CHAPTER 1 

CODE OF ORDINANCES 

1.01 Title 1.07 Amendments 
1.02 Definitions 1.08 Catchlines and Notes 
1.03 City Powers 1.09 Altering Code 
1.04 Personal Liability and Indemnity 1.10 Standard Penalty 
1.05 Personal Injuries 1.11 Severability 
1.06 Rules of Construction 1.12 Right of Entry 
1.01 TITLE. This code of ordinances shall be known and may be cited as the Code of Ordinances of the City of Perry, Iowa, 2001. 
1.02 DEFINITIONS. Where words and phrases used in this Code of Ordinances are defined by State law, such definitions apply to their use in this Code of Ordinances and are adopted by reference. Those definitions so adopted that need further definition or are reiterated, and other words and phrases used herein, have the following meanings, unless specifically defined otherwise in another portion of this Code of Ordinances: 
1. 
“Alley” means a public right-of-way, other than a street, affording secondary means of access to abutting property. 

2. 
“City” means the City of Perry, Iowa. 

3. 
“Clerk” means the city clerk of Perry, Iowa. 

4. 
“Code” means the specific chapter of this Code of Ordinances in which a specific subject is covered and bears a descriptive title word (such as the Building Code and/or a standard code adopted by reference). 

5. 
“Code of Ordinances” means the Code of Ordinances of the City of Perry, Iowa, 2001. 

6. 
“Council” means the city council of Perry, Iowa. 

7. 
“County” means Dallas County, Iowa. 

8. 
“Measure” means an ordinance, amendment, resolution or motion. 

9. 
“Month” means a calendar month. 

10. 
“Oath” means an affirmation in all cases in which by law an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the words “affirm” and “affirmed” are equivalent to the words “swear” and “sworn.” 


CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA 
-1­
11. 
“Occupant” or “tenant,” applied to a building or land, includes any person who occupies the whole or a part of such building or land, whether alone or with others. 

12. 
“Ordinances” means the ordinances of the City of Perry, Iowa, as embodied in this Code of Ordinances, ordinances not repealed by the ordinance adopting this Code of Ordinances, and those enacted hereafter. 

13. 
“Person” means an individual, firm, partnership, domestic or foreign corporation, company, association or joint stock association, trust, or other legal entity, and includes a trustee, receiver, assignee, or similar representative thereof, but does not include a governmental body. 

14. 
“Preceding” and “following” mean next before and next after, respectively. 

15. 
“Property” includes real property, and tangible and intangible personal property unless clearly indicated otherwise. 

16. 
“Property owner” means a person owning private property in the City as shown by the County Auditor’s plats of the City. 

17. 
“Public place” includes in its meaning, but is not restricted to, any City-owned open place, such as parks and squares. 

18. 
“Public property” means any and all property owned by the City or held in the name of the City by any of the departments, commissions or agencies within the City government. 

19. 
“Public way” includes any street, alley, boulevard, parkway, highway, sidewalk, or other public thoroughfare. 

20. 
“Sidewalk” means that surfaced portion of the street between the edge of the traveled way, surfacing, or curb line and the adjacent property line, intended for the use of pedestrians. 

21. 
“State” means the State of Iowa. 

22. 
“Statutes” or “laws” means the latest edition of the Code of Iowa, as amended. 

23. 
“Street” or “highway” means the entire width between property lines of every way or place of whatever nature when any part thereof is open to the use of the public, as a matter of right, for purposes of vehicular traffic. 

24. 
“Writing” and “written” include printing, typing, lithographing, or other mode of representing words and letters. 

25. 
“Year” means a calendar year. 


CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA -2­
1.03 CITY POWERS. The City may, except as expressly limited by the Iowa Constitution, and if not inconsistent with the laws of the Iowa General Assembly, exercise any power and perform any function it deems appropriate to protect and preserve the rights, privileges and property of the City and of its residents, and preserve and improve the peace, safety, health, welfare, comfort and convenience of its residents and each and every provision of this Code of Ordinances shall be deemed to be in the exercise of the foregoing powers and the performance of the foregoing functions. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.1) 

1.04 PERSONAL LIABILITY AND INDEMNITY. 
1. 
Officers and Employees. Officers and employees of the City, including but not limited to elected members of the Council and appointed members of the City boards, shall not be personally liable for claims arising out of acts or omissions in the performance of their employment and the duties and responsibilities vested in them under the laws of the State of Iowa, excepting claims for punitive damages and actions permitted under Section 85.20 of the Code of Iowa. 

2. 
Officers and Employees – Punitive Damages. Officers and employees of the City, including but not limited to elected members of the Council and appointed members of City boards, shall not be personally liable for punitive damages unless actual malice or willful, wanton and reckless misconduct is proven. 

3. 
Defense and Indemnity. The City shall defend, save harmless and indemnify its officers and employees, whether elected or appointed, including but not limited to elected members of the Council and appointed members of City boards, against any claim or demand, whether groundless or otherwise, arising out of the performance of the duties and responsibilities vested in them under the laws of the State of Iowa; provided, however, that an officer or employee shall not be entitled to indemnification for punitive damages if in an action commenced by the City, it is determined that the conduct of the employee or officer upon which the claim or demand was based constituted a willful, wanton and reckless act or omission. 

4. 
Duty to Cooperate. In the event that an officer or employee fails or refuses to cooperate in the defense against the claim or demand, the City shall have a right of indemnification against that officer or employee. 

5. 
Permittees and Licensees. An applicant for any permit or license under this Code of Ordinances, by making such application, assumes and agrees to pay for all injury to or death of any person or persons 


whomsoever, and all loss of or damage to property whatsoever, including all costs and expenses incident thereto, however arising from or related to, directly, indirectly or remotely, the issuance of the permit or license, or the doing of anything thereunder, or the failure of such applicant, or the agents, employees or servants of such applicant, to abide by or comply with any of the provisions of this Code of Ordinances or the terms and conditions of such permit or license, and such applicant, by making such application, forever agrees to indemnify the City and its officers, agents and employees, and agrees to save them harmless from any and all claims, demands, lawsuits or liability whatsoever for any loss, damage, injury or death, including all costs and expenses incident thereto, by reason of the foregoing. The provisions of this section shall be deemed to be a part of any permit or license issued under this Code of Ordinances or any other ordinance of the City whether expressly recited therein or not. 
1.05 PERSONAL INJURIES. When action is brought against the City for personal injuries alleged to have been caused by its negligence, the City may notify in writing any person by whose negligence it claims the injury was caused. The notice shall state the pendency of the action, the name of the plaintiff, the name and location of the court where the action is pending, a brief statement of the alleged facts from which the cause arose, that the City believes that the person notified is liable to it for any judgment rendered against the City, and asking the person to appear and defend. A judgment obtained in the suit is conclusive in any action by the City against any person so notified, as to the existence of the defect or other cause of the injury or damage, as to the liability of the City to the plaintiff in the first named action, and as to the amount of the damage or injury. The City may maintain an action against the person notified to recover the amount of the judgment together with all the expenses incurred by the City in the suit. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.14) 
1.06 RULES OF CONSTRUCTION. In the construction of the Code of Ordinances the following rules shall be observed, unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the Council or repugnant to the context of the provisions. 
1. 
Verb Tense and Plurals. Words used in the present tense include the future, the singular number includes the plural and the plural number includes the singular. 

2. 
May. The word “may” confers a power. 

3. 
Must. The word “must” states a requirement. 

4. 
Shall. The word “shall” imposes a duty. 


5. 
Gender. The masculine gender includes the feminine and neuter genders. 

6. 
Interpretation. All general provisions, terms, phrases, and expressions contained in the Code of Ordinances shall be liberally construed in order that the true intent and meaning of the Council may be fully carried out. 

7. 
Extension of Authority. Whenever an officer or employee is required or authorized to do an act by a provision of the Code of Ordinances, the provision shall be construed as authorizing performance by a regular assistant, subordinate or a duly authorized designee of said officer or employee. 


1.07 AMENDMENTS. All ordinances which amend, repeal or in any manner affect this Code of Ordinances shall include proper reference to chapter, section, subsection or paragraph to maintain an orderly codification of ordinances of the City. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.2) 
1.08 CATCHLINES AND NOTES. The catchlines of the several sections of the Code of Ordinances, titles, headings (chapter, section and subsection), editor’s notes, cross references and State law references, unless set out in the body of the section itself, contained in the Code of Ordinances, do not constitute any part of the law, and are intended merely to indicate, explain, supplement or clarify the contents of a section. 
1.09 ALTERING CODE. It is unlawful for any unauthorized person to change or amend by additions or deletions, any part or portion of the Code of Ordinances, or to insert or delete pages, or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with the Code of Ordinances in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the City to be misrepresented thereby. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 718.5) 
1.10 STANDARD PENALTY. Unless another penalty is expressly provided by the Code of Ordinances for any particular provision, section or chapter, any person failing to perform a duty, or obtain a license required by, or violating any provision of the Code of Ordinances, or any rule or regulation adopted herein by reference shall, upon conviction, be subject to a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or imprisonment not to exceed thirty (30) days. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.3[2]) 
1.11 SEVERABILITY. If any section, provision or part of the Code of Ordinances is adjudged invalid or unconstitutional, such adjudication will not affect the validity of the Code of Ordinances as a whole or any section, provision or part thereof not adjudged invalid or unconstitutional. 
1.12 RIGHT OF ENTRY. Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce the provisions of this Code of Ordinances, or whenever there is reasonable cause to believe there exists a violation in any building or upon any premises within the jurisdiction of the City, any authorized official of the City may, upon presentation of proper credentials, enter such building or premises at all reasonable times to inspect the same or to perform any duty imposed upon said official by this Code of Ordinances. In the event the owner and/or occupant refuses entry, any authorized official of the City is hereby empowered to seek assistance from any court of competent jurisdiction in obtaining such entry. 
[The next page is 9] 
CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA 
-6­

CHAPTER 2 
CHARTER 

2.01 Title 2.04 Number and Term of Council 
2.02 Form of Government 2.05 Term of Mayor 
2.03 Powers and Duties 2.06 Copies on File 
2.01 TITLE. This chapter may be cited as the charter of the City of Perry, Iowa.† 
2.02 FORM OF GOVERNMENT. The form of government of the City is the Mayor-Council form of government. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.4) 
2.03 POWERS AND DUTIES. The Council and Mayor and other City officers have such powers and shall perform such duties as are authorized or required by State law and by the ordinances, resolutions, rules and regulations of the City. 


2.04 NUMBER AND TERM OF COUNCIL. The Council consists of two 
(2) Council Members elected at large and one (1) Council Member from each of three (3) wards as established by this Code of Ordinances, elected for overlapping terms of four (4) years. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 376.2) 
2.05 TERM OF MAYOR. The Mayor is elected for a term of two (2) years. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 376.2) 
2.06 COPIES ON FILE. The Clerk shall keep an official copy of the charter on file with the official records of the Clerk and the Secretary of State, and shall keep copies of the charter available at the Clerk’s office for public inspection. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.1) 
† EDITOR’S NOTE: Ordinance No. 475, adopting a charter for the City, was passed and approved by the Council on August 20, 1973, and was published on August 24, 1973, in the Perry Daily Chief. 
°°°°°°°°°° 

CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA 
-10 ­



CHAPTER 3 
BOUNDARIES 

3.01 DIVISION INTO WARDS/PRECINCTS. The City is divided into three (3) wards/voting precincts described as follows: 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.4 & 372.13[7]) 
1. 
First Ward/Precinct. All that part of the City of Perry, Iowa, lying south of the line commencing at the west City limits on Willis Avenue and proceeding east to the railroad right-of-way of the Union Pacific Railroad, thence southeasterly to Otley Avenue, thence easterly to Sixteenth Street, thence north to Willis Avenue, thence east along Willis Avenue to the east City limits of the City. 

2. 
Second Ward/Precinct. All of that part of the City lying north of the First Ward/Precinct as heretofore described and south and east of a line commencing at the west City limits on the C.M. St. P. & P. abandoned main line to the railroad right-of-way of the Union Pacific Railroad, thence southeasterly to Pattee Street, thence easterly on Pattee Street to Eleventh Street, thence easterly on Record Street to Thirteenth Street, thence south to Taft Street, thence easterly on Taft Street to Sixteenth Street, thence north on Sixteenth Street to Park Street. 

3. 
Third Ward/Precinct. All of that part of the City lying north and west of a line commencing at the west City limits on the C.M. St. P. & P. abandoned main line to the railroad right-of-way of the Union Pacific Railroad, thence southeasterly to Pattee Street, thence easterly on Pattee Street to Eleventh Street, thence easterly on Record Street to Thirteenth Street, thence south to Taft Street, thence easterly on Taft Street to Sixteenth Street, thence north on Sixteenth Street to Park Street. 


(Ord. 770 – Dec. 01 Supp.) 
CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA 
-11 ­[The next page is 15] 
CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA 
-12­

CHAPTER 4 
MUNICIPAL INFRACTIONS 

4.01 Municipal Infraction 4.04 Civil Citations 
4.02 Environmental Violation 4.05 Alternative Relief 
4.03 Penalties 4.06 Criminal Penalties 
4.01 MUNICIPAL INFRACTION. A violation of this Code of Ordinances or any ordinance or code herein adopted by reference or the omission or failure to perform any act or duty required by the same, with the exception of those provisions specifically provided under State law as a felony, an aggravated misdemeanor, or a serious misdemeanor, or a simple misdemeanor under Chapters 687 through 747 of the Code of Iowa, is a municipal infraction punishable by civil penalty as provided herein. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.22[3]) 
4.02 ENVIRONMENTAL VIOLATION. A municipal infraction which is a violation of Chapter 455B of the Code of Iowa or of a standard established by the City in consultation with the Department of Natural Resources, or both, may be classified as an environmental violation. However, the provisions of this section shall not be applicable until the City has offered to participate in informal negotiations regarding the violation or to the following specific violations: 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.22 [1]) 
1. 
A violation arising from noncompliance with a pretreatment standard or requirement referred to in 40 C.F.R. §403.8. 

2. 
The discharge of airborne residue from grain, created by the handling, drying or storing of grain, by a person not engaged in the industrial production or manufacturing of grain products. 

3. 
The discharge of airborne residue from grain, created by the handling, drying or storing of grain, by a person engaged in such industrial production or manufacturing if such discharge occurs from September 15 to January 15. 


4.03 PENALTIES. A municipal infraction is punishable by the following civil penalties: 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.22 [1]) 


1. Standard Civil Penalties. 
A. First Offense -Not to exceed $500.00 
CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA 
-15 ­
B. Each Repeat Offense -Not to exceed $750.00 
Each day that a violation occurs or is permitted to exist constitutes a repeat offense. 
2. Special Civil Penalties. 
A. A municipal infraction arising from noncompliance with a pretreatment standard or requirement, referred to in 40 C.F.R. §403.8, by an industrial user is punishable by a penalty of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each day a violation exists or continues. 
B. A municipal infraction classified as an environmental violation is punishable by a penalty of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each occurrence. However, an environmental violation is not subject to such penalty if all of the following conditions are satisfied: 
(1) 
The violation results solely from conducting an initial startup, cleaning, repairing, performing scheduled maintenance, testing, or conducting a shutdown of either equipment causing the violation or the equipment designed to reduce or eliminate the violation. 

(2) 
The City is notified of the violation within twenty-four (24) hours from the time that the violation begins. 

(3) 
The violation does not continue in existence for more than eight (8) hours. 


4.04 CIVIL CITATIONS. Any officer authorized by the City to enforce this Code of Ordinances may issue a civil citation to a person who commits a municipal infraction. The citation may be served by personal service as provided in Rule of Civil Procedure 56.1, by certified mail addressed to the defendant at defendant’s last known mailing address, return receipt requested, or by publication in the manner as provided in Rule of Civil Procedure 60 and subject to the conditions of Rule of Civil Procedure 60.1. A copy of the citation shall be retained by the issuing officer, and one copy shall be sent to the Clerk of the District Court. The citation shall serve as notification that a civil offense has been committed and shall contain the following information: 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.22 [4]) 
1. 
The name and address of the defendant. 

2. 
The name or description of the infraction attested to by the officer issuing the citation. 

3. 
The location and time of the infraction. 


4. 
The amount of civil penalty to be assessed or the alternative relief sought, or both. 

5. 
The manner, location, and time in which the penalty may be paid. 

6. 
The time and place of court appearance. 

7. 
The penalty for failure to appear in court. 


4.05 ALTERNATIVE RELIEF. Seeking a civil penalty as authorized in this chapter does not preclude the City from seeking alternative relief from the court in the same action. Such alternative relief may include, but is not limited to, an order for abatement or injunctive relief. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.22 [8]) 
4.06 CRIMINAL PENALTIES. This chapter does not preclude a peace officer from issuing a criminal citation for a violation of this Code of Ordinances or regulation if criminal penalties are also provided for the violation. Nor does it preclude or limit the authority of the City to enforce the provisions of this Code of Ordinances by criminal sanctions or other lawful means. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.22[11]) 
CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA 
-17 ­[The next page is 21] 
CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA 
-18­


CHAPTER 5 
OPERATING PROCEDURES 

5.01 Oaths 5.07 Conflict of Interest 
5.02 Bonds 5.08 Resignations 
5.03 Duties: General 5.09 Removal of Appointed Officers and Employees 
5.04 Books and Records 5.10 Vacancies 
5.05 Transfer to Successor 5.11 Gifts 
5.06 Meetings 
5.01 OATHS. The oath of office shall be required and administered in accordance with the following: 
1. Qualify for Office. Each elected or appointed officer shall qualify for office by taking the prescribed oath and by giving, when required, a bond. The oath shall be taken, and bond provided, after being certified as elected but not later than noon of the first day which is not a Sunday or a legal holiday in January of the first year of the term for which the officer was elected. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 63.1) 
2. Prescribed Oath. The prescribed oath is: “I, (name), do solemnly swear that I will support the Constitution of the United States and the Constitution of the State of Iowa, and that I will faithfully and impartially, to the best of my ability, discharge all duties of the office of (name of office) in Perry as now or hereafter required by law.” 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 63.10) 
3. Officers Empowered to Administer Oaths. The following are empowered to administer oaths and to take affirmations in any matter pertaining to the business of their respective office: 
A. Mayor 
B. City Clerk 
C. Members of all boards, commissions or bodies created by law. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 63A.2) 

5.02 BONDS. Surety bonds are provided in accordance with the following: 
1. Required. The Council shall provide by resolution for a surety bond or blanket position bond running to the City and covering the Mayor, Clerk, Treasurer and such other officers and employees as may be necessary and advisable. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 64.13) 
CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA -21 ­
2. Bonds Approved. Bonds shall be approved by the Council. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 64.19) 
3. Bonds Filed. All bonds, after approval and proper record, shall be filed with the Clerk. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 64.23[6]) 
4. Record. The Clerk shall keep a book, to be known as the “Record of Official Bonds” in which shall be recorded the official bonds of all City officers, elective or appointive. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 64.24[3]) 
5.03 DUTIES: GENERAL. Each municipal officer shall exercise the powers and perform the duties prescribed by law and this Code of Ordinances, or as otherwise directed by the Council unless contrary to State law or City charter. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4]) 
5.04 BOOKS AND RECORDS. All books and records required to be kept by law or ordinance shall be open to examination by the public upon request, unless some other provisions of law expressly limit such right or require such records to be kept confidential. Access to public records which are combined with data processing software shall be in accordance with policies and procedures established by the City. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 22.2 & 22.3A) 
5.05 TRANSFER TO SUCCESSOR. Each officer shall transfer to his or her successor in office all books, papers, records, documents and property in the officer’s custody and appertaining to that office. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4]) 
5.06 MEETINGS. All meetings of the Council, any board or commission, or any multi-membered body formally and directly created by any of the foregoing bodies shall be held in accordance with the following: 
1. Notice of Meetings. Reasonable notice, as defined by State law, of the time, date and place of each meeting, and its tentative agenda shall be given. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 21.4) 
2. Meetings Open. All meetings shall be held in open session unless closed sessions are held as expressly permitted by State law. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 21.3) 
3. Minutes. Minutes shall be kept of all meetings showing the date, time and place, the members present, and the action taken at each meeting. The minutes shall show the results of each vote taken and information sufficient to indicate the vote of each member present. The vote of each member present shall be made public at the open session. The minutes shall be public records open to public inspection. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 21.3) 
4. Closed Session. A closed session may be held only by affirmative vote of either two-thirds of the body or all of the members present at the meeting and in accordance with Chapter 21 of the Code of Iowa. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 21.5) 
5. Cameras and Recorders. The public may use cameras or recording devices at any open session. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 21.7) 
6. Electronic Meetings. A meeting may be conducted by electronic means only in circumstances where such a meeting in person is impossible or impractical and then only in compliance with the provisions of Chapter 21 of the Code of Iowa. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 21.8) 
5.07 CONFLICT OF INTEREST. A City officer or employee shall not have an interest, direct or indirect, in any contract or job of work or material or the profits thereof or services to be furnished or performed for the City, unless expressly permitted by law. A contract entered into in violation of this section is void. The provisions of this section do not apply to: 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5) 
1. Compensation of Officers. The payment of lawful compensation of a City officer or employee holding more than one City office or position, the holding of which is not incompatible with another public office or is not prohibited by law. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5[1]) 
2. Investment of Funds. The designation of a bank or trust company as a depository, paying agent, or for investment of funds. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5[2]) 
3. City Treasurer. An employee of a bank or trust company, who serves as Treasurer of the City. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5[3]) 
4. Stock Interests. Contracts in which a City officer or employee has an interest solely by reason of employment, or a stock interest of the kind described in subsection 8 of this section, or both, if the contract is for professional services not customarily awarded by competitive bid, if the remuneration of employment will not be directly affected as a result of the contract, and if the duties of employment do not directly involve the procurement or preparation of any part of the contract. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5[5]) 
5. Newspaper. The designation of an official newspaper. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5[6]) 
6. Existing Contracts. A contract in which a City officer or employee has an interest if the contract was made before the time the officer or employee was elected or appointed, but the contract may not be renewed. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5[7]) 
7. Volunteers. Contracts with volunteer fire fighters or civil defense volunteers. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5[8]) 
8. Corporations. A contract with a corporation in which a City officer or employee has an interest by reason of stock holdings when less than five percent (5%) of the outstanding stock of the corporation is owned or controlled directly or indirectly by the officer or employee or the spouse or immediate family of such officer or employee. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5[9]) 
9. Contracts. Contracts made by the City upon competitive bid in writing, publicly invited and opened. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5[4]) 
10. Cumulative Purchases. Contracts not otherwise permitted by this section, for the purchase of goods or services which benefit a City officer or employee, if the purchases benefiting that officer or employee do not exceed a cumulative total purchase price of fifteen hundred dollars ($1500.00) in a fiscal year. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5[11]) 
11. Franchise Agreements. Franchise agreements between the City and a utility and contracts entered into by the City for the provision of essential City utility services. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5[12]) 
5.08 RESIGNATIONS. An elected officer who wishes to resign may do so by submitting a resignation in writing to the Clerk so that it shall be properly recorded and considered. A person who resigns from an elective office is not eligible for appointment to the same office during the time for which the person was elected, if during that time the compensation of the office has been increased. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[9]) 
CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA -24­

5.09 REMOVAL OF APPOINTED OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES. 
Except as otherwise provided by State or City law, all persons appointed to City office or employment may be removed by the officer or body making the appointment, but every such removal shall be by written order. The order shall give the reasons, be filed in the office of the Clerk, and a copy shall be sent by certified mail to the person removed, who, upon request filed with the Clerk within thirty (30) days after the date of mailing the copy, shall be granted a public hearing before the Council on all issues connected with the removal. The hearing shall be held within thirty (30) days after the date the request is filed, unless the person removed requests a later date. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.15) 
5.10 VACANCIES. A vacancy in an elective City office during a term of office shall be filled, at the Council’s option, by one of the two following procedures: 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13 [2]) 
1. Appointment. By appointment following public notice by the remaining members of the Council within forty (40) days after the vacancy occurs, except that if the remaining members do not constitute a quorum of the full membership, or if a petition is filed requesting an election, the Council shall call a special election as provided by law. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13 [2a]) 
2. Election. By a special election held to fill the office for the remaining balance of the unexpired term as provided by law. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13 [2b]) 
CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA 
-25 ­
5.11 GIFTS. Except as otherwise provided in Chapter 68B of the Code of Iowa, a public official, public employee or candidate, or that person’s immediate family member, shall not, directly or indirectly, accept or receive any gift or series of gifts from a “restricted donor” as defined in Chapter 68B and a restricted donor shall not, directly or indirectly, individually or jointly with one or more other restricted donors, offer or make a gift or a series of gifts to a public official, public employee or candidate. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 68B.22) 
[The next page is 29] 
CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA 
-26­


CHAPTER 6 
CITY ELECTIONS 

6.01 Nominating Method to be Used 6.04 Preparation of Petition and Affidavit 
6.02 Nominations by Petition 6.05 Filing, Presumption, Withdrawals, Objections 
6.03 Adding Name by Petition 6.06 Persons Elected 
6.01 NOMINATING METHOD TO BE USED. All candidates for elective municipal offices shall be nominated under the provisions of Chapter 45 of the Code of Iowa. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 376.3) 
6.02 NOMINATIONS BY PETITION. Nominations for elective municipal offices of the City may be made by nomination paper or papers signed by not less than twenty-five (25) eligible electors, residents of the City. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 45.1) 
6.03 ADDING NAME BY PETITION. The name of a candidate placed upon the ballot by any other method than by petition shall not be added by petition for the same office. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 45.2) 
6.04 PREPARATION OF PETITION AND AFFIDAVIT. Each eligible elector who signs a nominating petition shall add to the signature the elector’s residence address, and date of signing. The person whose nomination is proposed by the petition shall not sign it. Each candidate shall complete and file a signed, notarized affidavit of candidacy. The affidavit shall be filed at the same time as the nomination petition. The affidavit shall be in the form prescribed by the Secretary of State and shall include information required by the Code of Iowa. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 45.3) 
6.05 FILING, PRESUMPTION, WITHDRAWALS, OBJECTIONS. The time and place of filing nomination petitions, the presumption of validity thereof, the right of a candidate so nominated to withdraw and the effect of such withdrawal, and the right to object to the legal sufficiency of such petitions, or to the eligibility of the candidate, shall be governed by the appropriate provisions of Chapter 44 of the Code of Iowa. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 45.4) 
CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA 
-29 ­
6.06 PERSONS ELECTED. The candidates who receive the greatest number of votes for each office on the ballot are elected, to the extent necessary to fill the positions open. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 376.8[3]) 
[The next page is 35] 
CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA 
-30­


CHAPTER 7 
FISCAL MANAGEMENT 

7.01 Purpose 7.06 Budget Amendments 
7.02 Finance Officer 7.07 Accounting 
7.03 Cash Control 7.08 Financial Reports 
7.04 Fund Control 7.09 Payment of Fees, Fines or Unsatisfied Judgments 
7.05 Operating Budget Preparation as a Prerequisite to Issuance by the City of a License or Permit 
7.01 PURPOSE. The purpose of this chapter is to establish policies and provide for rules and regulations governing the management of the financial affairs of the City. 
7.02 FINANCE OFFICER. The Finance Officer is the finance and accounting officer of the City and is responsible for the administration of the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 787 – Nov. 02 Supp.) 
7.03 CASH CONTROL. To assure the proper accounting and safe custody of moneys the following shall apply: 
1. 
Deposit of Funds. All moneys or fees collected for any purpose by any City officer shall be deposited through the office of the finance officer. If any said fees are due to an officer, they shall be paid to the officer by check drawn by the finance officer and approved by the Council only upon such officer’s making adequate reports relating thereto as required by law, ordinance or Council directive. 

2. 
Deposits and Investments. All moneys belonging to the City shall be promptly deposited in depositories selected by the Council in amounts not exceeding the authorized depository limitation established by the Council or invested in accordance with the City’s written investment policy and State law, including joint investments as authorized by Section 384.21 of the Code of Iowa. 


(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.21, 12B.10, 12C.1) 
3. Petty Cash Fund. The finance officer shall be custodian of a petty cash fund for the payment of small claims for minor purchases, collect­on-delivery transportation charges and small fees customarily paid at the time of rendering a service, for which payments the finance officer shall obtain some form of receipt or bill acknowledged as paid by the vendor or agent. At such time as the petty cash fund is approaching depletion, the finance officer shall draw a check for replenishment in the amount of the accumulated expenditures and said check and supporting detail shall be submitted to the Council as a claim in the usual manner for claims and charged to the proper funds and accounts. It shall not be used for salary payments or other personal services or personal expenses. 
7.04 FUND CONTROL. There shall be established and maintained separate and distinct funds in accordance with the following: 
1. 
Revenues. All moneys received by the City shall be credited to the proper fund as required by law, ordinance or resolution. 

2. 
Expenditures. No disbursement shall be made from a fund unless such disbursement is authorized by law, ordinance or resolution, was properly budgeted, and supported by a claim approved by the Council. 

3. 
Emergency Fund. No transfer may be made from any fund to the Emergency Fund. 


(IAC, 545-2.5 [384,388], Sec. 2.5[2]) 
4. Debt Service Fund. Except where specifically prohibited by State law, moneys may be transferred from any other City fund to the Debt Service Fund to meet payments of principal and interest. Such transfers must be authorized by the original budget or a budget amendment. 
(IAC, 545-2.5[384,388] Sec. 2.5[3]) 
5. Capital Improvements Reserve Fund. Except where specifically prohibited by State law, moneys may be transferred from any City fund to the Capital Improvements Reserve Fund. Such transfers must be authorized by the original budget or a budget amendment. 
(IAC, 545-2.5[384,388] Sec. 2.5[4]) 
6. Utility and Enterprise Funds. A surplus in a Utility or Enterprise Fund may be transferred to any other City fund, except the Emergency Fund and Road Use Tax Funds, by resolution of the Council. A surplus may exist only after all required transfers have been made to any restricted accounts in accordance with the terms and provisions of any revenue bonds or loan agreements relating to the Utility or Enterprise Fund. A surplus is defined as the cash balance in the operating account or the unrestricted retained earnings calculated in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles in excess of: 
A. The amount of the expense of disbursements for operating and maintaining the utility or enterprise for the preceding three 
(3) 
months, and 

B. 
The amount necessary to make all required transfers to restricted accounts for the succeeding three (3) months. 


(IAC, 545-2.5[384,388], Sec. 2.5[5]) 
CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA -36­
7. Balancing of Funds. Fund accounts shall be reconciled at the close of each month and a report thereof submitted to the Council. 
7.05 OPERATING BUDGET PREPARATION. The annual operating budget of the City shall be prepared in accordance with the following: 
1. 
Proposal Prepared. The finance officer is responsible for preparation of the annual budget detail, for review by the Mayor and Council and adoption by the Council in accordance with directives of the Mayor and Council. 

2. 
Boards and Commissions. All boards, commissions and other administrative agencies of the City that are authorized to prepare and administer budgets must submit their budget proposals to the finance officer for inclusion in the proposed City budget at such time and in such form as required by the Council. 

3. 
Submission to Council. The finance officer shall submit the completed budget proposal to the Council no later than February 15 of each year. 

4. 
Council Review. The Council shall review the proposed budget and may make any adjustments in the budget which it deems appropriate before accepting such proposal for publication, hearing and final adoption. 

5. 
Notice of Hearing. Upon adopting a proposed budget the Council shall set a date for public hearing thereon to be held before March 15 and cause notice of such hearing and a summary of the proposed budget to be published not less than ten (10) nor more than twenty (20) days before the date established for the hearing. Proof of such publication must be filed with the County Auditor. 


(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.16[3]) 
6. Copies of Budget on File. Not less than twenty (20) days before the date that the budget must be certified to the County Auditor and not less than ten (10) days before the public hearing, the Clerk shall make available a sufficient number of copies of the detailed budget to meet the requests of taxpayers and organizations, and have them available for distribution at the offices of the Mayor and Clerk and at the City library. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.16[2]) 
7. Adoption and Certification. After the hearing, the Council shall adopt, by resolution, a budget for at least the next fiscal year and the Clerk shall certify the necessary tax levy for the next fiscal year to the County Auditor and the County Board of Supervisors. The tax levy certified may be less than, but not more than, the amount estimated in the proposed budget. Two copies each of the detailed budget as adopted and of the tax certificate must be transmitted to the County Auditor. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.16[5]) 
7.06 BUDGET AMENDMENTS. A City budget finally adopted for the following fiscal year becomes effective July 1 and constitutes the City appropriation for each program and purpose specified therein until amended as provided by this section. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.18) 
1. Program Increase. Any increase in the amount appropriated to a program must be prepared, adopted and subject to protest in the same manner as the original budget. 
(IAC, 545-2.2 [384, 388]) 
2. Program Transfer. Any transfer of appropriation from one program to another must be prepared, adopted and subject to protest in the same manner as the original budget. 
(IAC, 545-2.3 [384, 388]) 
3. Activity Transfer. Any transfer of appropriation from one activity to another activity within a program must be approved by resolution of the Council. 
(IAC, 545-2.4 [384, 388]) 
4. Administrative Transfers. The finance officer shall have the authority to adjust, by transfer or otherwise, the appropriations allocated within a specific activity without prior Council approval. 
(IAC, 545-2.4 [384, 388]) 
7.07 ACCOUNTING. The accounting records of the City shall consist of not less than the following: 
1. 
Books of Original Entry. There shall be established and maintained books of original entry to provide a chronological record of cash received and disbursed. 

2. 
General Ledger. There shall be established and maintained a general ledger controlling all cash transactions, budgetary accounts and for recording unappropriated surpluses. 

3. 
Checks. Checks shall be prenumbered and all checks written shall be signed by officials designated by resolution. Vendor checks, specifically excluding payroll checks, over $1,000 shall require two designated signatures. Exceptions are provided by subsection 5 hereof.


(Ord. 787 – Nov. 02 Supp.) 
CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA 
-38­
4. 
Budget Accounts. There shall be established such individual accounts to record receipts by source and expenditures by program and activity as will provide adequate information and control for budgeting purposes as planned and approved by the Council. Each individual account shall be maintained within its proper fund and so kept that receipts can be immediately and directly compared with revenue estimates and expenditures can be related to the authorizing appropriation. No expenditure shall be posted except to the appropriation for the function and purpose for which the expense was incurred. 

5. 
Immediate Payment Authorized. The Council may by resolution authorize the Finance Officer to issue checks for immediate payment of amounts due, which if not paid promptly would result in loss of discount, penalty for late payment or additional interest cost. Any such payments made shall be reported to the Council for review and approval with and in the same manner as other claims at the next meeting following such payment. The resolution authorizing immediate payment shall specify the type of payment so authorized and may include but is not limited to payment of utility bills, contractual obligations, payroll and bond principal and interest. (Ord. 787 – Nov. 02 Supp.) 


7.08 FINANCIAL REPORTS. The finance officer shall prepare and file the following financial reports: 
1. 
Monthly Reports. There shall be submitted to the Council each month a report showing the activity and status of each fund, program, sub-program and activity for the preceding month. 

2. 
Annual Report. Not later than December first of each year there shall be published an annual report containing a summary for the preceding fiscal year of all collections and receipts, all accounts due the City, and all expenditures, the current public debt of the City, and the legal debt limit of the City for the current fiscal year. A copy of the annual report must be filed with the Auditor of State not later than December 1 of each year. 


(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.22) 
7.09 PAYMENT OF FEES, FINES OR UNSATISFIED JUDGMENTS AS A PREREQUISITE TO ISSUANCE BY THE CITY OF A LICENSE OR PERMIT. Prior to the issuance of a license or permit by the City, the Finance Officer shall made a diligent search of City and Waterworks records to determine if the applicant owed any fines or fees to the City or Waterworks, or has an unsatisfied judgment in favor of the City or Waterworks. If there are fees or fines due and owing, such fees and fines, or both, shall be paid in full prior to the issuance of a license or permit. If the applicant has an unsatisfied judgment in favor of the City or Waterworks, that judgment must be satisfied with evidence of such presented to the Finance Officer prior to the issuance of the license or permit. (Ord. 794 – Jul. 03 Supp.) 
[The next page is 45] 
CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA 
-40­
CHAPTER 8 


INDUSTRIAL PROPERTY TAX EXEMPTIONS 
8.01 Purpose 8.06 Applications 
8.02 Definitions 8.07 Approval 
8.03 Period of Partial Exemption 8.08 Exemption Repealed 
8.04 Amounts Eligible for Exemption 8.09 Dual Exemptions Prohibited 
8.05 Limitations 
8.01 PURPOSE. The purpose of this chapter is to provide for a partial exemption from property taxation of the actual value added to industrial real estate by the new construction of industrial real estate, research-service facilities, warehouses, distribution centers and the acquisition of or improvement to machinery and equipment assessed as real estate. 

8.02 DEFINITIONS. For use in this chapter the following terms are defined: 
1. 
“Actual value added” means the actual value added as of the first year for which the exemption is received, except that actual value added by improvements to machinery and equipment means the actual value as determined by the local assessor as of January 1 of each year for which the exemption is received. 

2. 
“Distribution center” means a building or structure used primarily for the storage of goods which are intended for subsequent shipment to retail outlets. Distribution center does not mean a building or structure used primarily to store raw agricultural products, used primarily by a manufacturer to store goods to be used in the manufacturing process, used primarily for the storage of petroleum products, or used for the retail sale of goods. 

3. 
“New construction” means new buildings and structures and includes new buildings and structures which are constructed as additions to existing buildings and structures. New construction does not include reconstruction of an existing building or structure which does not constitute complete replacement of an existing building or structure or refitting of an existing building or structure unless the reconstruction of an existing building or structure is required due to economic obsolescence and the reconstruction is necessary to implement recognized industry standards for the manufacturing and processing of specific products and the reconstruction is required for the owner of the building or structure to continue competitively to manufacture or process those products, which determination shall receive prior approval from 


the City Council of the City upon the recommendation of the Iowa Department of Economic Development. 
4. 
“New machinery and equipment assessed as real estate” means new machinery and equipment assessed as real estate pursuant to Section 427A.1, Subsection 1, Paragraph “e”, Code of Iowa, unless the machinery or equipment is part of the normal replacement or operating process to maintain or expand the existing operational status. 

5. 
“Research-service facilities” means a building or group of buildings devoted primarily to research and development activities, including, but not limited to, the design and production or manufacture of prototype products for experimental use, and corporate research services which do not have a primary purpose of providing on-site services to the public. 

6. 
“Warehouse” means a building or structure used as a public warehouse for the storage of goods pursuant to Chapter 554, Article 7, of the Code of Iowa, except that it does not mean a building or structure used primarily to store raw agricultural products or from which goods are sold at retail. 


8.03 PERIOD OF PARTIAL EXEMPTION. The actual value added to industrial real estate by the new construction of industrial real estate, research-service facilities, warehouses, distribution centers, and the acquisition of or improvement to machinery and equipment assessed as real estate, is eligible to receive a partial exemption from taxation for a period of five (5) years. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 427B.3) 
8.04 AMOUNTS ELIGIBLE FOR EXEMPTION. The amount of actual value added which is eligible to be exempt from taxation shall be as follows: 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 427B.3) 
1. 
For the first year, seventy-five percent (75%) 

2. 
For the second year, sixty percent (60%) 

3. 
For the third year, forty-five percent (45%) 

4. 
For the fourth year, thirty percent (30%) 

5. 
For the fifth year, fifteen percent (15%) 


8.05 LIMITATIONS. The granting of the exemption under this chapter for new construction constituting complete replacement of an existing building or structure shall not result in the assessed value of the industrial real estate being reduced below the assessed value of the industrial real estate before the start of the new construction added. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 427B.3) 
8.06 APPLICATIONS. An application shall be filed for each project resulting in actual value added for which an exemption is claimed. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 427B.4) 
1. 
The application for exemption shall be filed by the owner of the property with the local assessor by February 1 of the assessment year in which the value added is first assessed for taxation. 

2. 
Applications for exemption shall be made on forms prescribed by the Director of Revenue and Finance and shall contain information pertaining to the nature of the improvement, its cost, and other information deemed necessary by the Director of Revenue and Finance. 


8.07 APPROVAL. A person may submit a proposal to the City Council to receive prior approval for eligibility for a tax exemption on new construction. If the City Council resolves to consider such proposal, it shall publish notice and hold a public hearing thereon. Thereafter, at least thirty days after such hearing the City Council, by ordinance, may give its prior approval of a tax exemption for new construction if the new construction is in conformance with City zoning. Such prior approval shall not entitle the owner to exemption from taxation until the new construction has been completed and found to be qualified real estate. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 427B.4) 
8.08 EXEMPTION REPEALED. When in the opinion of the City Council continuation of the exemption granted by this chapter ceases to be of benefit to the City, the City Council may repeal this chapter, but all existing exemptions shall continue until their expiration. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 427B.5) 
8.09 DUAL EXEMPTIONS PROHIBITED. A property tax exemption under this chapter shall not be granted if the property for which the exemption is claimed has received any other property tax exemption authorized by law. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 427B.6) 
CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA 
-47 ­
°°°°°°°°°° 

CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA 
-48­
CHAPTER 9 


ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT PROPERTY TAX 
EXEMPTION 

9.01 Purpose 9.03 Eligibility 
9.02 Definitions 9.04 Application 
9.01 PURPOSE. The purpose of this chapter is to provide for a property tax exemption for shell buildings constructed by community development organizations, not-for-profit cooperative associations under Chapter 499 of the Code of Iowa or for-profit entities for speculative purposes in accordance with Section 427.1 of the Code of Iowa. 

9.02 DEFINITIONS. For use in this chapter the following terms are defined: 
1. “Community development organization” means a City organi­zation or a multi-community group formed for one or more of the following purposes: 
A. To promote, stimulate, develop, and advance the business prosperity and economic welfare of the community, area, or region and its citizens. 
B. To encourage and assist the location of new business and industry. 
C. To rehabilitate and assist existing business and industry. 
D. To stimulate and assist in the expansion of business activity. 
For purposes of this definition, a community development organization must have at least fifteen (15) members with representation from the government at the level or levels corresponding to the community development organization’s area of operation; a private sector lending institution; a community organization in the area; business in the area; and private citizens in the community. 
2. “New construction” means new buildings or structures and includes new buildings or structures which are constructed as additions to existing buildings or structures. “New construction” also includes reconstruction or renovation of an existing building or structure which constitutes complete replacement of an existing building or structure or refitting of an existing building or structure, if the reconstruction or renovation of the existing building or structure is required due to economic obsolescence, if the reconstruction or renovation is necessary to implement recognized industry standards for the manufacturing or processing of products, and the reconstruction or renovation is required in order to competitively manufacture or process products or for community development organizations, not-for-profit cooperative associations under Chapter 499 of the Code of Iowa or for-profit entities to market a building or structure as a speculative shell building, which determination must receive prior approval from the Council. 
3. “Speculative shell building” means a building or structure owned and constructed or reconstructed by a community development organization, a not-for-profit cooperative association under Chapter 499 of the Code of Iowa or a for-profit entity without a tenant or buyer for the purpose of attracting an employer or user which will complete the building to the employer’s or user’s specification for manufacturing, processing, or warehousing the employer’s or user’s product line. 
9.03 ELIGIBILITY. The new construction of shell buildings, or the portion of the value added to buildings being reconstructed or renovated in order to become speculative shell buildings, by the community development organization, not-for-profit cooperative association under Chapter 499 of the Code of Iowa or for-profit entity is eligible for property tax exemption commencing the assessment year in which the building is first assessed or in which the reconstruction or renovation first adds value. The exemption shall continue until the property is leased or sold or until terminated by ordinance of the Council. The exemption shall continue for a period of five (5) years. Eligibility for an exemption as a speculative shell building shall be determined as of January 1 of the assessment year. However, an exemption shall not be granted a speculative shell building of a not-for-profit cooperative association under Chapter 499 of the Code of Iowa or a for-profit entity if the building is used by the cooperative association or for-profit entity or a subsidiary or majority owners thereof for other than as a speculative shell building. 
9.04 APPLICATION. An application shall be filed with the local assessor for each project for which an exemption is claimed in accordance with Section 427B.4 of the Code of Iowa. 
CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA 
-50­
EDITOR’S NOTE  
The following ordinances, not codified herein and specifically saved from repeal, have been adopted granting prior approval and remain in full force and effect.  
ORDINANCE NO.  ADOPTED  ENTITY  
698  June 17, 1996  Perry Property, LLC  





CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA 
-51 ­
°°°°°°°°°° 

CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA 
-52­
CHAPTER 10 
URBAN RENEWAL 


EDITOR’S NOTE  
The following ordinances not codified herein, and specifically saved from repeal, have been adopted establishing Urban Renewal Areas in the City and remain in full force and effect, for division of tax levied on taxable property.  
ORDINANCE NO.  ADOPTED  NAME OF AREA  
597  October 11, 1990  Perry Urban Renewal Area  
640  May 28, 1992  1992 Addition to Perry Urban Renewal Area  
699  July 1, 1996  1996 Addition to Perry Urban Renewal Area  
759  September 5, 2000  2000 Addition to Perry Urban Renewal Area  


CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA 
-53 ­[The next page is 61] 
CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA 
-54­


CHAPTER 11 
URBAN REVITALIZATION 

EDITOR’S NOTE 
Ordinance No. 690, adopted December 18, 1995, designated the Perry Revitalization Area for the City. This ordinance, not codified herein, is specifically saved from repeal. 
CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA 
-61 ­
°°°°°°°°°° 

CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA 
-62­
CHAPTER 12 


LOCAL SALES TAX 
12.01 Tax Imposed 12.02 Allocation of Revenues 
12.01 TAX IMPOSED. A tax at the rate of one percent (1%) shall be imposed in conformance with Chapter 422B of the Code of Iowa upon local sales and services of the City. 
12.02 ALLOCATION OF REVENUES. The revenues from the local sales and service tax are to be allocated in the City as follows: 
1. 
Zero percent (0%) is to be allocated for property tax relief. 

2. 
Ninety percent (90%) is to be allocated for streets and sewers. 

3. 
Ten percent (10%) is to be allocated for building maintenance. 


CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA 
-63 ­
°°°°°°°°°° 

CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA 
-64­


CHAPTER 13 
HOTEL/MOTEL TAX 

13.01 Tax Imposed 13.04 Collection 
13.02 Definitions 13.05 Restrictions on Use of Revenues 
13.03 Effective Date of Tax 
13.01 TAX IMPOSED. There is imposed a seven percent (7%) hotel and motel tax upon the gross receipts from the renting of any and all sleeping rooms, apartments or sleeping quarters in any hotel, motel, inn, public lodging house, rooming house, or tourist court or in any place where sleeping accommodations are furnished to transient guests for rent for any direct or indirect charge, whether with or without meals, but do not include sleeping rooms in dormitories and memorial unions located in the State of Iowa and sleeping rooms, apartments, or sleeping quarters rented by the same person for a period of more than thirty-one (31) consecutive days. 
(Code of Iowa, Ch. 423A) 
13.02 DEFINITIONS. “Renting” and “rent,” as used in this chapter, include any kind of direct or indirect charge for the use of rooms, apartments or sleeping quarters. However, the tax imposed in this chapter does not apply to the gross receipts from the renting of a room, apartment or sleeping quarters while rented by the same person for a period of more than thirty-one (31) consecutive days. 
(Code of Iowa, Ch. 423A) 
13.03 EFFECTIVE DATE OF TAX. The hotel and motel tax as set forth in this chapter shall be imposed on all gross rent receipts received on January 1, 2006 and terminate on December 31, 2011. 
13.04 COLLECTION. The tax imposed in this chapter shall be remitted by the person or company liable for same to the Iowa State Director of Revenue in the manner required by State law. 
(Code of Iowa, Ch. 423A) 
13.05 RESTRICTIONS ON USE OF REVENUES. The revenue derived from the tax imposed by this chapter shall be accounted for as follows: 
1. All revenue received by the City from the imposition of the hotel and motel tax shall be deposited in the General Fund of the City. 
CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA 
-65 ­
2. 
One-seventh (1/7) of the hotel-motel tax revenues shall be retained by the City for use as set forth in Iowa Code Section 423A.7(4), Code of Iowa 2005. 

3. 
Four-sevenths (4/7) of the hotel-motel tax revenues shall be distributed to the Perry Chamber of Commerce to be used for the promotion and encouragement of tourist and convention business in the City and surrounding area. 

4. 
Two-sevenths (2/7) of the hotel-motel tax revenues shall be distributed to the Greater Des Moines Convention and Visitors Bureau in accordance with the Intergovernmental Agreement for the Promotion of Tourism and Convention Activities in the Greater Des Moines Area filed for record in Polk County, Iowa on May 13, 1985, at Book 5452, Page 


479. 
(Ch. 13 -Ord. 848 – Aug. 06 Supp.) 
[The next page is 81] 
CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA 
-66­
CHAPTER 15 



MAYOR 

15.01 Term of Office 15.04 Compensation 
15.02 Powers and Duties 15.05 Voting 
15.03 Appointments 
15.01 TERM OF OFFICE. The Mayor is elected for a term of two (2) years. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 376.2) 
15.02 POWERS AND DUTIES. The powers and duties of the Mayor are as follows: 
1. Chief Executive Officer. Act as the chief executive officer of the City and presiding officer of the Council, supervise all departments of the City, except for supervisory duties delegated to the City Administrator, give direction to department heads concerning the functions of the departments, and have the power to examine all functions of the municipal departments, their records and to call for special reports from department heads at any time. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.14[1]) 
2. Proclamation of Emergency. Have authority to take command of the police and govern the City by proclamation, upon making a determination that a time of emergency or public danger exists. Within the City limits, the Mayor has all the powers conferred upon the Sheriff to suppress disorders. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.14[2]) 
3. Special Meetings. Call special meetings of the Council when the Mayor deems such meetings necessary to the interests of the City. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.14[1]) 
4. Mayor’s Veto. Sign, veto or take no action on an ordinance, amendment or resolution passed by the Council. The Mayor may veto an ordinance, amendment or resolution within fourteen days after passage. The Mayor shall explain the reasons for the veto in a written message to the Council at the time of the veto. The Council may override the Mayor’s veto by a two-thirds majority of all of the members of the Council. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.5 & 380.6[2]) 
CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA 
-81 ­
5. 
Reports to Council. Make such oral or written reports to the Council as required. These reports shall concern municipal affairs generally, the municipal departments, and recommendations suitable for Council action. 

6. 
Contracts. Whenever authorized by the Council, sign contracts on behalf of the City. 

7. 
Licenses and Permits. Sign all licenses and permits which have been granted by the Council, except those designated by law or ordinance to be issued by another municipal officer. 

8. 
Absentee Officer. Make appropriate provision that duties of any absentee officer be carried on during such absence. 


15.03 APPOINTMENTS. The Mayor shall appoint the Mayor Pro Tem and the Police Chief, and the Mayor also appoints, with Council approval, the following officials: 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.4) 
1. 
Library Board of Trustees 

2. 
Parks and Recreation Advisory Commission 

3. 
Water Utility Board of Trustees 

4. 
Zoning Board of Adjustment 

5. 
Historic Preservation Commission 


15.04 COMPENSATION. The salary of the Mayor is three thousand, nine hundred fifty dollars ($3,950.00) per year, payable in equal monthly, bimonthly or biweekly installments. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[8]) 
15.05 VOTING. The Mayor is not a member of the Council and may not vote as a member of the Council. As presiding officer, the Mayor may express his/her opinion and make recommendations to the Council. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.4) 
CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA 
-82­


CHAPTER 16 
MAYOR PRO TEM 

16.01 Vice President of Council 16.03 Voting Rights 
16.02 Powers and Duties 16.04 Compensation 
16.01 VICE PRESIDENT OF COUNCIL. The Mayor Pro Tem is vice president of the Council. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.14[3]) 
16.02 POWERS AND DUTIES. Except for the limitations otherwise provided herein, the Mayor Pro Tem shall perform the duties of the Mayor in cases of absence or inability of the Mayor to perform such duties. In the exercise of the duties of the office the Mayor Pro Tem shall not have power to employ, or discharge from employment, officers or employees that the Mayor has the power to appoint, employ or discharge without the approval of the Council. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.14[3]) 
16.03 VOTING RIGHTS. The Mayor Pro Tem shall have the right to vote as a member of the Council. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.14[3]) 
16.04 COMPENSATION. If the Mayor Pro Tem performs the duties of the Mayor during the Mayor’s absence or disability for a continuous period of fifteen (15) days or more, the Mayor Pro Tem may be paid for that period the compensation as determined by the Council, based upon the Mayor Pro Tem’s performance of the Mayor’s duties and upon the compensation of the Mayor. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[8]) 
CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA 
-83 ­
°°°°°°°°°° 

CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA 
-84­
CHAPTER 17 
COUNCIL 

17.01 Number and Term of Council 17.04 Council Meetings 
17.02 Powers and Duties 17.05 Appointments 
17.03 Exercise of Power 17.06 Compensation 


17.01 NUMBER AND TERM OF COUNCIL. The Council consists of two 
(2) Council Members elected at large and one Council Member from each of three (3) wards as established by the Code of Ordinances, elected for overlapping terms of four (4) years. 
17.02 POWERS AND DUTIES. The powers and duties of the Council include, but are not limited to the following: 
1. General. All powers of the City are vested in the Council except as otherwise provided by law or ordinance. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.2[1]) 
2. Wards. By ordinance, the Council may divide the City into wards based upon population, change the boundaries of wards, eliminate wards or create new wards. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[7]) 
3. Fiscal Authority. The Council shall apportion and appropriate all funds, and audit and allow all bills, accounts, payrolls and claims, and order payment thereof. It shall make all assessments for the cost of street improvements, sidewalks, sewers and other work, improvement or repairs which may be specially assessed. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.2[1], 384.16 & 384.38 [1]) 
4. Public Improvements. The Council shall make all orders for the construction of any improvements, bridges or buildings. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.2[1]) 
5. Contracts. The Council shall make or authorize the making of all contracts. No contract shall bind or be obligatory upon the City unless adopted by resolution of the Council. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.100) 
6. Employees. The Council shall authorize, by resolution, the number, duties, term of office and compensation of employees or officers not otherwise provided for by State law or the Code of Ordinances. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4]) 
CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA -85 ­
7. Setting Compensation for Elected Officers. By ordinance, the Council shall prescribe the compensation of the Mayor, Council members, and other elected City officers, but a change in the compensation of the Mayor does not become effective during the term in which the change is adopted, and the Council shall not adopt such an ordinance changing the compensation of any elected officer during the months of November and December in the year of a regular City election. A change in the compensation of Council members becomes effective for all Council members at the beginning of the term of the Council members elected at the election next following the change in compensation. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[8]) 
17.03 EXERCISE OF POWER. The Council shall exercise a power only by the passage of a motion, a resolution, an amendment or an ordinance in the following manner: 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.3[1]) 
1. Action by Council. Passage of an ordinance, amendment or resolution requires a majority vote of all of the members of the Council. Passage of a motion requires a majority vote of a quorum of the Council. A resolution must be passed to spend public funds in excess of twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) on any one project, or to accept public improvements and facilities upon their completion. Each Council member’s vote on a measure must be recorded. A measure which fails to receive sufficient votes for passage shall be considered defeated. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.4) 
2. Overriding Mayor’s Veto. Within thirty (30) days after the Mayor’s veto, the Council may pass the measure again by a vote of not less than two-thirds of all of the members of the Council. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.6[2]) 
3. Measures Become Effective. Measures passed by the Council become effective in one of the following ways: 
A. An ordinance or amendment signed by the Mayor becomes effective when the ordinance or a summary of the ordinance is published, unless a subsequent effective date is provided within the ordinance or amendment. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.6[1a]) 
B. A resolution signed by the Mayor becomes effective immediately upon signing. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.6[1b]) 
CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA -86­
C. A motion becomes effective immediately upon passage of the motion by the Council. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.6[1c]) 
D. If the Mayor vetoes an ordinance, amendment or resolution and the Council repasses the measure after the Mayor’s veto, a resolution becomes effective immediately upon repassage, and an ordinance or amendment becomes a law when the ordinance or a summary of the ordinance is published, unless a subsequent effective date is provided within the ordinance or amendment. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.6[2]) 
E. If the Mayor takes no action on an ordinance, amendment or resolution, a resolution becomes effective fourteen (14) days after the date of passage, and an ordinance or amendment becomes law when the ordinance or a summary of the ordinance is published, but not sooner than fourteen (14) days after the date of passage, unless a subsequent effective date is provided within the ordinance or amendment. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.6[3]) 
“All of the members of the Council” refers to all of the seats of the Council including a vacant seat and a seat where the member is absent, but does not include a seat where the Council member declines to vote by reason of a conflict of interest. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.4) 
17.04 COUNCIL MEETINGS. Procedures for giving notice of meetings of the Council and other provisions regarding the conduct of Council meetings are contained in Section 5.06 of this Code of Ordinances. Additional particulars relating to Council meetings are the following: 
1. 
Regular Meetings. The time and place of the regular meetings of the Council shall be fixed by resolution of the Council. 

2. 
Special Meetings. Special meetings shall be held upon call of the Mayor or upon the written request of a majority of the members of the Council submitted to the Clerk. Notice of a special meeting shall specify the date, time, place and subject of the meeting and such notice shall be given personally or left at the usual place of residence of each member of the Council. A record of the service of notice shall be maintained by the Clerk. 


(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[5]) 
3. Quorum. A majority of all Council members is a quorum. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[1]) 
CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA -87 ­
4. Rules of Procedure. The Council shall determine its own rules and maintain records of its proceedings. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[5]) 
5. Compelling Attendance. Any three (3) members of the Council can compel the attendance of the absent members at any regular, adjourned or duly called meeting, by serving a written notice upon the absent members to attend at once. 
17.05 APPOINTMENTS. The Council shall appoint the following officials and prescribe their powers, duties, compensation and term of office: 
1. 
City Administrator 

2. 
City Clerk 

3. 
City Attorney 

4. 
Planning and Zoning Commission 

5. 
Airport Commission 

6. 
Fire Chief 

7. 
Compliance Officer 

8. 
Tree Advisory Board 


17.06 COMPENSATION. The salary of each Council member is nine hundred sixty dollars ($960.00) per year, payable quarterly or in other convenient installments. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[8]) 
[The next page is 95] 
CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA 
-88­
CHAPTER 18 
CITY CLERK 

18.01 Appointment and Compensation 18.08 Records 
18.02 Powers and Duties: General 18.09 Attendance at Meetings 
18.03 Publication of Minutes 18.10 Issue Licenses and Permits 
18.04 Recording Measures 18.11 Notify Appointees 
18.05 Publication 18.12 Elections 
18.06 Authentication 18.13 City Seal 
18.07 Certify Measures 
18.01 APPOINTMENT AND COMPENSATION. The Council shall appoint by majority vote a City Clerk to serve at the discretion of the Council. The Clerk shall receive such compensation as established by resolution of the Council. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[3]) 
18.02 POWERS AND DUTIES: GENERAL. The Clerk, or in the Clerk’s absence or inability to act, the Deputy Clerk, has the powers and duties as provided in this chapter, this Code of Ordinances and the law. 
18.03 PUBLICATION OF MINUTES. The Clerk shall attend all regular and special Council meetings and within fifteen (15) days following a regular or special meeting shall cause the minutes of the proceedings thereof to be published. Such publication shall include a list of all claims allowed and a summary of all receipts and shall show the gross amount of the claim. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[6]) 
18.04 RECORDING MEASURES. The Clerk shall promptly record each measure considered by the Council and record a statement with the measure, where applicable, indicating whether the Mayor signed, vetoed or took no action on the measure, and whether the measure was repassed after the Mayor’s veto. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.7[1 & 2]) 
18.05 PUBLICATION. The Clerk shall cause to be published all ordinances, enactments, proceedings and official notices requiring publication as follows: 
1. Time. If notice of an election, hearing, or other official action is required by this Code of Ordinances or law, the notice must be published 
CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA 
-95 ­
at least once, not less than four (4) nor more than twenty (20) days before the date of the election, hearing or other action, unless otherwise provided by law. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.3[1]) 
2. Manner of Publication. A publication required by this Code of Ordinances or law must be in a newspaper published at least once weekly and having general circulation in the City. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.3[2]) 
18.06 AUTHENTICATION. The Clerk shall authenticate all measures except motions with the Clerk’s signature, certifying the time and manner of publication when required. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.7[4]) 
18.07 CERTIFY MEASURES. The Clerk shall certify all measures establishing any zoning district, building lines, or fire limits and a plat showing the district, lines, or limits to the recorder of the County containing the affected parts of the City. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.11) 
18.08 RECORDS. The Clerk shall maintain the specified City records in the following manner: 
1. Ordinances and Codes. Maintain copies of all effective City ordinances and codes for public use. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.7[5]) 
2. Custody. Have custody and be responsible for the safekeeping of all writings or documents in which the City is a party in interest unless otherwise specifically directed by law or ordinance. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4]) 
3. Maintenance. Maintain all City records and documents, or accurate reproductions, for at least five (5) years except that ordinances, resolutions, Council proceedings, records and documents, or accurate reproductions, relating to the issuance, cancellation, transfer, redemption or replacement of public bonds or obligations shall be kept for at least eleven (11) years following the final maturity of the bonds or obligations. Ordinances, resolutions, Council proceedings, records and documents, or accurate reproductions, relating to real property transactions shall be maintained permanently. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[3 & 5]) 
4. Provide Copy. Furnish upon request to any municipal officer a copy of any record, paper or public document under the Clerk’s control when it may be necessary to such officer in the discharge of such officer’s duty; furnish a copy to any citizen when requested upon payment of the fee set by Council resolution; under the direction of the Mayor or other authorized officer, affix the seal of the City to those public documents or instruments which by ordinance and Code of Ordinances are required to be attested by the affixing of the seal. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4 & 5] and 380.7[5]) 
5. Filing of Communications. Keep and file all communications and petitions directed to the Council or to the City generally. The Clerk shall endorse thereon the action of the Council taken upon matters considered in such communications and petitions. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4]) 
18.09 ATTENDANCE AT MEETINGS. At the direction of the Council, the Clerk shall attend meetings of committees, boards and commissions. The Clerk shall record and preserve a correct record of the proceedings of such meetings. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4]) 
18.10 ISSUE LICENSES AND PERMITS. The Clerk shall issue or revoke licenses and permits when authorized by this Code of Ordinances, and keep a record of licenses and permits issued which shall show date of issuance, license or permit number, official receipt number, name of person to whom issued, term of license or permit and purpose for which issued. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4]) 
18.11 NOTIFY APPOINTEES. The Clerk shall inform all persons appointed by the Mayor or Council to offices in the City government of their position and the time at which they shall assume the duties of their office. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4]) 
18.12 ELECTIONS. The Clerk shall perform the following duties relating to elections and nominations: 
1. In the event of a change in the method of nomination process used by the City, certify to the Commissioner of Elections the type of nomination process to be used by the City no later than seventy-seven 
(77) days before the date of the regular City election. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 376.6) 
2. Accept the nomination petition of a candidate for a City office for filing if on its face it appears to have the requisite number of signatures and is timely filed. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 376.4) 
CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA -97 ­
3. Designate other employees or officials of the City who are ordinarily available to accept nomination papers if the Clerk is not readily available during normal working hours. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 376.4) 
4. Note upon each petition and affidavit accepted for filing the date and time that the petition was filed. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 376.4) 
5. Deliver all nomination petitions, together with the text of any public measure being submitted by the Council to the electorate, to the County Commissioner of Elections not later than five o’clock (5:00) 
p.m. on the day following the last day on which nomination petitions can be filed. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 376.4) 
18.13 CITY SEAL. The City seal is in the custody of the Clerk and shall be attached by the Clerk to all transcripts, orders and certificates which it may be necessary or proper to authenticate. The City seal is circular in form, in the center of which are the words “PERRY, IOWA” and around the margin of which are the words “CITY OF” and “SEAL.” 
CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA 
-98­
CHAPTER 19 
CITY TREASURER 

19.01 Appointment 19.03 Duties of Treasurer 
19.02 Compensation 
19.01 APPOINTMENT. The Finance Officer is the Treasurer and performs all functions required of the position of Treasurer. (Ord. 788 – Nov. 02 Supp.) 
19.02 COMPENSATION. The Finance Officer receives no additional compensation for performing the duties of the Treasurer. 
(Ord. 788 – Nov. 02 Supp.) 
19.03 DUTIES OF TREASURER. The duties of the Treasurer are as follows: 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4]) 
1. 
Custody of Funds. Be responsible for the safe custody of all funds of the City in the manner provided by law, and Council direction. 

2. 
Record of Fund. Keep the record of each fund separate. 

3. 
Record Receipts. Keep an accurate record of all money or securities received by the Treasurer on behalf of the City and specify the date, from whom, and for what purpose received. 

4. 
Record Disbursements. Keep an accurate account of all disbursements, money or property, specifying date, to whom, and from what fund paid. 

5. 
Special Assessments. Keep a separate account of all money received by the Treasurer from special assessments. 

6. 
Deposit Funds. Upon receipt of moneys to be held in the Treasurer’s custody and belonging to the City, deposit the same in depositories selected by the Council. 

7. 
Reconciliation. Reconcile depository statements with the Treasurer’s books and certify monthly to the Council the balance of cash and investments of each fund and amounts received and disbursed. 

8. 
Debt Service. Keep a register of all bonds outstanding and record all payments of interest and principal. 

9. 
Other Duties. Perform such other duties as specified by the Council by resolution or ordinance. 


°°°°°°°°°° 

CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA 
-100 ­
CHAPTER 20 
CITY ATTORNEY 

20.01 Appointment and Compensation 20.05 Review and Comment 
20.02 Attorney for City 20.06 Provide Legal Opinion 
20.03 Power of Attorney 20.07 Attendance at Council Meetings 
20.04 Ordinance Preparation 20.08 Prepare Documents 
20.01 APPOINTMENT AND COMPENSATION. The Council shall appoint by majority vote a City Attorney to serve at the discretion of the Council. The City Attorney shall receive such compensation as established by resolution of the Council. 
20.02 ATTORNEY FOR CITY. The City Attorney shall act as attorney for the City in all matters affecting the City’s interest and appear on behalf of the City before any court, tribunal, commission or board. The City Attorney shall prosecute or defend all actions and proceedings when so requested by the Mayor or Council. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4]) 
20.03 POWER OF ATTORNEY. The City Attorney shall sign the name of the City to all appeal bonds and to all other bonds or papers of any kind that may be essential to the prosecution of any cause in court, and when so signed the City shall be bound upon the same. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4]) 
20.04 ORDINANCE PREPARATION. The City Attorney shall prepare those ordinances which the Council may desire and direct to be prepared and report to the Council upon all such ordinances before their final passage by the Council and publication. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4]) 
20.05 REVIEW AND COMMENT. The City Attorney shall, upon request, make a report to the Council giving an opinion on all contracts, documents, resolutions, or ordinances submitted to or coming under the City Attorney’s notice. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4]) 
20.06 PROVIDE LEGAL OPINION. The City Attorney shall give advice or a written legal opinion on City contracts and all questions of law relating to City matters submitted by the Mayor, Council or City Administrator. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4]) 
CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA -101 ­
20.07 ATTENDANCE AT COUNCIL MEETINGS. The City Attorney shall attend meetings of the Council at the request of the Mayor or Council. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4]) 
20.08 PREPARE DOCUMENTS. The City Attorney shall, upon request, formulate drafts for contracts, forms and other writings which may be required for the use of the City. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4]) 
[The next page is 105] 
CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA 
-102 ­
CHAPTER 21 

CITY ADMINISTRATOR 

21.01 Appointment and Term 21.04 Duties 
21.02 Compensation 21.05 Council Relations 
21.03 Qualifications 
21.01 APPOINTMENT AND TERM. The City Administrator shall be appointed by the majority vote of all members of the Council, shall hold office at the discretion of the Council, and shall be subject to removal and termination by majority vote of all members of the Council, subject to the provisions and protections of Section 372.15 of the Code of Iowa. 
21.02 COMPENSATION. The City Administrator shall receive such annual salary and benefits as the Council shall from time to time determine, and payment shall be made from the treasury of the City in the manner provided for the payment of compensation and allocation of benefits to other officers and employees of the City. 
21.03 QUALIFICATIONS. The City Administrator shall be a person competent by education and/or experience to perform the duties imposed upon such person by this chapter. The City Administrator: 
1. 
Shall possess a college degree in public administration or a related field and have three (3) years of experience in city administration or shall have a minimum of eight (8) years of practical experience in city administration. 

2. 
Following appointment, shall reside within the school district of Perry Community Schools. (Ord. 847 – May 06 Supp.) 

3. 
Shall devote full time to the diligent and faithful performance of duties hereunder and shall not, during the term as Administrator, engage in any other employment or self-employment activities or endeavors or hold any other office or position, except with the approval of the Council, by motion. 

4. 
Shall not, during the term as City Administrator, hold any position as officer or director of any “for-profit” organization which does business or carries on any activities in the City, or own more than five percent (5%) of the outstanding stock of any corporation which does business or carries on activities within the City. 


CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA 
-105 ­




21.04 DUTIES. The duties of the City Administrator are as follows: 
1. 
To supervise and direct the duties of the City Clerk and City Treasurer. 

2. 
To supervise enforcement and execution of the City ordinances and resolutions and applicable State and Federal laws and regulations within the City. 

3. 
To attend all meetings of the Council unless excused by the Mayor or majority of the Council members. 

4. 
To recommend to the Council such measure as may be necessary or expedient for the good government and welfare of the City. 

5. 
To have the general supervision and direction of the administration of the City government. 

6. 
To supervise and conduct the business affairs of the City and cause accurate records to be kept by modern and efficient accounting methods. 

7. 
To supervise the performance of all contracts for work to be done for the City, supervise all purchases of material, supplies and equipment and insure that such material, supplies and equipment are received and are of the quality and character called for by the contract. 

8. 
To supervise the construction, improvements, repair, maintenance and management of all City property, capital improvements and undertakings of the City, including the making and preservation of all surveys, maps, plans, drawings, specifications and estimates for capital improvements. 

9. 
To be directly responsible to the Council for the administration of the City as directed by the Council. 

10. 
To supervise and direct through established procedures, all officers, departments and employees of the City, specifically including but not limited to police, fire, streets, sewers, waste disposal and central administration. To effectuate this responsibility, the City Administrator shall have the power and authority to recommend employment of such assistants and other employees of the City for which the Council has approved. 

11. 
To represent the City as directed by the Council, in all negotiations and relations with employees, contractors, consultants, other governmental units and civic organizations in which the City may have an interest. 


CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA 
-106 ­
12. 
To cooperate with, assist and advise all administrative agencies, City boards and commissions and act as the Council’s liaison and representative to such entities. 

13. 
To investigate the performance and conduct of any department agency, officer or employee of the City, as deemed appropriate. 

14. 
To keep the Council fully advised of the financial and other conditions of the City and of its future needs. 

15. 
To supervise and assist City boards, commissions and all City departments in the preparation, administration and operation of the City’s annual budget. 

16. 
To make to the Council periodic reports of the general condition of the City in writing at such intervals as the Council directs. 

17. 
To advise, assist and consult with the City Attorney on all City legal matters. 

18. 
To formulate and recommend employment and personnel policies, compensation schedules and benefits; to prepare and maintain job descriptions for all City employees, all with the approval of the Council; to supervise and direct negotiations in all matters relating to collective bargaining. 

19. 
To compile and maintain current and up-to-date information regarding all funding sources of the City, including State and Federal grant and loan programs; to plan, develop, prepare and submit, with the approval and at the direction of the Council, applications for grants, loans and other sources of funding and to administer all such funding. 

20. 
To make recommendations to the Council and to participate in projects and endeavors to support and promote economic growth and development in the City. 

21. 
To faithfully represent the Council and the City in intergovernmental relations. 

22. 
To have the power to employ, reclassify, discipline or suspend any employee under the Administrator’s direct control. The City Administrator shall also have the power to employ, reclassify, discipline, suspend or discharge any employee under the supervision and control of any department head, but only with the concurrence of the department head. The City Administrator shall not have the authority to employ or appoint, reclassify, discipline, suspend or discharge the Police Chief, Fire Chief, the Compliance Officer, the Public Works Director, the City Clerk or the City Attorney. However, the City Administrator shall, when appropriate, recommend to the Council action regarding such appointed 


CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA -107 ­
officers or employees of the City and shall also recommend to and seek direction from the Council when the Administrator and a department head are not in agreement in regard to the employment, reclassification, suspension, discipline or discharge of a City employee. 
23. To perform such other duties as the Mayor or Council may direct. 
21.05 COUNCIL RELATIONS. The City Administrator shall not participate in campaign activities in any City election, except by casting his or her vote, and shall not appoint an elected City official to any City office or employment position. 
[The next page is 111] 
CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA 
-108 ­
CHAPTER 22 
LIBRARY BOARD OF TRUSTEES 

22.01 Public Library 22.07 Nonresident Use 
22.02 Library Trustees 22.08 Expenditures 
22.03 Qualifications of Trustees 22.09 Annual Report 
22.04 Organization of the Board 22.10 Injury to Books or Property 
22.05 Powers and Duties 22.11 Theft 
22.06 Contracting with Other Libraries 22.12 Notice Posted 
22.01 PUBLIC LIBRARY. The public library for the City is known as the Perry Public Library, Wiese Building. It is referred to in this chapter as the Library. 
22.02 LIBRARY TRUSTEES. The Board of Trustees of the Library, hereinafter referred to as the Board, consists of five (5) resident members. All members are to be appointed by the Mayor with the approval of the Council. 
22.03 QUALIFICATIONS OF TRUSTEES. All members of the Board shall be bona fide citizens and residents of the City. Members shall be over the age of eighteen (18) years. 
22.04 ORGANIZATION OF THE BOARD. The organization of the Board shall be as follows: 
1. Term of Office. All appointments to the Board shall be for four 
(4) years, except to fill vacancies. Each term shall commence on July first. Appointments shall be made every two (2) years of one-half (1/2) the total number or as near as possible, to stagger the terms. 
(Ord. 842 – May 06 Supp.) 
2. 
Vacancies. The position of any Trustee shall be vacated if such member moves permanently from the City and shall be deemed vacated if such member is absent from six (6) consecutive regular meetings of the Board, except in the case of sickness or temporary absence from the City. Vacancies in the Board shall be filled in the same manner as an original appointment except that the new Trustee shall fill out the unexpired term for which the appointment is made. 

3. 
Compensation. Trustees shall receive no compensation for their services. 


22.05 POWERS AND DUTIES. The Board shall have and exercise the following powers and duties: 
1. 
Officers. To meet and elect from its members a President, a Secretary, and such other officers as it deems necessary. 

2. 
Physical Plant. To have charge, control and supervision of the Library, its appurtenances, fixtures and rooms containing the same. 

3. 
Charge of Affairs. To direct and control all affairs of the Library. 

4. 
Hiring of Personnel. To employ a librarian, and authorize the librarian to employ such assistants and employees as may be necessary for the proper management of the Library, and fix their compensation; provided, however, that prior to such employment, the compensation of the librarian, assistants and employees shall have been fixed and approved by a majority of the members of the Board voting in favor thereof. 

5. 
Removal of Personnel. To remove the librarian, by a two-thirds vote of the Board, and provide procedures for the removal of the assistants or employees for misdemeanor, incompetence or inattention to duty, subject however, to the provisions of Chapter 35C of the Code of Iowa. 

6. 
Purchases. To select, or authorize the librarian to select, and make purchases of books, pamphlets, magazines, periodicals, papers, maps, journals, other Library materials, furniture, fixtures, stationery and supplies for the Library within budgetary limits set by the Board. 

7. 
Use by Nonresidents. To authorize the use of the Library by nonresidents and to fix charges therefor unless a contract for free service exists. 

8. 
Rules and Regulations. To make and adopt, amend, modify or repeal rules and regulations, not inconsistent with this Code of Ordinances and the law, for the care, use, government and management of the Library and the business of the Board, fixing and enforcing penalties for violations. 

9. 
Expenditures. To have exclusive control of the expenditure of all funds allocated for Library purposes by the Council, and of all moneys available by gift or otherwise for the erection of Library buildings, and of all other moneys belonging to the Library including fines and rentals collected under the rules of the Board. 

10. 
Gifts. To accept gifts of real property, personal property, or mixed property, and devises and bequests, including trust funds; to take the title to said property in the name of the Library; to execute deeds and 


CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA 
-112 ­
bills of sale for the conveyance of said property; and to expend the funds received by them from such gifts, for the improvement of the Library. 
11. Enforce the Performance of Conditions on Gifts. To enforce the performance of conditions on gifts, donations, devises and bequests accepted by the City on behalf of the Library. 
(Code of Iowa, Ch. 661) 
12. 
Record of Proceedings. To keep a record of its proceedings. 

13. 
County Historical Association. To have authority to make agreements with the local County historical association where such exists, and to set apart the necessary room and to care for such articles as may come into the possession of the association. The Trustees are further authorized to purchase necessary receptacles and materials for the preservation and protection of such articles as are in their judgment of a historical and educational nature and pay for the same out of funds allocated for Library purposes. 


22.06 CONTRACTING WITH OTHER LIBRARIES. The Board has power to contract with other libraries in accordance with the following: 
1. Contracting. The Board may contract with any other boards of trustees of free public libraries, with any other city, school corporation, private or semiprivate organization, institution of higher learning, township, or County, or with the trustees of any County library district for the use of the Library by their respective residents. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.5 & Ch. 28E) 
2. Termination. Such a contract may be terminated at any time by mutual consent of the contracting parties. It also may be terminated by a majority vote of the electors represented by either of the contracting parties. Such a termination proposition shall be submitted to the electors by the governing body of a contracting party on a written petition of not less than five percent (5%) in number of the electors who voted for governor in the territory of the contracting party at the last general election. The petition must be presented to the governing body not less than forty (40) days before the election. The proposition may be submitted at any election provided by law that is held in the territory of the party seeking to terminate the contract. 
22.07 NONRESIDENT USE. The Board may authorize the use of the Library by persons not residents of the City or County in any one or more of the following ways: 
CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA 
-113 ­
1. 
Lending. By lending the books or other materials of the Library to nonresidents on the same terms and conditions as to residents of the City, or County, or upon payment of a special nonresident Library fee. 

2. 
Depository. By establishing depositories of Library books or other materials to be loaned to nonresidents. 

3. 
Bookmobiles. By establishing bookmobiles or a traveling library so that books or other Library materials may be loaned to nonresidents. 

4. 
Branch Library. By establishing branch libraries for lending books or other Library materials to nonresidents. 


22.08 EXPENDITURES. All money appropriated by the Council for the operation and maintenance of the Library shall be set aside in an account for the Library. Expenditures shall be paid for only on orders of the Board, signed by its President and Secretary. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.20 & 392.5) 
22.09 ANNUAL REPORT. The Board shall make a report to the Council immediately after the close of the fiscal year. This report shall contain statements as to the condition of the Library, the number of books added, the number circulated, the amount of fines collected, and the amount of money expended in the maintenance of the Library during the year, together with such further information as may be required by the Council. 
22.10 INJURY TO BOOKS OR PROPERTY. It is unlawful for a person willfully, maliciously or wantonly to tear, deface, mutilate, injure or destroy, in whole or in part, any newspaper, periodical, book, map, pamphlet, chart, picture or other property belonging to the Library or reading room. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.1) 
22.11 THEFT. No person shall take possession or control of property of the Library with the intent to deprive the Library thereof. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 714.1) 
22.12 NOTICE POSTED. There shall be posted in clear public view within the Library notices informing the public of the following: 
1. Failure To Return. Failure to return Library materials for two (2) months or more after the date the person agreed to return the Library materials, or failure to return Library equipment for one (1) month or more after the date the person agreed to return the Library equipment, is evidence of intent to deprive the owner, provided a reasonable attempt, including the mailing by restricted certified mail of notice that such material or equipment is overdue and criminal actions will be taken, has been made to reclaim the materials or equipment. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 714.5) 
2. Detention and Search. Persons concealing Library materials may be detained and searched pursuant to law. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 808.12) 
CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA 
-115 ­
°°°°°°°°°° 

CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA 
-116 ­
CHAPTER 23 
PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION 

23.01 Planning and Zoning Commission 23.04 Compensation 
23.02 Term of Office 23.05 Powers and Duties 
23.03 Vacancies 
23.01 PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION. There shall be appointed by the Council a City Planning and Zoning Commission, hereinafter referred to as the Commission, consisting of seven (7) members, who shall be residents of the City and qualified by knowledge or experience to act in matters pertaining to the development of a City plan and who shall not hold any elective office in the City government. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 414.6 & 392.1) 
23.02 TERM OF OFFICE. The term of office of the members of the Commission shall be four (4) years. The terms of not more than one-third of the members will expire in any one year. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1) 
23.03 VACANCIES. If any vacancy exists on the Commission caused by resignation, or otherwise, a successor for the residue of the term shall be appointed in the same manner as the original appointee. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1) 
23.04 COMPENSATION. All members of the Commission shall serve without compensation, except their actual expenses, which shall be subject to the approval of the Council. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1) 
23.05 POWERS AND DUTIES. The Commission shall have and exercise the following powers and duties: 
1. Selection of Officers. The Commission shall choose annually at its first regular meeting one of its members to act as Chairperson and another as Vice Chairperson, who shall perform all the duties of the Chairperson during the Chairperson’s absence or disability. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1) 
2. Adopt Rules and Regulations. The Commission shall adopt such rules and regulations governing its organization and procedure as it may deem necessary. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1) 
CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA -117 ­
3. Zoning. The Commission shall have and exercise all the powers and duties and privileges in establishing the City zoning regulations and other related matters and may from time to time recommend to the Council amendments, supplements, changes or modifications, all as provided by Chapter 414 of the Code of Iowa. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 414.6) 
4. Recommendations of Improvements. No statuary, memorial or work of art in a public place, and no public building, bridge, viaduct, street fixtures, public structure or appurtenances, shall be located or erected, or site therefor obtained, nor shall any permit be issued by any department of the City for the erection or location thereof until and unless the design and proposed location of any such improvement shall have been submitted to the Commission and its recommendations thereon obtained, except such requirements and recommendations shall not act as a stay upon action for any such improvement when the Commission after thirty (30) days’ written notice requesting such recommendations, shall have failed to file same. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1) 
5. Review and Comment on Plats. All plans, plats, or re-plats of subdivision or re-subdivisions of land embraced in the City or adjacent thereto, laid out in lots or plats with the streets, alleys, or other portions of the same intended to be dedicated to the public in the City, shall first be submitted to the Commission and its recommendations obtained before approval by the Council. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1) 
6. Review and Comment of Street and Park Improvements. No plan for any street, park, parkway, boulevard, traffic-way, river front, or other public improvement affecting the City plan shall be finally approved by the City or the character or location thereof determined, unless such proposal shall first have been submitted to the Commission and the Commission shall have had thirty (30) days within which to file its recommendations thereon. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1) 
7. Fiscal Responsibilities. The Commission shall have full, complete and exclusive authority to expend for and on behalf of the City all sums of money appropriated to it, and to use and expend all gifts, donations or payments whatsoever which are received by the City for City planning and zoning purposes. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1) 
CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA 
-118 ­
8. Limitation on Entering Contracts. The Commission shall have no power to contract debts beyond the amount of its original or amended appropriation as approved by the Council for the present year. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1) 
9. Annual Report. The Commission shall each year make a report to the Mayor and Council of its proceedings, with a full statement of its receipts, disbursements and the progress of its work during the preceding fiscal year. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1) 
CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA 
-119 ­
°°°°°°°°°° 

CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA 
-120 ­
CHAPTER 24 
TREE BOARD 

24.01 Tree Board 24.04 Tree List 
24.02 Term of Office 24.05 Powers and Duties 
24.03 Compensation 
24.01 TREE BOARD. There is hereby created and established a City Tree Board for the City of Perry, which consists of five members, appointed by the Mayor with the approval of the Council. Such member shall reside in the Perry Community School District. 
24.02 TERM OF OFFICE. The term of office of the members of the Board shall be staggered three-year terms. Each term shall commence on April 1. The regular full term of office for a member of the City Tree Board shall be three years and shall expire on April 1 of the third year. For the purpose of creating staggered terms, three initial members shall be appointed to three-year terms expiring on April 1, 2010, and two initial members shall be appointed to two-year terms expiring on April 1, 2009. If the office of a member of the City Tree Board becomes vacant prior to the normal expiration of its fixed term for any reason, a member shall be appointed by the Mayor, with the approval of the City Council, to fill such vacancy for the remainder of such unexpired term. 
1. Removal. A member of the Tree Board may be removed from office upon written order filed by the Mayor with the City Clerk and sent by certified mail to the person to be removed. A member of the Tree Board who fails to attend three consecutive regular meetings of the Board may be removed from office by reason thereof as reported by the Board Chairperson to the Mayor. 
24.03 COMPENSATION. Members of the Board shall serve without compensation. 
24.04 TREE LIST. The Tree Board shall maintain a list of desirable trees for planting as well as a list of trees not permitted for planting. This list will be updated and maintained on a regular basis by the Board. 
24.05 POWERS AND DUTIES. The Board shall have and exercise the following powers and duties: 
1. Selection of Officers. The Board shall choose annually at its first regular meeting one of its members to act as Chairperson and another as Vice Chairperson, who shall perform all of the duties of the Chairperson during the Chairperson’s absence or disability. 
2. 
Adopt Rules and Regulations. The Board shall adopt such rules and regulations governing its organization and procedure as it may deem necessary. 

3. 
Limitation on Entering Contracts. The Board shall have no power to contract debts but may present expenditure requests to the Perry City Council regarding proposed needs the Board deems prudent for projects. 

4. 
It shall be the duty of the Tree Board to prepare, revise annually and administer a written plan for the care, preservation, pruning, planting, replanting, removal and disposition of trees and shrubs located within the right-of-way boundaries of all City streets or located on any other property owned by the City. 

5. 
The Board shall determine based upon the Tree Ordinance of the City of Perry Code of Ordinances the variety of trees that will be allowed to be planted in right-of-ways, City parks, or on any other City property. 

6. 
The Board shall determine through physical inspection what trees need to be removed in right-of-ways, City parks, or on any other City property. 

7. 
A regular tree inspection schedule shall be carried out by the Board with the Board having the authority to determine the priority of a tree that should be removed or planted. 

8. 
Long range plans for tree removal and planting will be developed by the Board and be presented to the Perry City Council. 


(Former Chapter 24, Parks Commission, repealed by Ord. 857 – Mar. 07 Supp.) 
(New Chapter 24, Tree Board, added by Ord. 855 – Mar. 07 Supp.) 
[The next page is 125] 
CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA 
-122 ­
CHAPTER 25 

UTILITY BOARD OF TRUSTEES 

25.01 Purpose 25.06 Powers and Duties of the Board 
25.02 Board Established 25.07 Control of Funds 
25.03 Appointment of Trustees 25.08 Accounting 
25.04 Compensation 25.09 Discriminatory Rates Illegal 
25.05 Vacancies 25.10 Discontinuance of Board 
25.01 PURPOSE. The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the operation of the municipally owned water utility by a board of trustees. 
25.02 BOARD ESTABLISHED. Pursuant to an election held March 30, 1947, the management and control of the municipally owned Water Utility were placed in the hands of a Board of Trustees. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 388.2) 
25.03 APPOINTMENT OF TRUSTEES. The Mayor shall appoint, subject to the approval of the Council, three (3) persons to serve as trustees for staggered six (6) year terms, to run from the first day of April following appointment. No public officer or salaried employee of the City may serve on the Utility Board. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 388.3) 
25.04 COMPENSATION. The Council shall by resolution set the compensation of Board members. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 388.3) 
25.05 VACANCIES. An appointment to fill a vacancy on the Board of Trustees shall be made in the same manner as an original appointment except that such appointment shall be for the balance of the unexpired term. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 388.3) 
25.06 POWERS AND DUTIES OF THE BOARD. The Board of Trustees may exercise all powers of the City in relation to the Water Utility, with the following exceptions: 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 388.4) 
1. Taxes, ordinances and bonds. The Board may not certify taxes to be levied, pass ordinances or amendments, or issue general obligation or special assessment bonds. 
Code of Iowa, Sec. 388.4[1]) 
CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA 
-125 ­
2. Property. Title to all property must be in the name of the City but the Board has full control of such property subject to limitations imposed by law. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 388.4[2]) 
3. Reports to Council. The Board shall make a detailed annual report to the Council including a complete financial statement. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 388.4[3]) 
4. Proceedings Published. Immediately following a regular or special meeting, the Board Secretary shall prepare and cause to be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the City a condensed statement of proceedings including a list of all claims. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 388.4[4]) 
25.07 CONTROL OF FUNDS. The Board shall control tax revenues allocated to it as well as all moneys derived from operations. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 388.5) 





25.08 ACCOUNTING. Utility moneys are held in a separate utility fund. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 388.5) 
25.09 DISCRIMINATORY RATES ILLEGAL. The utility may not provide use or service at a discriminatory rate, except to the City or its agencies, as provided in Section 384.91, Code of Iowa. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 388.6) 
25.10 DISCONTINUANCE OF BOARD. A proposal, on motion of the Council or upon receipt of a valid petition, to discontinue the utility board is subject to the approval of the voters of the City, except that the Board may be discontinued by resolution of the Council when the utility it administers is disposed of or leased for a period of over five (5) years. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 388.2) 
CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA 
-126 ­
CHAPTER 26 
AIRPORT COMMISSION 

26.01 Airport Commission 26.05 Bond 
26.02 Appointment and Term 26.06 Officers 
26.03 Vacancies 26.07 Powers and Duties 
26.04 Compensation 26.08 Annual Report 
26.01 AIRPORT COMMISSION. There shall be an Airport Commission consisting of five (5) resident voters of the City. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 330.20) 
26.02 APPOINTMENT AND TERM. Commissioners shall be appointed by the Council for staggered terms of four (4) years. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 330.20) 
26.03 VACANCIES. Vacancies shall be filled by appointment of the Council to fill out the unexpired term for which the appointment was made. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 330.20) 
26.04 COMPENSATION. Members of the Commission shall serve without compensation. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 330.20) 
26.05 BOND. The bond amount, as is required for Airport Commissioners in Section 330.20 of the Code of Iowa, shall be set at zero. 
26.06 OFFICERS. The Commission shall elect from its own members a Chairperson and Secretary who shall serve for such term as the Commission shall determine. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 330.20) 
26.07 POWERS AND DUTIES. The Commission shall have and exercise the following powers and duties. 
1. General. The Commission has all the powers in relation to airports granted to cities under State law except powers to sell the airport. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 330.21) 
2. Budget. The Commission shall annually certify the amount of tax to be levied for airport purposes, and upon such certification the Council may include all or a portion of said amount in its budget. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 330.21) 
CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA -127 ­
3. Funds. All funds derived from taxation or otherwise for airport purposes shall be under the full and absolute control of the Commission for the purposes prescribed by law, and shall be deposited with the Treasurer or City Clerk to the credit of the Airport Commission, and shall be disbursed only on the written orders of the Airport Commission, including the payment of all indebtedness arising from the acquisition and construction of airports and the maintenance, operation, and extension thereof. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 330.21) 
26.08 ANNUAL REPORT. The Airport Commission shall immediately after the close of each municipal fiscal year, file with the City Clerk a detailed and audited written report of all money received and disbursed by the Commission during said fiscal year, and shall publish a summary thereof in an official newspaper. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 330.22) 
CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA 
-128 ­
CHAPTER 27 
HISTORIC PRESERVATION COMMISSION 

27.01 Purpose and Intent 27.03 Structure of the Commission 
27.02 Definitions 27.04 Powers of the Commission 



27.01 PURPOSE AND INTENT. The purposes of this chapter are to: 
1. 
Establish a Historic Preservation Commission; 

2. 
Define the powers and duties of the Commission; 

3. 
Promote the educational, cultural, economic and general welfare of the public through the recognition, enhancement and perpetuation of sites and districts of historical and cultural significance; 

4. 
Safeguard the City’s historic, aesthetic and cultural heritage by preserving sites and districts of historic and cultural significance; 

5. 
Stabilize and improve property values; 

6. 
Foster pride in the legacy of beauty and achievements of the past; 

7. 
Protect and enhance the City’s attractions to tourists and visitors and the support and stimulus to business thereby provided; 

8. 
Strengthen the economy of the City; and 

9. 
Promote the use of sites and districts of historic and cultural significance as places for the education, pleasure, and welfare of the people of the City. 


27.02 DEFINITIONS. For use in this chapter, the following terms are defined: 
1. 
“Commission” means the Perry Historic Preservation Commission, as established by this chapter. 

2. 
“Historic district” means an area which contains a significant portion of buildings, structures or other improvements which, considered as a whole, possess integrity of location, design, setting, materials, workmanship, feeling and association, and which area as a whole: 


A. Embodies the distinctive characteristics of a type, period or method of construction, or represents the work of a master, or possesses high artistic values, or represents a significant and distinguishable entity whose components may lack individual distinction; or 
B. Is associated with events that have made significant contributions to the broad patterns of our local, state or national history; or 
C. Possesses a coherent and distinctive visual character or integrity based upon similarity of scale, design, color, setting, workmanship, materials or combinations thereof which is deemed to add significantly to the value and attractiveness of properties within such area; or 
D. Is associated with the lives of persons significant in our past; or 
E. Has yielded, or may be likely to yield, information important in prehistory or history. 
3. “Historic site” means a structure or building which: 
A. Is associated with events that have made a significant contribution to the broad patterns of our history; or 
B. Is associated with the lives of persons significant in our past; or 
C. Embodies the distinctive characteristics of a type, period or method of construction or represents the work of a master, or possesses high artistic values, or represents a significant and distinguishable entity whose components may lack individual distinction; or 
D. Has yielded, or may be likely to yield, information important in prehistory or history. 


27.03 STRUCTURE OF COMMISSION. 
1. 
The Commission shall consist of seven (7) persons and a majority of the Commission members must be residents of the City. 

2. 
Members of the Commission shall be appointed by the Mayor with the approval of the Council. Members shall demonstrate a positive interest in historic preservation, possess interest or expertise in architecture, architectural history, historic preservation, city planning, building rehabilitation, conservation in general or real estate. 

3. 
The Commission members are appointed for staggered terms of three (3) years, from January 1 following the year of such appointment or until the appointment of a successor to serve for the remaining term. 


CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA 
-130 ­
4. 
Vacancies occurring in the Commission, other than expiration of term of office, shall be only for the unexpired portion of the term of the member replaced. 

5. 
Members may serve for more than one term and each member shall serve until the appointment of a successor. 

6. 
Vacancies shall be filled by the City according to the original selection as aforesaid. 

7. 
Members shall serve without compensation. 

8. 
A simple majority of the Commission shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business. 

9. 
The Commission shall elect a Chairperson who shall preside over all Commission meetings and elect a Secretary who shall be responsible for maintaining written records of the Commission’s proceedings. 

10. 
The Commission shall meet at least three (3) times a year. 



27.04 POWERS OF THE COMMISSION. 
1. 
The Commission may conduct inventory studies for the identification and designation of historic districts and sites meeting the definitions established by this chapter. The Commission may proceed at its own initiative or upon a petition from any person, group or association. The Commission shall maintain records of all studies and inventories for public use. 

2. 
The Commission may make a recommendation to the State Bureau of Historic Preservation for the listing of an historic district or site in the National Register of Historic Places and may conduct a public hearing thereon. 

3. 
The Commission may investigate and recommend to the Council the adoption of ordinances designating historic sites and historic districts if they qualify as defined herein. 

4. 
In addition to those duties and powers specified above, the Commission may, with Council approval, 


A. Accept unconditional gifts and donations of real and personal property, including money, for the purpose of historic preservation; 
B. Acquire, by purchase, bequest or donation, fee and lesser interests in historic properties, including properties adjacent to or associated with historic properties; 
C. Preserve, restore, maintain and operate historic properties under the ownership or control of the Commission; 
D. Lease, sell and otherwise transfer or dispose of historic properties subject to rights of public access and other covenants and in a manner that will preserve the property; 
E. Contract, with the approval of the Council, with State or Federal government or other organizations; 
F. Cooperate with Federal, State and local governments in the pursuance of the objectives of historic preservation; 
G. Provide information for the purpose of historic preservation to the Council; and 
H. Promote and conduct an educational and interpretive program on historic properties within its jurisdiction. 
[The next page is 135] 
CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA 
-132 ­
CHAPTER 28 
COMPLIANCE OFFICER 

28.01 POWERS AND DUTIES. The Compliance Officer shall enforce this Code of Ordinances by serving as Building Official designated to enforce the Code of Ordinances including such areas as dangerous buildings and other areas as directed by the Council. 
CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA 
-135 ­
°°°°°°°°°° 

CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA 
-136 ­
CHAPTER 29 
PARKS AND RECREATION ADVISORY BOARD 
29.01 Board Established 29.04 Reports to Council 
29.02 Purpose 29.05 Powers and Duties of the Board 
29.03 Structure of Board 29.06 Rules and Regulations 
29.01 BOARD ESTABLISHED. There is hereby established an administrative agency known as the Parks and Recreation Advisory Board. 
29.02 PURPOSE. The purpose of the Board is to advise and make recommendations to the Council on matters relating to the operation of the McCreary Community Building, Perkins Park, Wiese Park, Pattee Park and such other parks, playgrounds, and community recreational facilities as may be designated by the Council. The Board shall plan, develop and oversee City programs for the leisure time activities of the City’s residents of all ages. 


29.03 STRUCTURE OF BOARD. 
1. 
The Board is composed of five (5) members and at least three (3) of those members must be residents of the City of Perry. 

2. 
The Mayor, with approval of the Council, shall appoint members of the Board. 

3. 
The Board members are appointed for staggered terms of three (3) years, from March 1 following the year of such appointment or until the appointment of a successor to serve for the remaining term. 

4. 
Vacancies occurring in the Board, other than expiration of terms of office, shall be only for the unexpired portion of the term of the member replaced. 

5. 
Three (3) members of the Board shall serve as a quorum. 

6. 
Members shall serve without compensation, but may be reimbursed for actual expenses, including travel expenses, incurred in performing any duty described in this chapter, subject to Council approval. 

7. 
The Board shall elect officers and adopt its own rules of order as it applies to meeting procedure. 


29.04 REPORTS TO COUNCIL. The Board shall make written reports to the Council of its activities on at least an annual basis, or upon Council request. The report shall contain the work of the Board, including income and expenditures for the Recreation Department and the Parks Department and the condition of the property in the Recreation Department and the Parks Department. 
29.05 POWERS AND DUTIES OF THE BOARD. The Board shall work in harmony in an advisory position to the Council to develop a master plan of activities and shall assist when necessary in the preparation of the budget and make recommendations for expenditures. The Board shall review and make recommendations for operations of the City’s park system, recreational activities, the McCreary Community Building and other related functions. 
29.06 RULES AND REGULATIONS. The Board shall have the power to establish, adopt, amend, modify or repeal rules and regulations, not inconsistent with this Code of Ordinances and the law, for the care, use, government and management of the Recreation Department, Parks Department, McCreary Community Center and the business of the Board, fixing and enforcing penalties for violations. 
(Ch. 29 – Ord. 858 – Oct. 07 Supp.) 
[The next page is 145] 
CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA 
-138 ­
CHAPTER 30 
POLICE DEPARTMENT 

30.01 Department Established 30.07 Police Chief: Duties 
30.02 Organization 30.08 Departmental Rules 
30.03 Peace Officer Qualifications 30.09 Summoning Aid 
30.04 Required Training 30.10 Taking Weapons 
30.05 Compensation 30.11 Compliance Officer 
30.06 Peace Officers Appointed 
30.01 DEPARTMENT ESTABLISHED. The police department of the City is established to provide for the preservation of peace and enforcement of law and ordinances within the corporate limits of the City. 
30.02 ORGANIZATION. The department consists of the Police Chief and such other law enforcement officers and personnel, whether full or part time, as may be authorized by the Council. 
30.03 PEACE OFFICER QUALIFICATIONS. In no case shall any person be selected or appointed as a law enforcement officer unless such person meets the minimum qualification standards established by the Iowa Law Enforcement Academy. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 80B.11) 
30.04 REQUIRED TRAINING. All peace officers shall have received the minimum training required by law at an approved law enforcement training school within one year of employment. Peace officers shall also meet the minimum in-service training as required by law. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 80B.11 [2]) (IAC, 501-3 and 501-8) 
30.05 COMPENSATION. Members of the department are designated by rank and receive such compensation as shall be determined by resolution of the Council. 
30.06 PEACE OFFICERS APPOINTED. The Mayor shall appoint the Police Chief and the Police Chief shall select, subject to the approval of the Mayor, the other members of the department. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.4) 
30.07 POLICE CHIEF: DUTIES. The Police Chief has the following powers and duties subject to the approval of the Council. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13 [4]) 
CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA -145 ­
1. 
General. Perform all duties required of the police chief by law or ordinance. 

2. 
Enforce Laws. Enforce all laws, ordinances and regulations and bring all persons committing any offense before the proper court. 

3. 
Writs. Execute and return all writs and other processes directed to the Police Chief. 

4. 
Accident Reports. Report all motor vehicle accidents investigated to the State Department of Transportation. 


(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.266) 
5. 
Prisoners. Be responsible for the custody of prisoners, including conveyance to detention facilities as may be required. 

6. 
Assist Officials. When requested, provide aid to other City officers, boards and commissions in the execution of their official duties. 

7. 
Investigations. Provide for such investigation as may be necessary for the prosecution of any person alleged to have violated any law or ordinance. 

8. 
Record of Arrests. Keep a record of all arrests made in the City by showing whether said arrests were made under provisions of State law or City ordinance, the offense charged, who made the arrest and the disposition of the charge. 

9. 
Reports. Compile and submit to the Mayor and Council an annual report as well as such other reports as may be requested by the Mayor or Council. 

10. 
Command. Be in command of all officers appointed for police work and be responsible for the care, maintenance and use of all vehicles, equipment and materials of the department. 


30.08 DEPARTMENTAL RULES. The Police Chief shall establish such rules, not in conflict with the Code of Ordinances, and subject to the approval of the Council, as may be necessary for the operation of the department. 
30.09 SUMMONING AID. Any peace officer making a legal arrest may orally summon as many persons as the officer reasonably finds necessary to aid the officer in making the arrest. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 804.17) 
30.10 TAKING WEAPONS. Any person who makes an arrest may take from the person arrested all items which are capable of causing bodily harm which the arrested person may have within such person’s control to be disposed of according to law. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 804.18) 
30.11 COMPLIANCE OFFICER. The Compliance Officer is a member of the Police Department and shall have and exercise the following powers and duties: 
1. 
Enforcement. Enforce this Code of Ordinances by serving as a compliance officer designated to enforce the Code of Ordinances including such areas as nuisances, junk vehicles and noise. 

2. 
Other. Perform such other duties as may be included in the job description of Compliance Officer as approved by the Council. 


CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA 
-147 ­[The next page is 155] 
CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA 
-148 ­
CHAPTER 35 
FIRE DEPARTMENT 
35.01 Establishment and Purpose 35.07 Membership Application and Approval 
35.02 Organization 35.08 Fire Chief Duties 
35.03 Rules and Regulations 35.09 Fire Calls Outside Corporate Limits 
35.04 Removal of Members 35.10 Mutual Aid 
35.05 Section of Other Officers 35.11 Authority to Cite Violations 
35.06 Employment and Appointment of Chiefs 35.12 Liability for Assistance Costs 
35.01 ESTABLISHMENT AND PURPOSE. The Perry Fire Department is hereby established to prevent and extinguish fires and to protect lives and property against fires, to promote fire prevention and fire safety, and to answer all emergency calls for which there is no other established agency. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.16) 
35.02 ORGANIZATION. The department consists of the Fire Chief, Assistant Fire Chief and such other officers and personnel as may be authorized by the Council by resolution. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4]) 
35.03 RULES AND REGULATIONS. The Fire Chief, after consultation with the City Administrator, shall formulate the rules and regulations of the department, which rules and regulations, when approved by the Council and recorded in its minutes, shall govern the department and its members. 
35.04 REMOVAL OF MEMBERS. The Council or City Administrator, after the approval of the Council, has the power to remove any member or officer of the department at any time for dereliction of duty, disobedience, misconduct or failure to properly perform the duties of such member or officer. 
35.05 SELECTION OF OTHER OFFICERS. The Fire Chief, with the approval of the Council, shall approve such officers in addition to a Chief and Assistant Chief as the Fire Chief sees fit and advisable for the proper and orderly administration of the department. 
35.06 EMPLOYMENT AND APPOINTMENT OF CHIEFS. The Fire Chief shall be appointed by the Council upon the recommendation of the City Administrator. The Assistant Chief shall be appointed by the Council. 
35.07 MEMBERSHIP APPLICATION AND APPROVAL. Any person desiring to become a volunteer member of the Fire Department shall submit an application to the Fire Chief, and if there is a vacancy in the membership, the Fire Chief shall submit such application to the Council, and upon approval by the Council and the Fire Chief’s recommendation, such person shall become a member. The members of the Fire Department shall, at all times, be subject to the direction of the Fire Chief. 
35.08 FIRE CHIEF DUTIES. The Fire Chief, or in the absence of or inability to act as Fire Chief, the Assistant Fire Chief shall perform all duties required of the Fire Chief by law or ordinance, including but not limited to the following: 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4]) 
1. 
Command. Have the sole and absolute charge of all members of the Fire Department at any fire. 

2. 
Call for Aid. Call upon all persons to assist in extinguishing fires and the removal or saving of property. 

3. 
Authority at Fires. When in charge of a fire scene, direct an operation as necessary to extinguish or control a fire, perform a rescue operation, investigate the existence of a suspected or reported fire, gas leak, or other hazardous condition, or take any other action deemed necessary in the reasonable performance of the department’s duties. 


(Code of Iowa, Sec. 102.2) 
4. Control of Scenes. Prohibit an individual, vehicle or vessel from approaching a fire scene and remove from the scene any object, vehicle, vessel or individual that may impede or interfere with the operation of the Fire Department. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 102.2) 
5. Authority to Barricade. When in charge of a fire scene, place or erect ropes, guards, barricades or other obstructions across a street, alley, right-of-way, or private property near the location of the fire or emergency so as to prevent accidents or interference with the fire fighting efforts of the fire department, to control the scene until any required investigation is complete, or to preserve evidence related to the fire or other emergency. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 102.3) 
6. Fire Inspector. May serve as the Fire Inspector of the City and as such inspect any building, structure, business place, place or thing charged to be in violation of the State or City fire laws and report the results of said investigations, together with his or her recommendations, to the City Administrator. 
CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA 
-156 ­
7. 
Records. Cause to be kept a true and correct roll of the members of the Fire Department, showing the dates of admission to membership and withdrawal or expulsion of each member thereof. 

8. 
Suspend Members. Suspend any member of the department, except the Assistant Chief, for the violation of any rule or regulation of the department, or for disobedience to any superior officer while going to, at, or returning from any fire. Any suspended member may appeal from such suspension to the Council by serving notice thereof upon the Fire Chief and by filing such appeal with the City Administrator within forty-eight (48) hours and the Council after giving the Fire Chief and suspended person twenty-four (24) hours’ notice of the time and place of hearing shall hear evidence upon the matter. The actions of the Council shall be final and no appeal shall lie therefrom. 

9. 
Other. Perform such other duties as may be included in the job description of Fire Chief approved by the Council prior to the appointment of the Fire Chief. 

10. 
Township Trustees Meetings and Contract Development. Annually meet with the Township Trustees (or their designee) of every rural township having a fire service agreement with the City and by December 31st of each calendar year provide the City Council with a written status report with respect to each township fire service agreement and make recommendations for the continuation, modification or cancellation of each of the said agreements. (Ord. 791 – May 03 Supp.) 


35.09 FIRE CALLS OUTSIDE CORPORATE LIMITS. Fire protection may be extended outside the City as follows: 
1. 
Petition. Any industry located without the corporate limits of the City which desires fire protection by the local department and its equipment may acquire the same by petitioning the Council for this protection. 

2. 
Approval. After said petition has been presented to the Council and the Council has approved same, then by contract, fire protection will be furnished, and the terms will be specifically expressed therein for the furnishing of the services by the Fire Department. The terms will be designated by the Council for answering such fire calls. 

3. 
Fire Protection Agreements. The City will provide fire protection within the surrounding fire district upon agreement with each individual township or parts of townships. 

4. 
Outside City Limits. The department shall answer calls to fires and other emergencies outside the City limits if the Fire Chief 


determines that such emergency exists and that such action will not endanger persons and property within the City limits. 
35.10 MUTUAL AID. Subject to approval by resolution of the Council, the department may enter into mutual aid agreements with other legally constituted fire departments. Copies of any such agreements shall be filed with the Clerk. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.4 [2 & 3]) 
35.11 AUTHORITY TO CITE VIOLATIONS. Fire officials acting under the authority of Chapter 100 of the Code of Iowa may issue citations in accordance to Chapter 805 of the Code of Iowa, for violations of State and/or local fire safety regulations. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 100.41) 
35.12 LIABILITY FOR ASSISTANCE COSTS. Extraordinary costs incurred by the Fire Department of the City in connection with a call for aid authorized by Section 35.08(2) and any other call for assistance needed to suppress fire shall be borne by the owner of the property requiring said assistance. The final decision on the need for assistance is made by the Fire Department officer in charge at the fire scene. The City shall bill the individual responsible for the costs. If the bill for those services has not been paid within thirty (30) days, the City Attorney shall proceed to obtain payment by all legal means. 
[The next page is 165] 
CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA 
-158 ­
CHAPTER 36 
HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCE SPILLS 

36.01 Purpose 36.05 Notifications 
36.02 Definitions 36.06 Police Authority 
36.03 Cleanup Required 36.07 Liability 
36.04 Liability for Cleanup Costs 
36.01 PURPOSE. In order to reduce the danger to the public health, safety and welfare from the leaks and spills of hazardous substances, these regulations are promulgated to establish responsibility for the treatment, removal and cleanup of hazardous substance spills within the City limits. 
36.02 DEFINITIONS. For purposes of this chapter the following terms are defined: 
1. “Cleanup” means actions necessary to contain, collect, control, identify, analyze, clean up, treat, disperse, remove or dispose of a hazardous substance. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 455B.381[1]) 
2. “Hazardous condition” means any situation involving the actual, imminent or probable spillage, leakage, or release of a hazardous substance onto the land, into a water of the State or into the atmosphere which creates an immediate or potential danger to the public health or safety or to the environment. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 455B.381[4]) 
3. “Hazardous substance” means any substance or mixture of substances that presents a danger to the public health or safety and includes, but is not limited to, a substance that is toxic, corrosive, or flammable, or that is an irritant or that generates pressure through decomposition, heat, or other means. “Hazardous substance” may include any hazardous waste identified or listed by the administrator of the United States Environmental Protection Agency under the Solid Waste Disposal Act as amended by the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act of 1976, or any toxic pollutant listed under section 307 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act as amended to January 1, 1977, or any hazardous substance designated under Section 311 of the Federal 
CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA 
-165 ­
Water Pollution Control Act as amended to January 1, 1977, or any hazardous material designated by the Secretary of Transportation under the Hazardous Materials Transportation Act. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 455B.381[5]) 
4. “Responsible person” means a person who at any time produces, handles, stores, uses, transports, refines, or disposes of a hazardous substance, the release of which creates a hazardous condition, including bailees, carriers, and any other person in control of a hazardous substance when a hazardous condition occurs, whether the person owns the hazardous substance or is operating under a lease, contract, or other agreement with the legal owner of the hazardous substance. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 455B.381[7]) 
36.03 CLEANUP REQUIRED. Whenever a hazardous condition is created by the deposit, injection, dumping, spilling, leaking or placing of a hazardous substance, so that the hazardous substance or a constituent of the hazardous substance may enter the environment or be emitted into the air or discharged into any waters, including ground waters, the responsible person shall cause the condition to be remedied by a cleanup, as defined in the preceding section, as rapidly as feasible to an acceptable, safe condition. The costs of cleanup shall be borne by the responsible person. If the responsible person does not cause the cleanup to begin in a reasonable time in relation to the hazard and circumstances of the incident, the City may, by an authorized officer, give reasonable notice, based on the character of the hazardous condition, said notice setting a deadline for accomplishing the cleanup and stating that the City will proceed to procure cleanup services and bill the responsible person for all costs associated with the cleanup if the cleanup is not accomplished within the deadline. In the event that it is determined that immediate cleanup is necessary as a result of the present danger to the public health, safety and welfare, then no notice shall be required and the City may proceed to procure the cleanup and bill the responsible person for all costs associated with the cleanup. If the bill for those services is not paid within thirty (30) days, the City Attorney shall proceed to obtain payment by all legal means. If the cost of the cleanup is beyond the capacity of the City to finance it, the authorized officer shall report to the Council and immediately seek any State or Federal funds available for said cleanup. 
36.04 LIABILITY FOR CLEANUP COSTS. The responsible person shall be strictly liable for all of the following: 
1. The reasonable cleanup costs incurred by the City as a result of the failure of the responsible person to clean up a hazardous substance involved in a hazardous condition. 
2. 
The reasonable costs incurred by the City to evacuate people from the area threatened by a hazardous condition caused by the person. 

3. 
The reasonable damages to the City for the injury to, destruction of, or loss of City property, including parks and roads, resulting from a hazardous condition caused by that person, including the costs of assessing the injury, destruction or loss. 






36.05 NOTIFICATIONS. 
1. 
A person manufacturing, storing, handling, transporting, or disposing of a hazardous substance shall notify the State Department of Natural Resources and the Police Department and Fire Department of the occurrence of a hazardous condition as soon as possible but not later than six (6) hours after the onset of the hazardous condition or discovery of the hazardous condition. The Police Chief shall immediately notify the Department of Natural Resources. 

2. 
Any other person who discovers a hazardous condition shall notify the Police Department and Fire Department, which shall then notify the Department of Natural Resources. 


36.06 POLICE AUTHORITY. If the circumstances reasonably so require, the law enforcement officer or an authorized representative may: 
1. 
Evacuate persons from their homes to areas away from the site of a hazardous condition, and 

2. 
Establish perimeters or other boundaries at or near the site of a hazardous condition and limit access to cleanup personnel. 


No person shall disobey an order of any law enforcement officer issued under this section. 
36.07 LIABILITY. The City shall not be liable to any person for claims of damages, injuries, or losses resulting from any hazardous condition, unless the City is the responsible person as defined in Section 36.02[4]. 
CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA 
-167 ­[The next page is 185] 
CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA 
-168 ­
CHAPTER 40 
PUBLIC PEACE 

40.01 Assault 40.04 Unlawful Assembly 
40.02 Harassment 40.05 Failure to Disperse 
40.03 Disorderly Conduct 
40.01 ASSAULT. No person shall, without justification, commit any of the following: 
1. Pain or Injury. Any act which is intended to cause pain or injury to, or which is intended to result in physical contact which will be insulting or offensive to another, coupled with the apparent ability to execute the act. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 708.1 [1]) 
2. Threat of Pain or Injury. Any act which is intended to place another in fear of immediate physical contact which will be painful, injurious, insulting, or offensive, coupled with the apparent ability to execute the act. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 708.1 [2]) 
However, where the person doing any of the above enumerated acts, and such other person, are voluntary participants in a sport, social or other activity, not in itself criminal, and such act is a reasonably foreseeable incident of such sport or activity, and does not create an unreasonable risk or serious injury or breach of the peace, the act is not an assault. Provided, where the person doing any of the above enumerated acts is employed by a school district or accredited nonpublic school, or is an area education agency staff member who provides services to a school or school district, and intervenes in a fight or physical struggle, or other disruptive situation that takes place in the presence of the employee or staff member performing employment duties in a school building, on school grounds or at an official school function regardless of the location, the act is not an assault, whether the fight or physical struggle or other disruptive situation is between students or other individuals if the degree and the force of the intervention is reasonably necessary to restore order and to protect the safety of those assembled. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 708.1) 

40.02 HARASSMENT. No person shall commit harassment. 
1. A person commits harassment when, with intent to intimidate, annoy or alarm another person, the person does any of the following: 
A. Communicates with another by telephone, telegraph, writing or via electronic communication without legitimate purpose and in a manner likely to cause the other person annoyance or harm. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 708.7) 
B. Places any simulated explosive or simulated incendiary device in or near any building, vehicle, airplane, railroad engine or railroad car, or boat occupied by the other person. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 708.7) 
C. Orders merchandise or services in the name of another, or to be delivered to another, without such other person’s knowledge or consent. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 708.7) 
D. Reports or causes to be reported false information to a law enforcement authority implicating another in some criminal activity, knowing that the information is false, or reports the alleged occurrence of a criminal act, knowing the same did not occur. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 708.7) 
2. A person commits harassment when the person, purposefully and without legitimate purpose, has personal contact with another person, with the intent to threaten, intimidate or alarm that other person. As used in this section, unless the context otherwise requires, “personal contact” means an encounter in which two or more people are in visual or physical proximity to each other. “Personal contact” does not require a physical touching or oral communication, although it may include these types of contacts. 
40.03 DISORDERLY CONDUCT. No person shall do any of the following: 
1. Fighting. Engage in fighting or violent behavior in any public place or in or near any lawful assembly of persons, provided that participants in athletic contests may engage in such conduct which is reasonably related to that sport. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 723.4 [1]) 
2. Noise. Make loud and raucous noise in the vicinity of any residence or public building which causes unreasonable distress to the occupants thereof. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 723.4 [2]) 
CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA 
-186 ­
3. Abusive Language. Direct abusive epithets or make any threatening gesture which the person knows or reasonably should know is likely to provoke a violent reaction by another. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 723.4 [3]) 
4. Disrupt Lawful Assembly. Without lawful authority or color of authority, disturb any lawful assembly or meeting of persons by conduct intended to disrupt the meeting or assembly. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 723.4 [4]) 
5. False Report of Catastrophe. By words or action, initiate or circulate a report or warning of fire, epidemic, or other catastrophe, knowing such report to be false or such warning to be baseless. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 723.4 [5]) 
6. Disrespect of Flag. Knowingly and publicly use the flag of the United States in such a manner as to show disrespect for the flag as a symbol of the United States, with the intent or reasonable expectation that such use will provoke or encourage another to commit a public offense. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 723.4 [6]) 
7. Obstruct Use of Street. Without authority or justification, obstruct any street, sidewalk, highway, or other public way, with the intent to prevent or hinder its lawful use by others. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 723.4 [7]) 
40.04 UNLAWFUL ASSEMBLY. It is unlawful for three (3) or more persons to assemble together, with them or any of them acting in a violent manner, and with intent that they or any of them will commit a public offense. No person shall willingly join in or remain part of an unlawful assembly, knowing or having reasonable grounds to believe it is such. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 723.2) 
40.05 FAILURE TO DISPERSE. A peace officer may order the participants in a riot or unlawful assembly or persons in the immediate vicinity of a riot or unlawful assembly to disperse. No person within hearing distance of such command shall refuse to obey. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 723.3) 
CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA 
-187 ­
°°°°°°°°°° 

CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA 
-188 ­



CHAPTER 41 
PUBLIC HEALTH AND SAFETY 

41.01 Distributing Dangerous Substances 41.06 Antenna and Radio Wires 
41.02 False Reports to or Communications with Public 	41.07 Barbed Wire and Electric Fences Safety Entities 41.08 Discharging Weapons 
41.03 Refusing to Assist Officer 	41.09 Throwing and Shooting 
41.04 Harassment of Public Officers and Employees 41.10 Urinating and Defecating 
41.05 Abandoned or Unattended Refrigerators 41.11 Pseudoephedrine Restrictions 
41.01 DISTRIBUTING DANGEROUS SUBSTANCES. No person shall distribute samples of any drugs or medicine, or any corrosive, caustic, poisonous or other injurious substance unless the person delivers such into the hands of a competent person, or otherwise takes reasonable precautions that the substance will not be taken by children or animals from the place where the substance is deposited. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 727.1) 

41.02 FALSE REPORTS TO OR COMMUNICATIONS WITH PUBLIC SAFETY ENTITIES. No person shall do any of the following: 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 718.6) 
1. 
Report or cause to be reported false information to a fire department, a law enforcement authority or other public safety entity, knowing that the information is false, or report the alleged occurrence of a criminal act knowing the act did not occur. 

2. 
Telephone an emergency 911 communications center, knowing that he or she is not reporting an emergency or otherwise needing emergency information or assistance. 

3. 
Knowingly provide false information to a law enforcement officer who enters the information on a citation. 


41.03 REFUSING TO ASSIST OFFICER. Any person who is requested or ordered by any magistrate or peace officer to render the magistrate or officer assistance in making or attempting to make an arrest, or to prevent the commission of any criminal act, shall render assistance as required. No person shall unreasonably and without lawful cause, refuse or neglect to render assistance when so requested. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 719.2) 

41.04 HARASSMENT OF PUBLIC OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES. 
No person shall willfully prevent or attempt to prevent any public officer or employee from performing the officer’s or employee’s duty. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 718.4) 
41.05 ABANDONED OR UNATTENDED REFRIGERATORS. No person shall abandon or otherwise leave unattended any refrigerator, ice box, or similar container, with doors that may become locked, outside of buildings and accessible to children, nor shall any person allow any such refrigerator, ice box, or similar container, to remain outside of buildings on premises in the person’s possession or control, abandoned or unattended and so accessible to children. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 727.3) 
41.06 ANTENNA AND RADIO WIRES. It is unlawful for a person to allow antenna wires, antenna supports, radio wires or television wires to exist over any street, alley, highway, sidewalk, public way, public ground or public building without written consent of the Council. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12 [2]) 
41.07 BARBED WIRE AND ELECTRIC FENCES. It is unlawful for a person to use barbed wire or electric fences to enclose land within the City limits without the written consent of the Council unless such land consists of ten (10) acres or more and is used as agricultural land. 

41.08 DISCHARGING WEAPONS. 
1. 
It is unlawful for a person to discharge rifles, shotguns, revolvers, pistols, guns, BB guns or other firearms of any kind within the City limits except by written consent of the Council. 

2. 
No person shall intentionally discharge a firearm in a reckless manner. 


41.09 THROWING AND SHOOTING. It is unlawful for a person to throw stones, bricks or missiles of any kind or to shoot arrows, rubber guns, slingshots, air rifles or other dangerous instruments or toys on or into any street, alley, highway, sidewalk, public way, public ground or public building, without written consent of the Council. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12 [2]) 
41.10 URINATING AND DEFECATING. It is unlawful for any person to urinate or defecate onto any sidewalk, street, alley, or other public way, or onto any public or private building, including but not limited to the wall, floor, hallway, steps, stairway, doorway or window thereof, or onto any public or private land. 

41.11 PSEUDOEPHEDRINE RESTRICTIONS. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 126.23A) 
CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA -190 ­
1. 
A retailer shall not sell and a person shall not purchase in a single transaction more than two packages containing pseudoephedrine as the product’s sole active ingredient. 

2. 
Except as otherwise provided, a retailer who offers for sale a product containing pseudoephedrine as the product’s sole active ingredient shall display and offer such product for sale behind a counter where the public is not permitted or within twenty feet of a counter which allows the attendant to view the products in an unobstructed manner. A retailer may display or offer for sale without restriction a product containing pseudoephedrine as the sole active ingredient if the product is displayed using any type of antitheft device system, including but not limited to an electronic antitheft device system that utilizes a product tag and detection alarm which prevents the theft of the product. 

3. 
A retailer shall post a notice at the location where a product containing pseudoephedrine as its sole active ingredient is displayed or offered for sale stating the following: 


Iowa law prohibits the sale or purchase of more than two packages containing pseudoephedrine as the sole active ingredient. 
4. The provisions of this section do not apply to: 
A. Any package of a product containing pseudoephedrine as the product’s sole active ingredient which is in liquid form. 
B. Any package of a product containing pseudoephedrine as the product’s sole active ingredient which is primarily intended for administration to children under twelve years of age according to the label, regardless of whether the product is in liquid or solid form. 
C. Any package of a product containing pseudoephedrine as the product’s sole active ingredient that the Board of Pharmacy Examiners, with the concurrence of the Department of Public Safety, upon application of a manufacturer, exempts from this section because the product is formulated to effectively prevent conversion of the active ingredient into methamphetamine or its salts or precursors. 
5. An employee of a retailer who sells or a person who purchases pseudoephedrine in violation of subsection 1 of this section commits a simple misdemeanor, punishable in an amount equal to a scheduled violation under Section 805.8C (4a) of the Code of Iowa. If a citation is issued for a violation of subsection 1, the citation shall be issued to both the employee and the purchaser. For each violation of subsections 1, 2 or 3 of this section by a retailer, the retailer shall be assessed an amount 
CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA -191 ­
equal to a scheduled fine under Section 805.8C (4b) of the Code of Iowa, which is a civil penalty. 
(Ord. 823 – Oct. 04 Supp.) 
CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA 
-192 ­
CHAPTER 42 
PUBLIC AND PRIVATE PROPERTY 

42.01 Trespassing 42.04 Unauthorized Entry 
42.02 Criminal Mischief 42.05 Fraud 
42.03 Defacing Proclamations or Notices 42.06 Theft 
42.07 Signs on Private Property 
42.01 TRESPASSING. It is unlawful for a person to knowingly trespass upon the property of another. As used in this section, the term “property” includes any land, dwelling, building, conveyance, vehicle or other temporary or permanent structure whether publicly or privately owned. The term “trespass” means one or more of the following acts: 
(Code of Iowa Sec. 716.7 and 716.8) 
1. Entering Property Without Permission. Entering upon or in property without the express permission of the owner, lessee, or person in lawful possession with the intent to commit a public offense or to use, remove therefrom, alter, damage, harass, or place thereon or therein anything animate or inanimate. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.7 [2a]) 
2. Entering or Remaining on Property. Entering or remaining upon or in property without justification after being notified or requested to abstain from entering or to remove or vacate therefrom by the owner, lessee, or person in lawful possession, or by any peace officer, magistrate, or public employee whose duty it is to supervise the use or maintenance of the property. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.7 [2b]) 
3. Interfering with Lawful Use of Property. Entering upon or in property for the purpose or with the effect of unduly interfering with the lawful use of the property by others. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.7 [2c]) 
4. Using Property Without Permission. Being upon or in property and wrongfully using, removing therefrom, altering, damaging, harassing, or placing thereon or therein anything animate or inanimate, without the implied or actual permission of the owner, lessee, or person in lawful possession. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.7 [2d]) 
None of the above shall be construed to prohibit entering upon the property of another for the sole purpose of retrieving personal property which has accidentally or inadvertently been thrown, fallen, strayed, or blown onto the property of another, provided that the person retrieving the property takes the most direct and accessible route to and from the property to be retrieved, quits the property as quickly as is possible, and does not unduly interfere with the lawful use of the property. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.7(3)) 
42.02 CRIMINAL MISCHIEF. It is unlawful, for any person who has no right to do so, to intentionally damage, deface, alter or destroy tangible property. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.1) 
42.03 DEFACING PROCLAMATIONS OR NOTICES. It is unlawful for a person intentionally to deface, obliterate, tear down, or destroy in whole or in part, any transcript or extract from or of any law of the United States or the State, or any proclamation, advertisement or notification, set up at any place within the City by authority of the law or by order of any court, during the time for which the same is to remain set up. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.1) 
42.04 UNAUTHORIZED ENTRY. No unauthorized person shall enter or remain in or upon any public building, premises or grounds in violation of any notice posted thereon or when said building, premises or grounds are closed and not open to the public. When open to the public, a failure to pay any required admission fee also constitutes an unauthorized entry. 
42.05 FRAUD. It is unlawful for any person to commit a fraudulent practice as defined in Section 714.8 of the Code of Iowa. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 714.8) 
42.06 THEFT. It is unlawful for any person to commit theft as defined in Section 714.1 of the Code of Iowa. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 714.1) 
42.07 SIGNS ON PRIVATE PROPERTY. No person shall paste, write, print, stamp, nail or affix to any building, erection, fence, tree, lamppost, sidewalk, telephone, telegraph or other pole, or to any other improvement, any poster, show bill, hand bill or other printed or written notice or sign. This section does not apply to legal and judicial notices. 
[The next page is 225] 
CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA 
-194 ­
CHAPTER 45 



ALCOHOL CONSUMPTION AND INTOXICATION 
45.01 Persons Under Legal Age 45.03 Open Containers in Motor Vehicles 
45.02 Public Consumption or Intoxication 
45.01 PERSONS UNDER LEGAL AGE. As used in this section, “legal age” means twenty-one (21) years of age or more. 
1. A person or persons under legal age shall not purchase or attempt to purchase or individually or jointly have alcoholic liquor, wine or beer in their possession or control; except in the case of liquor, wine or beer given or dispensed to a person under legal age within a private home and with the knowledge, presence and consent of the parent or guardian, for beverage or medicinal purposes or as administered to the person by either a physician or dentist for medicinal purposes and except to the extent that a person under legal age may handle alcoholic beverages, wine, and beer during the regular course of the person’s employment by a liquor control licensee, or wine or beer permittee under State laws. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.47[2]) 
2. A person under legal age shall not misrepresent the person’s age for the purpose of purchasing or attempting to purchase any alcoholic beverage, wine or beer from any licensee or permittee. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49[3]) 

45.02 PUBLIC CONSUMPTION OR INTOXICATION. 
1. As used in this section unless the context otherwise requires: 
A. “Arrest” means the same as defined in Section 804.5 of the Code of Iowa and includes taking into custody pursuant to Section 232.19 of the Code of Iowa. 
B. “Chemical test” means a test of a person’s blood, breath, or urine to determine the percentage of alcohol present by a qualified person using devices and methods approved by the Commissioner of Public Safety. 
C. “Peace Officer” means the same as defined in Section 
801.4 of the Code of Iowa. 
D. “School” means a public or private school or that portion of a public or private school which provides teaching for any grade from kindergarten through grade twelve. 
2. A person shall not use or consume alcoholic liquor, wine or beer upon the public streets or highways. A person shall not use or consume alcoholic liquor, wine or beer in any public place, except premises covered by a liquor control license. A person shall not possess or consume alcoholic liquor, wine or beer on public school property or while attending any public or private school-related function. A person shall not be intoxicated or simulate intoxication in a public place. 
(Ord. 796 – Jul. 03 Supp.) 
3. When a peace officer arrests a person on a charge of public intoxication under this section, the peace officer shall inform the person that the person may have a chemical test administered at the person’s own expense. If a device approved by the Commissioner of Public Safety for testing a sample of a person’s breath to determine the person’s blood alcohol concentration is available, that is the only test that need be offered the person arrested. In a prosecution for public intoxication, evidence of the results of a chemical test performed under this subsection is admissible upon proof of a proper foundation. The percentage of alcohol present in a person’s blood, breath, or urine established by the results of a chemical test performed within two hours after the person’s arrest on a charge of public intoxication is presumed to be the percentage of alcohol present at the time of arrest. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.46) 
45.03 OPEN CONTAINERS IN MOTOR VEHICLES. (See Section 62.08 of this Code of Ordinances.) 
CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA 
-226 ­
CHAPTER 46 
MINORS 

46.01 Curfew 46.03 Contributing to Delinquency 
46.02 Cigarettes and Tobacco 



46.01 CURFEW. 
1. Purpose. The Council has determined that a curfew for minors is necessary to promote the public health, safety, morals and general welfare of the City and specifically to achieve the following purposes: 
A. Reinforce the primary authority and responsibility of adults responsible for minors; 
B. Protect the public from the illegal acts of minors committed individually and in groups after the curfew hour; and 
C. Protect minors from improper influences and criminal activity by individuals and groups that prevail in public places after the curfew hour. 
2. Definitions. For use in this section, the following terms are defined: 
A. “Curfew hours” means: 
(1) 
Sunday – Thursday 

11:00 p.m. – 5:00 a.m. each day 

(2) 
Friday – Saturday 


12:00 a.m. (midnight) – 5:00 a.m. each day 
B. “Emergency” means an unforeseen combination of circumstances or the resulting state that calls for immediate action. The term includes, but is not limited to, a fire, a natural disaster, an automobile accident or any situation requiring immediate action to prevent serious bodily injury or loss of life. 
C. “Establishment” means any privately owned place of business operated for a profit to which the public is invited, including but not limited to any place of amusement or entertainment. 
D. “Guardian” means: 
(1) A person who, under court order, is the guardian of the person of a minor; or 
(2) A public or private agency with whom a minor has been placed by a court. 
E. “Knowingly” means knowledge which a responsible adult should reasonably be expected to have concerning the whereabouts of a minor in that responsible adult’s custody. It is intended to continue to hold the neglectful or careless adult responsible for a minor to a reasonable community standard of adult responsibility through an objective test. It is therefore no defense that an adult responsible for a minor was completely indifferent to the activities or conduct or whereabouts of the minor. 
F. “Minor” means any person under eighteen (18) years of age. 
G. “Operator” means any person operating, managing or conducting any establishment including the members or partners of an association or partnership and the officers of a corporation. 
H. “Parent” means a person who is: 
(1) 
A natural parent, adoptive parent or step-parent of another person; or 

(2) 
At least 18 years of age and authorized by a parent or guardian to have the care and custody of a minor. 


I. “Public place” means any place to which the public or a substantial group of the public has access and includes but is not limited to streets, highways and the common areas of schools, hospitals, apartment houses, office buildings, transport facilities and shops. 
J. “Remain” means: 
(1) 
To linger or stay; or 

(2) 
To fail to leave the premises when requested to do so by a police officer or the owner, operator or other person in control of the premises. 


K. “Serious bodily injury” means bodily injury that creates a substantial risk of death or that causes death, serious permanent disfigurement or protracted loss or impairment of the function of any bodily member or organ. 
3. Offenses. 
CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA 
-228 ­
A. A minor commits an offense if he or she remains in any public place or on the premises of any establishment within the City during curfew hours. 
B. A parent or guardian commits an offense if he or she knowingly permits or by insufficient control allows the minor to remain in any public place or on the premises of any establishment within the City during curfew hours. 
C. The owner, operator or any employee of an establishment commits an offense if he or she knowingly allows a minor to remain upon the premises of the establishment during curfew hours. 
4. Defenses. 
A. It is a defense to prosecution under subsection 3 of this section that the minor was: 
(1) 
Accompanied by the minor’s parent or guardian; 

(2) 
On an errand at the direction of the minor’s parent or guardian, without any detour or stop; 

(3) 
In a motor vehicle involved in interstate travel; 

(4) 
Engaged in an employment activity or going to or returning home from an employment activity, without any detour or stop; 

(5) 
Involved in an emergency; 

(6) 
On the sidewalk abutting the minor’s residence or abutting the residence of a next-door neighbor if the neighbor did not complain to the Police Department about the minor’s presence; 

(7) 
Attending an official school, religious or other recreational activity supervised by adults and sponsored by the City, a civic organization or another similar entity that takes responsibility for the minor, or going to or returning home from, without any detour or stop, an official school, religious or other recreational activity supervised by adults and sponsored by the City, a civic organization or other similar entity that takes responsibility for the minor; 

(8) 
Exercising First Amendment rights protected by the United States Constitution, such as the free exercise of religion, freedom of speech and the right of assembly; or 


CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA -229 ­
(9) Married or previously married or if said minor had disabilities of minority removed in accordance with Section 599 of the Code of Iowa. 
B. It is a defense to prosecution under subsection 3(C) of this section that the owner, operator or employee of an establishment promptly notified the Police Department that a minor was present on the premises of the establishment during curfew hours and refused to leave. 
5. Enforcement. 
A. Before taking any enforcement action under this section, a police officer shall ask the apparent offender’s age and reason for being in the public place. In the absence of convincing evidence such as a birth certificate or driver’s license, a police officer on the street shall, in the first instance, use his or her best judgment in determining age. The officer shall not issue a citation or take a minor into custody under this section unless the officer reasonably believes that an offense has occurred and that, based on the minor’s response and other circumstances, no defense in subsection 4 of this section is present. 
B. A peace officer may take a minor into custody for violation of this section pursuant to Section 232.19 of the Code of Iowa for the limited purpose of detaining the minor until he or she can be reunited with the minor’s family or guardian or other responsible adult or if the peace officer has probable cause to believe that the minor has committed a delinquent act which if committed by an adult would constitute a public offense. A peace officer who takes a minor into custody shall not place bodily restraints such as handcuffs on the minor unless the minor physically resists or threatens physical violence when being taken into custody. A minor shall not be placed in detention following a curfew violation. 
C. After a minor is taken into custody, the peace officer shall notify the adult responsible for the minor as soon as possible. The minor shall be released to the adult responsible for the minor upon the promise of such person to produce the child in court at such time as the court may direct. 
D. If a peace officer determines that a minor does not have adult supervision because the peace officer cannot locate the minor’s parent, guardian or other person legally responsible for the care of the minor within a reasonable time, the peace officer 
CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA -230 ­
shall attempt to place the minor with an adult relative of the minor, an adult person who cares for the minor or another adult person who is known to the minor. 
6. Penalties. 
A. Responsible Adult’s First Violation -Warning. In the case of a first violation by a minor, the Police Chief or designee of the Police Chief shall, by certified mail or personal service, deliver to the adult responsible for the minor written notice of the violation with a warning that any subsequent violation will result in full enforcement of the curfew ordinance against both the responsible adult and minor, with applicable penalties. 
B. Responsible Adult’s Second Violation -Municipal Infraction. Any responsible adult as defined in this section who, following receipt of a warning, knowingly allows the minor to violate any of the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a municipal infraction as set forth in Chapter 4 of this Code of Ordinances and upon conviction shall be punished by a fine as established in Chapter 4. 
C. Minor’s First Violation -Warning. In the case of a first violation by a minor, the peace officer shall give the minor a written warning, which states that any subsequent violation will result in full enforcement of the curfew ordinance against the responsible adult and the minor, with applicable penalties. 
D. Minor’s Second Violation -Municipal Infraction. For the minor’s second and subsequent violations of any of the provisions of this section, the minor shall be guilty of a municipal infraction as set forth in Chapter 4 of this Code of Ordinances and upon conviction shall be punished by a fine as established in Chapter 4. 
46.02 CIGARETTES AND TOBACCO. It is unlawful for any person under eighteen (18) years of age to smoke, use, possess, purchase or attempt to purchase any tobacco, tobacco products or cigarettes. Possession of cigarettes or tobacco products by a person under eighteen years of age shall not constitute a violation of this section if said person possesses the cigarettes or tobacco products as part of the person’s employment and said person is employed by a person who holds a valid permit under Chapter 453A of the Code of Iowa and lawfully offers for sale or sells cigarettes or tobacco products. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 453A.2) 
CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA 
-231 ­
46.03 CONTRIBUTING TO DELINQUENCY. It is unlawful for any per­son to encourage any child under eighteen (18) years of age to commit any act of delinquency. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 709A.1) 
CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA 
-232 ­
CHAPTER 47 
PARK REGULATIONS 

47.01 Purpose 47.05 Littering 
47.02 Parking 47.06 Parks Closed 
47.03 Use of Drives Required 47.07 Camping 
47.04 Fires 47.08 Animal Droppings 
47.09 Use of Alcoholic Beverages in Perry Municipal Parks 
47.01 PURPOSE. The purpose of this chapter is to facilitate the enjoyment of park facilities by the general public by establishing rules and regulations governing the use of park facilities. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12) 
47.02 PARKING. All vehicles shall be parked in designated parking areas, and no vehicles shall be left unattended on any park drive, road or street, except in the case of an emergency. 
47.03 USE OF DRIVES REQUIRED. No person shall drive any car, cycle or other vehicle, or ride or lead any horse, in any portion of a park except upon the established drives or roadways therein or such other places as may be officially designated by the City. 
47.04 FIRES. No fires shall be built, except in a place provided therefor, and such fire shall be extinguished before leaving the area unless it is to be immediately used by some other party. 
47.05 LITTERING. No person shall place, deposit, or throw any waste, refuse, litter or foreign substance in any area or receptacle except those provided for that purpose. 
47.06 PARKS CLOSED. No person, except those camping in designated areas, shall enter or remain within any park between the hours of eleven o’clock 
(11:00) p.m. and seven o’clock (7:00) a.m. unless authorized by the Parks and Recreation Advisory Commission. 


47.07 CAMPING. 
1. 
Camping Areas. No person shall camp in any portion of a park except in portions prescribed or designated by the Parks and Recreation Advisory Commission. 

2. 
Fees. The Parks and Recreation Advisory Commission may establish such fees for camping and other special privileges as it deems appropriate and reasonable. 


3. 
Registration. Any person who camps in any park shall register his or her name and address with the Police Chief. 

4. 
Camping Refused. The City may refuse camping privileges or rescind any and all camping permits for cause. 

5. 
Camping Limit. No person shall camp in any park for a period of time in excess of seven (7) days. 


47.08 ANIMAL DROPPINGS. It is prohibited for any or all domestic animals to excrete urine or fecal matter in any park and/or facility in a park. If droppings do occur, the owner is required to remove such excrement at the time of occurrence. 
47.09 USE OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES IN PERRY MUNICIPAL PARKS. The use of alcohol in municipal parks within the City of Perry will be limited to beer (only in cans) and wines by permit only. No alcoholic liquors will be permitted. 
1. 
No beer or wine will be allowed without a permit to be issued by the Perry Parks and Recreation Department. 

2. 
Permit fees will be set by resolution as recommended by the Perry Parks and Recreation Department. 

3. 
No beer or wine will be allowed anywhere in the park where there is a school function taking place in that particular area of the park. 

4. 
No beer or wine will be allowed in immediate area of organized activities involving minors, i.e. Little League. 

5. 
These rules are applicable to Parks and Recreation Department sponsored events. 

6. 
Violators of these rules will be dealt with by the Perry Police Department under the Municipal Infraction section of the code. 

7. 
The Perry Police Department will be issued a copy of the permit issued by the Perry Parks and Recreation Department to better allow for enforcement of this section. 

8. 
The proposed fines include: warning for the first offense, $50.00 for the second offense, $100.00 for the third offense, and $200.00 for the fourth offense. 


(Ord. 879 – Mar. 09 Supp.) 
[The next page is 237] 
CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA 
-234 ­
CHAPTER 48 
DRUG PARAPHERNALIA 

48.01 Purpose 48.05 Possession of Drug Paraphernalia 
48.02 Controlled Substance Defined 48.06 Manufacture, Delivery or Offering For Sale 
48.03 Drug Paraphernalia Defined 48.07 Advertisement of Drug Paraphernalia 
48.04 Determining Factors 48.08 Penalties 
48.01 PURPOSE. The purpose of this chapter is to prohibit the use, possession with intent to use, manufacture and delivery of drug paraphernalia as defined herein. 
48.02 CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE DEFINED. The term “controlled substance” as used in this chapter is defined as the term “controlled substance” is defined in the Uniform Controlled Substance Act, Chapter 124 of the Code of Iowa, as it now exists or is hereafter amended. 
48.03 DRUG PARAPHERNALIA DEFINED. The term “drug paraphernalia” as used in this chapter means all equipment, products and materials of any kind which are used, intended for use, or designed for use, in planting, propagating, cultivating, growing, harvesting, manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing, preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging, repackaging, storing, concealing, containing, injecting, ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing into the human body a controlled substance in violation of the Uniform Controlled Substances Act, Chapter 124 of the Code of Iowa. It includes, but is not limited to: 
1. 
Growing Kits. Kits used, intended for use, or designed for use in planting, propagating, cultivating, growing or harvesting of any species of plant which is a controlled substance or from which a controlled substance can be derived. 

2. 
Processing Kits. Kits used, intended for use, or designed for use in manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing, or preparing controlled substances. 

3. 
Isomerization Devices. Isomerization devices used, intended for use, or designed for use in increasing the potency of any species of plant which is a controlled substance. 

4. 
Testing Equipment. Testing equipment used, intended for use, or designed for use in identifying or in analyzing the strength, effectiveness or purity of controlled substances. 


5. 
Scales. Scales and balances used, intended for use, or designed for use in weighing or measuring controlled substances. 

6. 
Diluents. Diluents and adulterants, such as quinine hydrochloride, mannitol, mannite, dextrose or lactose, used, intended for use, or designed for use in cutting controlled substances. 

7. 
Separators -Sifters. Separation gins and sifters used, intended for use, or designed for use in removing twigs and seeds from, or in otherwise cleaning or refining marijuana. 

8. 
Mixing Devices. Blenders, bowls, containers, spoons and mixing devices used, intended for use, or designed for use in compounding controlled substances. 

9. 
Containers. Capsules, balloons, envelopes and other containers used, intended for use, or designed for use in packaging small quantities of controlled substances. 

10. 
Storage Containers. Containers and other objects used, intended for use, or designed for use in storing or concealing controlled substances. 

11. 
Injecting Devices. Hypodermic syringes, needles and other objects used, intended for use, or designed for use in parenterally injecting controlled substances into the human body. 

12. 
Ingesting-Inhaling Device. Objects used, intended for use, or designed for use in ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing heroin, marijuana, cocaine, hashish, or hashish oil into the human body, such as: 


A. Metal, wooden, acrylic, glass, stone, plastic, or ceramic pipes with or without screens, permanent screens, hashish heads, or punctured metal bowls; 
B. Water pipes; 
C. Carburetion tubes and devices; 
D. Smoking and carburetion masks; 
E. Roach clips, meaning objects used to hold burning materials, such as a marijuana cigarette that has become too small or too short to be held in the hand; 
F. Miniature cocaine spoons and cocaine vials; 
G. Chamber pipes; 
H. Carburetor pipes; 
I. Electric pipes; 
CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA -238 ­
J. Air driven pipes; 
K. Chillums; 
L. Bongs; 
M. Ice pipes or chillers. 
48.04 DETERMINING FACTORS. In determining whether an object is drug paraphernalia for the purpose of enforcing this chapter, the following factors should be considered in addition to all other logically relevant factors: 
1. 
Statements. Statements by an owner or by anyone in control of the object concerning its use. 

2. 
Prior Convictions. Prior convictions, if any, of an owner, or of anyone in control of the object under any State or federal law relating to any controlled substance. 

3. 
Proximity To Violation. The proximity of the object, in time and space, to a direct violation of the Uniform Controlled Substance Act, Chapter 124 of the Code of Iowa. 

4. 
Proximity To Substances. The proximity of the object to controlled substances. 

5. 
Residue. The existence of any residue of controlled substances on the object. 

6. 
Evidence of Intent. Direct or circumstantial evidence of the intent of an owner or of anyone in control of the object, to deliver it to persons whom he or she knows, or should reasonably know, intend to use the object to facilitate a violation of the Uniform Controlled Substances Act, Chapter 124 of the Code of Iowa. 

7. 
Innocence of an Owner. The innocence of an owner, or of anyone in control of the object, as to a direct violation of the Uniform Controlled Substances Act, Chapter 124 of the Code of Iowa, should not prevent a finding that the object is intended for use, or designed for use as drug paraphernalia. 

8. 
Instructions. Instructions, oral or written, provided with the object concerning its use. 

9. 
Descriptive Materials. Descriptive materials accompanying the object which explain or depict its use. 

10. 
Advertising. National and local advertising concerning its use. 

11. 
Displayed. The manner in which the object is displayed for sale. 


CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA 
-239 ­
12. 
Licensed Distributor or Dealer. Whether the owner, or anyone in control of the object, is a legitimate supplier of like or related items to the community, such as a licensed distributor or dealer of tobacco products. 

13. 
Sales Ratios. Direct or circumstantial evidence of the ratio of sales of the object(s) to the total sales of the business enterprise. 

14. 
Legitimate Uses. The existence and scope of legitimate uses for the object in the community. 

15. 
Expert Testimony. Expert testimony concerning its use. 


48.05 POSSESSION OF DRUG PARAPHERNALIA. It is unlawful for any person to use, or to possess with intent to use, drug paraphernalia to plant, propagate, cultivate, grow, harvest, manufacture, compound, convert, produce, process, prepare, test, analyze, pack, repack, store, contain, conceal, inject, ingest, inhale, or otherwise introduce into the human body a controlled substance in violation of the Uniform Controlled Substance Act, Chapter 124 of the Code of Iowa. 
48.06 MANUFACTURE, DELIVERY OR OFFERING FOR SALE. It is unlawful for any person to deliver, possess with intent to deliver, manufacture with intent to deliver, or offer for sale drug paraphernalia, intending that the drug paraphernalia will be used, or knowing, or under circumstances where one reasonably should know that it will be used, or knowing that it is designed for use to plant, propagate, cultivate, grow, harvest, manufacture, compound, convert, produce, process, prepare, test, analyze, pack, repack, store, contain, conceal, inject, ingest, inhale, or otherwise introduce into the human body a controlled substance in violation of the Uniform Controlled Substances Act, Chapter 124 of the Code of Iowa. 
48.07 ADVERTISEMENT OF DRUG PARAPHERNALIA. It is unlawful for any person to place any advertisement in any newspaper, magazine, handbill or other publication, knowing or under circumstances where one reasonably should know that the purpose of the advertisement, in whole or in part, is to promote the sale of objects designed or intended for use as drug paraphernalia. 
48.08 PENALTIES. Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a simple misdemeanor or a municipal infraction. Each day a violation occurs may constitute a separate offense. 
[The next page is 265] 
CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA 
-240 ­



CHAPTER 50 
NUISANCE ABATEMENT PROCEDURE 

50.01 Definition of Nuisance 50.08 Abatement in Emergency 
50.02 Nuisances Enumerated 50.09 Abatement by City 
50.03 Other Conditions 50.10 Collection of Costs 
50.04 Nuisances Prohibited 50.11 Installment Payment of Cost of Abatement 
50.05 Nuisance Abatement 50.12 Failure to Abate 
50.06 Notice to Abate: Contents 50.13 Hearing 
50.07 Method of Service 
50.01 DEFINITION OF NUISANCE. Whatever is injurious to health, indecent, or unreasonably offensive to the senses, or an obstruction to the free use of property so as essentially to interfere unreasonably with the comfortable enjoyment of life or property is a nuisance. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 657.1) 
50.02 NUISANCES ENUMERATED. The following subsections include, but do not limit, the conditions which are deemed to be nuisances in the City: 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 657.2) 
1. 
Offensive Smells. Erecting, continuing or using any building or other place for the exercise of any trade, employment or manufacture, which, by occasioning noxious exhalations, unreasonably offensive smells, or other annoyances, becomes injurious and dangerous to the health, comfort or property of individuals or the public. 

2. 
Filth or Noisome Substance. Causing or suffering any offal, filth or noisome substance to be collected or to remain in any place to the prejudice of others. 

3. 
Impeding Passage of Navigable River. Obstructing or impeding without legal authority the passage of any navigable river, harbor or collection of water. 

4. 
Water Pollution. Corrupting or rendering unwholesome or impure the water of any river, stream or pond, or unlawfully diverting the same from its natural course or state, to the injury or prejudice of others. 

5. 
Blocking Public and Private Ways. Obstructing or encumbering, by fences, buildings or otherwise, the public roads, private ways, streets, alleys, commons, landing places or burying grounds. 

6. 
Billboards. Billboards, signboards and advertising signs, whether erected and constructed on public or private property, which so obstruct 


and impair the view of any portion or part of a public street, avenue, highway, boulevard or alley or of a railroad or street railway track as to render dangerous the use thereof. (See also Section 62.09) 
7. 
Storing of Flammable Junk. Depositing or storing of flammable junk, such as old rags, rope, cordage, rubber, bones and paper, by dealers in such articles within the fire limits of the City, unless in a building of fireproof construction. (See also Chapter 51) 

8. 
Air Pollution. Emission of dense smoke, noxious fumes or fly ash. 

9. 
Weeds, Brush. Dense growth of all weeds, vines, brush or other vegetation in the City so as to constitute a health, safety or fire hazard. 



(See also Chapter 52) 
10. Dutch Elm Disease. Trees infected with Dutch Elm Disease. 
(See also Chapter 151) 
11. 
Airport Air Space. Any object or structure hereafter erected within one thousand (1,000) feet of the limits of any municipal or regularly established airport or landing place, which may endanger or obstruct aerial navigation including take-off and landing, unless such object or structure constitutes a proper use or enjoyment of the land on which the same is located. 

12. 
Houses of Ill Fame. Houses of ill fame, kept for the purpose of prostitution and lewdness; gambling houses; places resorted to by persons participating in criminal gang activity prohibited by Chapter 723A of the Code of Iowa or places resorted to by persons using controlled substances, as defined in Section 124.101 of the Code of Iowa, in violation of law, or houses where drunkenness, quarreling, fighting or breaches of the peace are carried on or permitted to the disturbance of others. 


50.03 OTHER CONDITIONS. The following chapters of this Code of Ordinances contain regulations prohibiting or restricting other conditions which are deemed to be nuisances: 
1. 
Junk and Junk Vehicles (See Chapter 51) 

2. 
Grass and Weeds (See Chapter 52) 

3. 
Junk Yards (See Chapter 124) 

4. 
Dangerous Buildings (See Chapter 145) 

5. 
Storage and Disposal of Solid Waste (See Chapter 105) 

6. 
Trees (See Chapter 151) 


7. 
Building Numbering (See Chapter 150) 

8. 
Sanitary Sewer System (See Chapters 95 through 99) 

9. 
Water Well Protection (See Chapter 147) 


50.04 NUISANCES PROHIBITED. The creation or maintenance of a nuisance is prohibited, and a nuisance, public or private, may be abated in the manner provided for in this chapter or State law. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 657.3) 
50.05 NUISANCE ABATEMENT. Whenever the Compliance Officer finds that a nuisance exists, such officer has the authority to determine on a case-by­case basis whether to utilize the nuisance abatement procedure or to issue a citation to the person for violation of this Code of Ordinances. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3h]) 
50.06 NOTICE TO ABATE†: CONTENTS. The notice to abate shall contain: 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3h]) 
1. 
Description of Nuisance. A description of what constitutes the nuisance or other condition. 

2. 
Location of Nuisance. The location of the nuisance or other condition. 

3. 
Acts Necessary to Abate. A statement of the act or acts necessary to abate the nuisance or other condition. 

4. 
Reasonable Time. A reasonable time within which to complete the abatement. 

5. 
Assessment of City Costs or Citation. A statement that if the nuisance or condition is not abated as directed by the time specified in said notice, that (a) the City will abate said nuisance or condition and assess the costs against such person, or (b) said failure to correct will be considered a municipal infraction under Chapter 4 of this Code of Ordinances; that a citation will be issued by the City Compliance Officer pursuant to such chapter; that upon hearing, the Judicial Magistrate may 


† EDITOR’S NOTE: A suggested form of notice for the abatement of nuisances is included in the appendix of this Code of Ordinances. Caution is urged in the use of this administrative abatement procedure, particularly where cost of abatement is more than minimal or where there is doubt as to whether or not a nuisance does in fact exist. If compliance is not secured following notice and hearings, we recommend you review the situation with your attorney before proceeding with abatement and assessment of costs. Your attorney may recommend proceedings in court under Chapter 657 of the Code of Iowa rather than this procedure. 
impose a fine, order the nuisance abated and assess the costs of abatement against the person maintaining the nuisance or the property upon which the nuisance if maintained. 
50.07 METHOD OF SERVICE. Notice to abate said nuisance may be served in the manner of serving an Original Notice or sent by certified mail to the property owner. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3h]) 
50.08 ABATEMENT IN EMERGENCY. If it is determined that an emergency exists by reason of the continuing maintenance of the nuisance or condition, the City may perform any action which may be required to abate said nuisance without prior notice. The City shall assess the costs as provided in Section 50.10 after notice to the property owner under the applicable provisions of this chapter and hearing before the City Compliance Officer. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3h]) 
50.09 ABATEMENT BY CITY. If the person notified to abate a nuisance or condition neglects or fails to abate as directed, the City may perform the required action to abate, keeping an accurate account of the expense incurred. The itemized expense account shall be filed with the Clerk who shall pay such expenses on behalf of the City. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3h]) 
50.10 COLLECTION OF COSTS. The Clerk shall send a statement of the total expense incurred by certified mail to the property owner who has failed to abide by the notice to abate, and if the amount shown by the statement has not been paid within one (1) month, the Clerk shall certify the costs to the County Treasurer and such costs shall then be collected with, and in the same manner, as general property taxes. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3h]) 
50.11 INSTALLMENT PAYMENT OF COST OF ABATEMENT. If the amount expended to abate the nuisance or condition exceeds one hundred dollars ($100.00), the City may permit the assessment to be paid in up to ten 
(10) annual installments, to be paid in the same manner and with the same interest rates provided for assessments against benefited property under State law. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.13) 
CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA 
-268 ­
50.12 FAILURE TO ABATE. Any person causing or maintaining a nuisance who shall fail or refuse to abate or remove the same within the reasonable time required and specified in the notice to abate is in violation of this Code of Ordinances. 
50.13 HEARING. Any person ordered to abate a nuisance may have a hearing with the Council to determine whether a nuisance exists. A request for a hearing must be made in writing and delivered to the City Clerk within ten 
(10) days of receiving the Notice to Abate. If a request for hearing is not received within ten (10) days, it will be conclusively presumed that the nuisance exists and it must be abated as ordered. The hearing will be before the Council at a time and place fixed by the Council. The findings of the Council shall be conclusive and, if a nuisance is found to exist, it shall be ordered abated within a reasonable time set by Council under the circumstances. 
(Ord. 853 – Mar. 07 Supp.) 
CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA 
-269 ­
°°°°°°°°°° 

CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA 
-270 ­
CHAPTER 51 

JUNK AND JUNK VEHICLES 

51.01 Definitions 51.04 Exceptions 
51.02 Junk and Junk Vehicles Prohibited 51.05 Notice to Abate 
51.03 Junk and Junk Vehicles a Nuisance 
51.01 DEFINITIONS. For use in this chapter, the following terms are defined: 
1. 
“Junk” means all old or scrap copper, brass, lead, or any other non-ferrous metal; old or discarded rope, rags, batteries, paper, trash, rubber, debris, waste or used lumber, or salvaged wood; dismantled vehicles, machinery and appliances or parts of such vehicles, machinery or appliances; iron, steel or other old or scrap ferrous materials; old or discarded glass, tinware, plastic or old or discarded household goods or hardware. Neatly stacked firewood located on a side yard or a rear yard is not considered junk. 

2. 
“Junk motor vehicle” means any motor vehicle stored outside or parked within the corporate limits of the City, whether on public or private property, and whether currently licensed or not, which because of any one or more of the following characteristics constitutes a threat to the public health, welfare, and/or safety: 


A. Broken Glass. Any vehicle with a broken, shattered or missing windshield, window, or any other cracked or broken, shattered or missing glass. 
B. Broken, Loose or Missing Part. Any vehicle with a broken, loose or missing fender, door, hood, steering wheel or trunk lid. 
C. Habitat for Nuisance Animals or Insects. Any vehicle which has become or threatens to become the habitat of rats, mice, snakes, vermin, insects or other wild or domestic animals. 
D. Inoperable. Any vehicle which is rendered inoperable by the lack of one or more wheels (exclusive of the “spare”), or the lack of an engine, transmission, differential, drive shaft, axle or any component part thereof, which by its absence or removal makes the vehicle or machine inoperable by its own power, or 
CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA 
-271 ­
because of its inoperable condition has not been used as an operating vehicle for a period of thirty (30) days or more. 
E. Defective Condition. Any other vehicle which, because of its defective condition, in any way constitutes a threat to the public health or safety. 
(Ord. 854 – Mar. 07 Supp.) 
3. “Vehicle” means every device in, upon, or by which a person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a highway or street, excepting devices moved by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks, and includes without limitation a motor vehicle, automobile, truck, motorcycle, tractor, buggy, wagon, farm machinery, or any combination thereof. 
51.02 JUNK AND JUNK VEHICLES PROHIBITED. It is unlawful for any person to store, accumulate, or allow to remain on any private property within the corporate limits of the City any junk or junk vehicle. 
51.03 JUNK AND JUNK VEHICLES A NUISANCE. It is hereby declared that any junk or junk vehicle located upon private property, unless excepted by Section 51.04, constitutes a threat to the health and safety of the citizens and is a nuisance within the meaning of Section 657.1 of the Code of Iowa. If any junk or junk vehicle is kept upon private property in violation hereof, the owner of or person occupying the property upon which it is located shall be prima facie liable for said violation. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3a]) 
51.04 EXCEPTIONS. The provisions of this chapter do not apply to any junk or a junk vehicle stored within: 
1. 
Structure. A garage or other enclosed structure; or 

2. 
Salvage Yard. An auto salvage yard or junk yard lawfully operated within the City. 


51.05 NOTICE TO ABATE. Upon discovery of any junk or junk vehicle located upon private property in violation of Section 51.03, the City shall initiate abatement procedures as outlined in Chapter 50 of this Code of Ordinances. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3a]) 
CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA 
-272 ­
CHAPTER 52 
GRASS AND WEEDS 

52.01 Purpose 52.04 Uniform Height Specifications 
52.02 Definitions 52.05 Noxious Weeds 
52.03 Cutting Specifications and Standards of Practice 52.06 Notice to Abate 
52.01 PURPOSE. The purpose of this chapter is to beautify and preserve the appearance of the City by requiring property owners and occupants to maintain grass lawns at a uniform height within the boundaries of their property and on abutting street right-of-way in order to prevent unsightly, offensive or nuisance conditions. 
52.02 DEFINITIONS. For use in this chapter, the following terms are defined: 
1. 
“Curb,” “curb line” or “curbing” means the outer boundaries of a street at the edge of that portion of the street usually traveled by vehicular traffic. 

2. 
“Cut,” or “mow” means to mechanically maintain the growth of grass, weeds or brush at a uniform height. 

3. 
“Owner” means a person owning private property in the City and any person occupying private property in the City. 

4. 
“Parking” means that part of a street in the City not covered by a sidewalk and lying between the lot line or property line and the curb line; or on unpaved streets, that part of the street lying between the lot line or property line and that portion of the street usually traveled by vehicular traffic. 


52.03 CUTTING SPECIFICATIONS AND STANDARDS OF PRACTICE. 
1. 
Every owner shall cut, mow and maintain all grass, weeds and brush upon the owner’s property and adjacent to the curb line or outer boundary of any street, which includes the parking area abutting the owner’s property, to a uniform height as defined in Section 52.04. 

2. 
Every owner shall cut, mow and maintain grass, weeds and brush adjacent to the curb line, including the parking area abutting the owner’s property, in such a manner so as to be in conformity with and at an even height with all other grass, weeds or brush growing on the remainder of the owner’s property. 


52.04 UNIFORM HEIGHT SPECIFICATIONS. Grass, weeds or brush shall be cut, mowed and maintained so as not to exceed the following height specifications: 
1. 
Developed Residential Areas — not to exceed six inches (6"). 

2. 
Undeveloped Residential Areas — not to exceed eight inches (8"). 

3. 
Business and Industrial Areas — not to exceed six inches (6"). 

4. 
Agriculture Areas — not to exceed fifteen inches (15"). 


Grass, weeds and brush which are allowed to grow in excess of the above specified limitations are deemed to be violations of this chapter. 
52.05 NOXIOUS WEEDS. 
1. 
Every owner shall cut and control noxious weeds upon the owner’s property and adjacent to the curb line or outer boundary of any street, which includes the parking area abutting the owner’s property, by cutting noxious weeds to ground level or use of herbicides to eliminate or eradicate such weeds. 

2. 
Noxious weeds include any weed growth or plant designed as noxious by the State Department of Natural Resources rules and regulations or by the Code of Iowa. 


52.06 NOTICE TO ABATE. Upon discovery of any violations of this chapter, the City may within five (5) days initiate abatement procedures as outlined in Chapter 50 of this Code of Ordinances. 
[The next page is 291] 
CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA 
-274 ­
CHAPTER 55 

ANIMAL PROTECTION AND CONTROL 

55.01 Definitions 55.08 Annoyance or Disturbance 
55.02 Animal Neglect 55.09 Rabies Vaccination 
55.03 Livestock Neglect 55.10 Owner’s Duty 
55.04 Abandonment of Cats and Dogs 55.11 Confinement 
55.05 Livestock 55.12 At Large: Impoundment 
55.06 At Large Prohibited 55.13 Disposition of Animals 
55.07 Damage or Interference 55.14 Impounding Costs 
55.15 Pet Awards Prohibited 
55.01 DEFINITIONS. The following terms are defined for use in this chapter. 
1. “Animal” means a nonhuman vertebrate. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 717B.1) 
2. 
“At large” means off the premises of the owner and not under the control of a competent person, restrained within a motor vehicle, or housed in a veterinary hospital or kennel. 

3. 
“Livestock” means an animal belonging to the bovine, caprine, equine, ovine or porcine species; farm deer, as defined in Section 481A.1 of the Code of Iowa; ostriches, rheas, emus or poultry. 


(Code of Iowa, Sec. 717.1) 
4. “Owner” means any person owning, keeping, sheltering or harboring an animal. 
55.02 ANIMAL NEGLECT. It is unlawful for a person who impounds or confines, in any place, an animal, excluding livestock, to fail to supply the animal during confinement with a sufficient quantity of food or water, or to fail to provide a confined dog or cat with adequate shelter, or to torture, deprive of necessary sustenance, mutilate, beat, or kill such animal by any means which causes unjustified pain, distress or suffering. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 717B.3) 
55.03 LIVESTOCK NEGLECT. It is unlawful for a person who impounds or confines livestock in any place to fail to provide the livestock with care consistent with customary animal husbandry practices or to deprive the livestock of necessary sustenance or to injure or destroy livestock by any means which causes pain or suffering in a manner inconsistent with customary animal husbandry practices. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 717.2) 
CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA 
-291 ­
55.04 ABANDONMENT OF CATS AND DOGS. A person who has ownership or custody of a cat or dog shall not abandon the cat or dog, except the person may deliver the cat or dog to another person who will accept ownership and custody or the person may deliver the cat or dog to an animal shelter or pound. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 717B.8) 
55.05 LIVESTOCK. It is unlawful for a person to keep livestock within the City except by written consent of the Council or except in compliance with the City’s zoning regulations. 
55.06 AT LARGE PROHIBITED. It is unlawful for any owner to allow an animal to run at large within the corporate limits of the City. 
55.07 DAMAGE OR INTERFERENCE. It is unlawful for the owner of an animal to allow or permit such animal to pass upon the premises of another thereby causing damage to, or interference with, the premises. 
55.08 ANNOYANCE OR DISTURBANCE. It is unlawful for the owner of a dog to allow or permit such dog to cause serious annoyance or disturbance to any person or persons by frequent and habitual howling, yelping, barking, or otherwise; or, by running after or chasing persons, bicycles, automobiles or other vehicles. 
55.09 RABIES VACCINATION. Every owner of a dog shall obtain a rabies vaccination for such animal. It is unlawful for any person to own or have a dog in said person’s possession, six months of age or over, which has not been vaccinated against rabies. Dogs kept in kennels and not allowed to run at large are not subject to these vaccination requirements. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 351.33) 
55.10 OWNER’S DUTY. It is the duty of the owner of any dog, cat or other animal which has bitten or attacked a person or any person having knowledge of such bite or attack to report this act to a local health or law enforcement official. It is the duty of physicians and veterinarians to report to the local board of health the existence of any animal known or suspected to be suffering from rabies. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 351.38) 
55.11 CONFINEMENT. When a local board of health receives information that any person has been bitten by an animal or that a dog or animal is suspected of having rabies, it shall order the owner to confine such animal in the manner it directs. If the owner fails to confine such animal in the manner directed, the animal shall be apprehended and impounded by such board, and after two weeks the board may humanely destroy the animal. If such animal is returned to its owner, the owner shall pay the cost of impoundment. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 351.39) 
55.12 AT LARGE: IMPOUNDMENT. Animals found at large in violation of this chapter shall be seized and impounded, or at the discretion of the peace officer, the owner may be served a summons to appear before a proper court to answer charges made thereunder. 
55.13 DISPOSITION OF ANIMALS. When an animal has been apprehended and impounded, written notice shall be given in not less than two days to the owner, if known. Impounded animals may be recovered by the owner upon payment of impounding costs, and if an unvaccinated dog, by having it immediately vaccinated. If the owner does not redeem the animal within seven days of the date of notice, or if the owner cannot be located within seven days, the animal may be humanely destroyed or otherwise disposed of in accordance with law. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 351.37, 351.41) 
55.14 IMPOUNDING COSTS. Impounding costs are established by resolution of the Council. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 351.37) 
55.15 PET AWARDS PROHIBITED. 
(Code of Iowa, Ch. 717.E) 
1. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms are defined: 
A. “Advertise” means to present a commercial message in any medium including but not limited to print, radio, television, sign, display, label, tag or articulation. 
B. “Business” means any enterprise relating to any of the following: 
(1) 
The sale or offer for sale of goods or services. 

(2) 
A recruitment for employment or membership in an organization. 

(3) 
A solicitation to make an investment. 

(4) 
An amusement or entertainment activity. 


C. “Fair” means any of the following: 
(1) The annual fair and exposition held by the Iowa State Fair Board pursuant to Chapter 173 of the Code of Iowa or any fair event conducted by a fair under the provisions of Chapter 174 of the Code of Iowa. 
(2) 
An exhibition of agricultural or manufactured products. 

(3) 
An event for operation of amusement rides or devices or concession booths. 


D. “Game” means a “game of chance” or “game of skill” as defined in Section 99B.1 of the Code of Iowa. 
E. “Pet” means a living dog, cat or an animal normally maintained in a small tank or cage in or near a residence, including but not limited to a rabbit, gerbil, hamster, mouse, parrot, canary, mynah, finch, tropical fish, goldfish, snake, turtle, gecko or iguana. 
2. Prohibition. It is unlawful for any person to award a pet or advertise that a pet may be awarded as any of the following: 
A. A prize for participating in a game. 
B. A prize for participating in a fair event. 
C. An inducement or condition for visiting a place of business or attending an event sponsored by a business. 
D. An inducement or condition for executing a contract which includes provisions unrelated to the ownership, care or disposition of the pet. 
3. Exceptions. This section does not apply to any of the following: 
A. A pet shop licensed pursuant to Section 162.5 of the Code of Iowa if the award of a pet is provided in connection with the sale of a pet on the premises of the pet shop. 
B. Youth programs associated with 4-H Clubs; Future Farmers of America; the Izaak Walton League of America; or organizations associated with outdoor recreation, hunting or fishing, including but not limited to the Iowa Sportsmen’s Federation. 
(Ord. 824 – Oct. 04 Supp.) 
[The next page is 301] 
CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA 
-294 ­
CHAPTER 56 
DANGEROUS ANIMALS 

56.01 Definition 56.04 Regulations for Keeping 
56.02 Keeping of Dangerous Animals Prohibited 56.05 Escape – General Prohibition and Duty 
56.03 Dangerous Animal Exceptions 56.06 Seizure, Impoundment and Disposition 
56.01 DEFINITION. “Dangerous animal” means: 
1. 
Any animal which is not naturally tame or gentle, and which is of a wild nature or disposition, and which is capable of killing, inflicting serious injury upon, or causing disease among, human beings or domestic animals and having known tendencies as a species to do so; 

2. 
Any animal declared to be dangerous by the Council; 

3. 
The following animals, which are deemed to be dangerous animals per se: lions, tigers, jaguars, leopards, cougars, lynx, cheetah and bobcats; wolves, coyotes and foxes; badgers, wolverines, weasels, skunks and ferrets; raccoons; bears; monkeys and chimpanzees; alligators and crocodiles; scorpions; snakes that are venomous or constrictors; gila monsters; and any cross breed of such animals which have similar characteristics of the animals specified. 


56.02 KEEPING OF DANGEROUS ANIMALS PROHIBITED. No person shall keep, shelter or harbor for any purpose within the City a dangerous animal except as hereinafter provided. 
56.03 DANGEROUS ANIMAL EXCEPTIONS. The prohibition contained in Section 56.02 of this chapter does not apply to the keeping of dangerous animals in the following circumstances: 
1. 
The keeping of dangerous animals in a public zoo, public aquarium, bona fide educational or medical institution, humane society or museum where they are kept as live specimens for the public to view, or for the purpose of instruction, research or study. 

2. 
The keeping of dangerous animals for exhibition to the public by a bona fide traveling circus, carnival, exhibit or show licensed to perform in the City. 

3. 
The keeping of dangerous animals in a bona fide, licensed veterinary hospital for treatment. 


CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA 
-301 ­
4. 
The keeping of dangerous animals by a wildlife rescue organization with appropriate permit from the Department of Natural Resources. 

5. 
Any dangerous animals under the jurisdiction of and in the possession of the Department of Natural Resources, pursuant to Chapter 481A or 481B of the Code of Iowa. 

6. 
Any guard or sentry dog properly contained as required by law. 


56.04 REGULATIONS FOR KEEPING. 
1. 
Every person keeping, sheltering, or harboring a dangerous animal as permitted under Section 56.03 shall at all times keep such animal securely confined within a cage or other enclosure approved by the Police Chief. 

2. 
No person owning, keeping, sheltering or harboring a dangerous animal as permitted under Section 56.03 shall permit or allow such animal to enter upon, be placed in, or traverse any public property, park property, public right-of-way, public waterway or lagoon or public sewer system, or business establishment licensed by the City, or the property of another except when such animal is being transported while caged or confined. 

3. 
It is the duty of the persons permitted to keep dangerous animals under Section 56.03 to report to the Police Department when any dangerous animal is found missing. 

4. 
No person shall keep or harbor a dangerous animal which has demonstrated a propensity to attack or bite without provocation. 


56.05 ESCAPE – GENERAL PROHIBITION AND DUTY. No person shall aid or cause any dangerous animal, whether owned by such person or not, to escape confinement or impoundment, whether such confinement or impoundment is upon such person’s property or that of another, by opening any gate, door or window or making any opening of any fence, enclosure or structure or by unleashing or releasing such animal. 
56.06 SEIZURE, IMPOUNDMENT AND DISPOSITION. 
1. In the event that a dangerous animal is found at large and unattended upon public property, park property, public right-of-way, public waterway, lagoon or public sewer system, or the property of someone other than its owner, thereby creating a hazard to persons or property, such animal may, in the discretion of the Police Chief, be destroyed if it cannot be confined or captured. The City shall be under no duty to attempt the confinement or capture of a dangerous animal found at large, nor shall it have a duty to notify the owner of such animal prior to its destruction. 
2. Upon the complaint of any individual that a person is keeping, sheltering or harboring a dangerous animal on a premises in the City in violation of this chapter or that a person is keeping a dangerous animal which has demonstrated a propensity to attack or bite without provocation, the Police Chief shall cause the matter to be investigated and if after investigation, the facts indicate that the person named in the complaint is keeping, sheltering or harboring a dangerous animal in the City, the Police Chief shall order the person named in the complaint to safely remove such animal from the City, permanently place the animal with an organization or group allowed under Section 56.03 of this chapter to possess dangerous animals, or destroy the animal, within three 
(3) days of the receipt of such an order. Such order shall be contained in a notice to remove the dangerous animal, which notice shall be given in writing to the person keeping, sheltering or harboring the dangerous animal, and shall be served personally or by certified mail. Such order and notice to remove the dangerous animal shall not be required where such dangerous animal has previously caused serious physical harm or death to any person, in which case the Police Chief shall cause the animal to be immediately seized and impounded or killed if seizure and impoundment are not possible without risk of serious physical harm or death to any person. 
3. 
The order to remove a dangerous animal issued by the Police Chief may be appealed to the Council. In order to appeal such order, written notice of appeal must be filed with the Clerk within three (3) days after receipt of the order contained in the notice to remove the dangerous animal. Failure to file such written notice of appeal shall constitute a waiver of right to appeal the order. 

4. 
The notice of appeal shall state the grounds for such appeal and shall be delivered personally or by certified mail to the Clerk. The hearing of such appeal shall be scheduled within seven (7) days of the receipt of notice of appeal. The hearing may be continued for good cause. After such hearing, the Council may affirm or reverse the order of the Police Chief. Such determination shall be contained in a written decision and shall be filed with the Clerk within three (3) days after the hearing or any continued session thereof. 

5. 
If the Council affirms the action of the Police Chief, the Council shall order in its written decision that the person owning, sheltering, harboring or keeping such dangerous animal remove such animal from the City, permanently place such animal with an organization or group 


CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA -303 ­
allowed under Section 56.03 to possess dangerous animals, or destroy it. The decision and order shall immediately be served upon the person against whom rendered in the same manner as the notice of removal. If the original order of the Police Chief is not appealed and is not complied with within three (3) days of the order of the Council after appeal has been served, the Police Chief is authorized to seize and impound such dangerous animal. An animal so seized shall be impounded for a period of seven (7) days. If at the end of the impoundment period, the person against whom the decision and order of the Police Chief or Council was issued has not petitioned the Dallas County District Court for a review of said order, the Police Chief shall cause the animal to be disposed of by sale, permanently place such animal with an organization or group allowed under Section 56.03 of this chapter to possess dangerous animals or destroy such animal in a humane manner. All impoundment fees shall be at the expense of the owner of the dangerous animal, which fee shall be the actual cost of the feeding and care of the animal. 
[The next page is 311] 
CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA 
-304 ­
CHAPTER 57 
VICIOUS DOGS 

57.01 Definition 57.04 Insurance 
57.02 Keeping of Vicious Dogs 57.05 Violations and Penalties 
57.03 Seizure, Impoundment and Disposition 57.06 Official K-9 Dog Units 
57.01 DEFINITION. For the purpose of this chapter, a “vicious dog” means: 
1. 
Any dog with a known propensity, tendency or disposition to attack, unprovoked, as evidenced by its habitual or repeated chasing, snapping or barking at human beings or domestic animals so as to potentially cause injury or to otherwise endanger their safety; or 

2. 
A dog which has attacked or bitten any person or that acts in an aggressive or threatening manner toward any person or when a propensity to act aggressively or threateningly exists and such propensity is known or should be known to the owner thereof; or 

3. 
Any dog of that breed known variously as: 


A. The Bull Terrier breed of dog; 
B. The Staffordshire Bull Terrier breed of dog; 
C. The American Pit Bull Terrier breed of dog; 
D. The American Staffordshire Terrier breed of dog; 
E. The Rottweiler breed of dog; (Ord. 775 – May 02 Supp.) 
F. Any dog which has the appearance and characteristics of being predominately of the breeds of Rottweilers, Bull Terrier, Staffordshire Bull Terrier, American Pit Bull Terrier, American Staffordshire Terrier, any other breed commonly known as pit bulls, pit bull dogs or pit bull terriers, or a combination of any of these breeds. 
57.02 KEEPING OF VICIOUS DOGS. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, no person owning, possessing, harboring or having the care of a vicious dog shall permit such animal to go unconfined on or off the premises of such person unless the following conditions are met: 
CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA 
-311 ­
1. 
Confinement. All vicious dogs shall be securely enclosed in a locked pen or kennel, except when leashed and muzzled as provided hereinafter. Such locked pen or kennel must be constructed of metal fencing material, which is strong enough to withstand any pressure exerted by the confined dog or dogs. All fencing shall be of a type that will not allow a dog to push through and all structures must be secured at the sides and then be covered by a secured top attached to the sides. All structures to confine dogs must be locked with a key or combination padlock when such animals are within the structure. Said structure must have a secure bottom or floor attached to the sides of the pen so that the confined animal cannot burrow or dig beneath the sides. All structures erected to house vicious dogs must comply with all zoning and building regulations of the City. All such structures must be adequately lighted and kept in a clean and sanitary manner. 

2. 
Leash and Muzzle. No person shall permit a vicious dog to go outside its kennel, pen or indoor confinement unless such dog is securely leashed with a leash no longer than four (4) feet. All vicious dogs on a leash outside the animal’s kennel, pen or indoor confinement must be muzzled by a muzzling device sufficient to prevent the dog from biting persons or other animals. No person shall permit a vicious dog to be tethered on a chain, rope or other type of leash. Such dogs may not be secured to inanimate objects such as trees, posts, buildings, etc. 

3. 
No vicious dog may be kept on a porch, patio or in any part of a house or structure that would allow the dog to exit such building on its own volition. In addition, no such animal may be kept in a house or structure when the windows are open or when screen windows or screen doors are the only obstacles preventing the dog from exiting the structure. 


57.03 SEIZURE, IMPOUNDMENT AND DISPOSITION. Unconfined vicious dogs shall be seized and impounded in accordance with the following: 
1. 
The Police Chief, upon receipt of a complaint alleging that a dog is a vicious dog as defined in this chapter and is unconfined, may immediately take said dog into custody or impoundment using such means that will protect the general public, the police officer and the dog. 

2. 
Upon receipt of said complaint, a criminal complaint shall be filed by the Police Department against the person owning, keeping, sheltering, harboring or otherwise maintaining the dog in question. Said notice shall set forth a description of the dog and the basis for the allegation of being unconfined and vicious. The complaint shall be served upon any adult 


residing at the premises where in the animal was located or may be posted on those premises if no adult is present to accept service. 
3. 
Any dog found at large which displays vicious tendencies may be handled as a vicious dog pursuant to the foregoing, unless the animal is so vicious that it cannot safely be apprehended, in which case the Police Chief may immediately destroy the dog, or unless its ownership is not ascertainable, in which case it may be destroyed after seven (7) days’ impoundment. 

4. 
Any dog which is alleged to be vicious and which is under impoundment or quarantine shall not be released to the owner, but shall continue to be held at the expense of the owner, pending the outcome of any court proceeding. All costs of such impoundment or quarantine shall be paid by the owner of the animal if determined to be vicious. If the dog is not determined to be vicious, all costs of such impoundment or quarantine shall be paid by the City. 


57.04 INSURANCE. The owner of any vicious dog must provide proof to the City Administrator or City Clerk of public liability insurance in a single accident amount of $50,000.00 for bodily injury to or death of any person or persons or for damages to property owned by any such persons which may result from the ownership, keeping or maintenance of such animal. 
57.05 VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES. Any persons violating or permitting the violation of any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a municipal infraction. The Magistrate may order the dog to be removed from the City. Should the defendant refuse to remove the dog from the City, the Magistrate may find the defendant in contempt and order the immediate confiscation (impoundment) of the dog. In addition to the foregoing, any person who violates this chapter shall pay all expenses, including shelter, food, handling, veterinary care and testimony necessitated by the enforcement of this chapter. 
57.06 OFFICIAL K-9 DOG UNITS. Any official K-9 Dog units are exempt from the provisions and penalties of this chapter while actively employed by any and all law enforcement agencies. 
CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA 
-313 ­
°°°°°°°°°° 

CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA 
-314 ­
CHAPTER 58 
REGISTRATION OF DOGS AND CATS 

58.01 Purpose 58.04 Registration Fees 
58.02 Annual Registration 58.05 Registration Tag 
58.03 Requirements 
58.01 PURPOSE. The purpose of registering and tagging pets is for identification if the pet is lost, to prevent pets from being destroyed as stray and for the safety of Perry citizens by using the registration process as a way of tracking where the vicious animals in the community are located. 
58.02 ANNUAL REGISTRATION. The owner of a dog or cat over six (6) months of age shall register said dog or cat with the City Clerk or Finance Officer prior to the first of September of each year. (Ord. 835 – May 06 Supp.) 
58.03 REQUIREMENTS. The owner of a dog or cat for which registration is required shall provide proof of current vaccination against rabies, a description of the animal and such other information as the City Clerk requires. 
58.04 REGISTRATION FEES. The registration fee for each dog or cat is five dollars ($5.00). If the animal is not spayed or neutered, the registration fee for each dog or cat is twenty dollars ($20.00). There is a five dollar ($5.00) per animal late fee for animals not registered by the first of August each year. 
58.05 REGISTRATION TAG. Upon registration of a dog or cat and receipt of the fee, the City Clerk shall deliver or mail to the owner of said dog or cat a registration tag which will be work by the dog or cat at all times. 
(Ch. 58 – Ord. 793 – Jul. 03 Supp.) 
CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA 
-315 ­[The next page is 351] 
CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA 
-316 ­
CHAPTER 60 
ADMINISTRATION OF TRAFFIC CODE 

60.01 Title 60.05 Traffic Accidents: Reports 
60.02 Definitions 60.06 Peace Officer’s Authority 
60.03 Administration and Enforcement 60.07 Obedience to Peace Officers 
60.04 Power to Direct Traffic 60.08 Parades Regulated 
60.01 TITLE. Chapters 60 through 70 of this Code of Ordinances may be known and cited as the “Perry Traffic Code.” 
60.02 DEFINITIONS. Where words and phrases used in the Traffic Code are defined by State law, such definitions apply to their use in said Traffic Code and are adopted by reference. Those definitions so adopted that need further definition or are reiterated, and other words and phrases used herein, have the following meanings: 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.1) 
1. 
“Business District” means the territory located within the area zoned BC by the Zoning Ordinance of the City. The BC (Central Business Commercial District) is bordered on the west by First Street, on the north by Bateman Street, on the east by Third Street and on the south by Otley Avenue. The entire block between Willis Avenue and Otley Avenue, between Third Street and Fourth Street, as well as the west half of the block between Willis Avenue and Warford Street, Third Street and Fourth Street is also included in the BC District. 

2. 
“Park” or “parking” means the standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, otherwise than temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading merchandise or passengers. “Parking” also means that part of the street, avenue or highway in the City not covered by sidewalk and lying between the lot line and the curb line; or, on unpaved streets, that part of the street, avenue or highway lying between the lot line and that portion of the street usually traveled by vehicular traffic. 

3. 
“Peace officer” means every officer authorized to direct or regulate traffic or to make arrests for violations of traffic regulations. 


CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA 
-351 ­
4. 
“Residence district” means the territory contiguous to and including a highway not comprising a business, suburban or school district, where forty percent (40%) or more of the frontage on such a highway for a distance of three hundred (300) feet or more is occupied by dwellings or by dwellings and buildings in use for business. 

5. 
“School district” means the territory contiguous to and including a highway for a distance of two hundred (200) feet in either direction from a school house. 

6. 
“Stand” or “standing” means the halting of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, otherwise than for the purpose of and while actually engaged in receiving or discharging passengers. 

7. 
“Stop” means when required, the complete cessation of movement. 

8. 
“Stop” or “stopping” means when prohibited, any halting of a vehicle, even momentarily, whether occupied or not, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a peace officer or traffic control sign or signal. 

9. 
“Suburban district” means all other parts of the City not included in the business, school or residence districts. 

10. 
“Traffic control device” means all signs, signals, markings, and devices not inconsistent with this chapter, lawfully placed or erected for the purpose of regulating, warning, or guiding traffic. 

11. 
“Vehicle” means every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a public highway, street, or alley. 


60.03 ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT. Provisions of this Traffic Code and State law relating to motor vehicles and law of the road are enforced by the Police Chief. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13 [4]) 
60.04 POWER TO DIRECT TRAFFIC. A peace officer, and, in the absence of a peace officer, any officer of the fire department when at the scene of a fire, is authorized to direct all traffic by voice, hand or signal in conformance with traffic laws. In the event of an emergency, traffic may be directed as conditions require, notwithstanding the provisions of the traffic laws. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 102.4 & 321.236[2]) 
CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA 
-352 ­
60.05 TRAFFIC ACCIDENTS: REPORTS. The driver of a vehicle involved in an accident within the limits of the City shall file a report as and when required by the Iowa Department of Transportation. A copy of this report shall be filed with the City for the confidential use of peace officers and shall be subject to the provisions of Section 321.271 of the Code of Iowa. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.273) 
60.06 PEACE OFFICER’S AUTHORITY. A peace officer is authorized to stop a vehicle to require exhibition of the driver’s license of the driver, to serve a summons or memorandum of traffic violation, to inspect the condition of the vehicle, to inspect the vehicle with reference to size, weight, cargo, log book, bills of lading or other manifest of employment, tires and safety equipment, or to inspect the registration certificate, the compensation certificate, travel order, or permit of such vehicle. A peace officer having probable cause to stop a vehicle may require exhibition of the proof of financial liability coverage card issued for the vehicle. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.492) 
60.07 OBEDIENCE TO PEACE OFFICERS. No person shall willfully fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order or direction of any peace officer invested by law with authority to direct, control, or regulate traffic. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.229) 
60.08 PARADES REGULATED. No person shall conduct or cause any parade on any street except as provided herein: 
1. 
“Parade” Defined. “Parade” means any march or procession of persons or vehicles organized for marching or moving on the streets in an organized fashion or manner or any march or procession of persons or vehicles represented or advertised to the public as a parade. 

2. 
Permission Required. No parade shall be conducted without first obtaining permission from the Council. The person organizing or sponsoring the parade shall provide information concerning the time and date for the parade and the streets or general route therefor, and any permission given to such person includes all participants in the parade, provided they have been invited to participate. 

3. 
Parade Not A Street Obstruction. Any parade for which permission has been given and the persons lawfully participating therein shall not be deemed an obstruction of the streets, notwithstanding the provisions of any other ordinance to the contrary. 

4. 
Control By Peace Officers and Fire Fighters. Persons participating in any parade shall at all times be subject to the lawful 


orders and directions in the performance of their duties of law enforcement personnel and members of the Fire Department. 
CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA 
-354 ­
CHAPTER 61 
TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES 

61.01 Installation 61.04 Standards 
61.02 Crosswalks 61.05 Compliance 
61.03 Traffic Lanes 
61.01 INSTALLATION. The Police Chief shall cause to be placed and maintained traffic control devices when and as required under this Traffic Code or under State law or emergency or temporary traffic control devices for the duration of an emergency or temporary condition as traffic conditions may require to regulate, guide or warn traffic. The Police Chief shall keep a record of all such traffic control devices. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.255) 
61.02 CROSSWALKS. The Police Chief is hereby authorized, subject to approval of the Council by resolution, to designate and maintain crosswalks by appropriate traffic control devices at intersections where, due to traffic conditions, there is particular danger to pedestrians crossing the street or roadway, and at such other places as traffic conditions require. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4] & 321.255) 
61.03 TRAFFIC LANES. The Police Chief is hereby authorized to mark lanes for traffic on street pavements at such places as traffic conditions require, consistent with the traffic code of the City. Where such traffic lanes have been marked, it shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to fail or refuse to keep such vehicle within the boundaries of any such lane except when lawfully passing another vehicle or preparatory to making a lawful turning movement. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4] & 321.255) 
61.04 STANDARDS. Traffic control devices shall comply with standards established by The Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices for Streets and Highways. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.255) 
61.05 COMPLIANCE. No driver of a vehicle shall disobey the instructions of any official traffic control device placed in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, unless at the time otherwise directed by a peace officer, subject to the exceptions granted the driver of an authorized emergency vehicle under Section 321.231 of the Code of Iowa. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.256) 
CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA -355 ­
CHAPTER 62 

GENERAL TRAFFIC REGULATIONS 
62.01 Violation of Regulations 62.08 Open Containers in Motor Vehicles 
62.02 Play Streets Designated 62.09 Obstructing View at Intersections 
62.03 Vehicles on Sidewalks 62.10 Reckless Driving 
62.04 Clinging to Vehicle 62.11 Careless Driving 
62.05 Quiet Zones 62.12 Milling 
62.06 Funeral Processions 62.13 Traffic Noise 
62.07 Tampering with Vehicle 62.14 Engine Brakes and Compression Brakes 
62.15 No Vehicles When Buses Present 
62.01 VIOLATION OF REGULATIONS. Any person who willfully fails or refuses to comply with any lawful order of a peace officer or direction of a fire department officer during a fire, or who fails to abide by the applicable provisions of the following Iowa statutory laws relating to motor vehicles and the statutory law of the road is in violation of this section. These sections of the Code of Iowa are adopted by reference and are as follows: 
1. 
Section 321.17 – Misdemeanor to violate registration provisions. 

2. 
Section 321.20B – Proof of security against liability. 

3. 
Section 321.32 – Registration card, carried and exhibited. 

4. 
Section 321.37 – Display of plates. 

5. 
Section 321.38 – Plates, method of attaching, imitations prohibited. 

6. 
Section 321.79 – Intent to injure. 

7. 
Section 321.91 – Penalty for abandonment. 

8. 
Section 321.98 – Operation without registration. 

9. 
Section 321.99 – Fraudulent use of registration. 

10. 
Section 321.174 – Operators licensed. 

11. 
Section 321.174A – Operation of motor vehicles with expired license. 

12. 
Section 321.180 – Instruction permits. 

13. 
Section 321.180B – Graduated driver’s licenses for persons aged fourteen through seventeen. 

14. 
Section 321.193 – Restricted licenses. 

15. 
Section 321.194 – Special minor’s licenses. 


CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA 
-356 ­
16. 
Section 321.216 – Unlawful use of license and nonoperator’s identification card. 

17. 
Section 321.216B – Use of driver’s license or nonoperator’s identification card by underage person to obtain alcohol. 

18. 
Section 321.216C – Use of driver’s license or nonoperator’s identification card by underage person to obtain cigarettes or tobacco products. 

19. 
Section 321.219 – Permitting unauthorized minor to drive. 

20. 
Section 321.220 – Permitting unauthorized person to drive. 

21. 
Section 321.221 – Employing unlicensed chauffeur. 

22. 
Section 321.222 – Renting motor vehicle to another. 

23. 
Section 321.223 – License inspected. 

24. 
Section 321.224 – Record kept. 

25. 
Section 321.232 – Radar jamming devices; penalty. 

26. 
Section 321.234A – All-terrain vehicles. 

27. 
Section 321.247 – Golf cart operation on City streets. 

28. 
Section 321.257 – Official traffic control signal. 

29. 
Section 321.259 – Unauthorized signs, signals or markings. 

30. 
Section 321.262 – Damage to vehicle. 

31. 
Section 321.263 – Information and aid. 

32. 
Section 321.264 – Striking unattended vehicle. 

33. 
Section 321.265 – Striking fixtures upon a highway. 

34. 
Section 321.275 – Operation of motorcycles and motorized bicycles. 

35. 
Section 321.278 – Drag racing prohibited. 

36. 
Section 321.288 – Control of vehicle; reduced speed. 

37. 
Section 321.295 – Limitation on bridge or elevated structures. 

38. 
Section 321.297 – Driving on right-hand side of roadways; exceptions. 

39. 
Section 321.298 – Meeting and turning to right. 

40. 
Section 321.299 – Overtaking a vehicle. 

41. 
Section 321.302 – Overtaking on the right. 


CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA -357 ­
42. 
Section 321.303 – Limitations on overtaking on the left. 

43. 
Section 321.304 – Prohibited passing. 

44. 
Section 321.306 – Roadways laned for traffic. 

45. 
Section 321.307 – Following too closely. 

46. 
Section 321.308 – Motor trucks and towed vehicles; distance requirements. 

47. 
Section 321.309 – Towing; convoys; drawbars. 

48. 
Section 321.310 – Towing four-wheel trailers. 

49. 
Section 321.312 – Turning on curve or crest of grade. 

50. 
Section 321.313 – Starting parked vehicle. 

51. 
Section 321.314 – When signal required. 

52. 
Section 321.315 – Signal continuous. 

53. 
Section 321.316 – Stopping. 

54. 
Section 321.317 – Signals by hand and arm or signal device. 

55. 
Section 321.319 – Entering intersections from different highways. 

56. 
Section 321.320 – Left turns; yielding. 

57. 
Section 321.321 – Entering through highways. 

58. 
Section 321.322 – Vehicles entering stop or yield intersection. 

59. 
Section 321.323 – Moving vehicle backward on highway. 

60. 
Section 321.324 – Operation on approach of emergency vehicles. 

61. 
Section 321.329 – Duty of driver – pedestrians crossing or working on highways. 

62. 
Section 321.330 – Use of crosswalks. 

63. 
Section 321.332 – White canes restricted to blind persons. 

64. 
Section 321.333 – Duty of drivers. 

65. 
Section 321.340 – Driving through safety zone. 

66. 
Section 321.341 – Obedience to signal of train. 

67. 
Section 321.342 – Stop at certain railroad crossings; posting warning. 

68. 
Section 321.343 – Certain vehicles must stop. 

69. 
Section 321.344 – Heavy equipment at crossing. 

70. 
Section 321.344B – Immediate safety threat – penalty. 


CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA -358 ­
71. 
Section 321.354 – Stopping on traveled way. 

72. 
Section 321.359 – Moving other vehicle. 

73. 
Section 321.362 – Unattended motor vehicle. 

74. 
Section 321.363 – Obstruction to driver’s view. 

75. 
Section 321.364 – Preventing contamination of food by hazardous material. 

76. 
Section 321.365 – Coasting prohibited. 

77. 
Section 321.367 – Following fire apparatus. 

78. 
Section 321.368 – Crossing fire hose. 

79. 
Section 321.369 – Putting debris on highway. 

80. 
Section 321.370 – Removing injurious material. 

81. 
Section 321.371 – Clearing up wrecks. 

82. 
Section 321.372 – School buses. 

83. 
Section 321.381 – Movement of unsafe or improperly equipped vehicles. 

84. 
Section 321.381A – Operation of low-speed vehicles. 

85. 
Section 321.382 – Upgrade pulls; minimum speed. 

86. 
Section 321.383 – Exceptions; slow vehicles identified. 

87. 
Section 321.384 – When lighted lamps required. 

88. 
Section 321.385 – Head lamps on motor vehicles. 

89. 
Section 321.386 – Head lamps on motorcycles and motorized bicycles. 

90. 
Section 321.387 – Rear lamps. 

91. 
Section 321.388 – Illuminating plates. 

92. 
Section 321.389 – Reflector requirement. 

93. 
Section 321.390 – Reflector requirements. 

94. 
Section 321.392 – Clearance and identification lights. 

95. 
Section 321.393 – Color and mounting. 

96. 
Section 321.394 – Lamp or flag on projecting load. 

97. 
Section 321.395 – Lamps on parked vehicles. 

98. 
Section 321.398 – Lamps on other vehicles and equipment. 

99. 
Section 321.402 – Spot lamps. 


CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA -359 ­
100. 
Section 321.403 – Auxiliary driving lamps. 

101. 
Section 321.404 – Signal lamps and signal devices. 

102. 
Section 321.404A – Light-restricting devices prohibited. 

103. 
Section 321.405 – Self-illumination. 

104. 
Section 321.406 – Cowl lamps. 

105. 
Section 321.408 – Back-up lamps. 

106. 
Section 321.409 – Mandatory lighting equipment. 

107. 
Section 321.415 – Required usage of lighting devices. 

108. 
Section 321.417 – Single-beam road-lighting equipment. 

109. 
Section 321.418 – Alternate road-lighting equipment. 

110. 
Section 321.419 – Number of driving lamps required or permitted. 

111. 
Section 321.420 – Number of lamps lighted. 

112. 
Section 321.421 – Special restrictions on lamps. 

113. 
Section 321.422 – Red light in front. 

114. 
Section 321.423 – Flashing lights. 

115. 
Section 321.430 – Brake, hitch and control requirements. 

116. 
Section 321.431 – Performance ability. 

117. 
Section 321.432 – Horns and warning devices. 

118. 
Section 321.433 – Sirens, whistles and bells prohibited. 

119. 
Section 321.434 – Bicycle sirens or whistles. 

120. 
Section 321.436 – Mufflers, prevention of noise. 

121. 
Section 321.437 – Mirrors. 

122. 
Section 321.438 – Windshields and windows. 

123. 
Section 321.439 – Windshield wipers. 

124. 
Section 321.440 – Restrictions as to tire equipment. 

125. 
Section 321.441 – Metal tires prohibited. 

126. 
Section 321.442 – Projections on wheels. 

127. 
Section 321.444 – Safety glass. 

128. 
Section 321.445 – Safety belts and safety harnesses – use required. 


129. 
Section 321.446 – Child restraint devices. 

130. 
Section 321.449 – Motor carrier safety regulations. 

131. 
Section 321.450 – Hazardous materials transportation. 

132. 
Section 321.454 – Width of vehicles. 

133. 
Section 321.455 – Projecting loads on passenger vehicles. 

134. 
Section 321.456 – Height of vehicles; permits. 

135. 
Section 321.457 – Maximum length. 

136. 
Section 321.458 – Loading beyond front. 

137. 
Section 321.460 – Spilling loads on highways. 

138. 
Section 321.461 – Trailers and towed vehicles. 

139. 
Section 321.462 – Drawbars and safety chains. 

140. 
Section 321.463 – Maximum gross weight. 

141. 
Section 321.465 – Weighing vehicles and removal of excess. 

142. 
Section 321.466 – Increased loading capacity – reregistration. 


62.02 PLAY STREETS DESIGNATED. The Police Chief shall have authority to declare any street or part thereof a play street and cause to be placed appropriate signs or devices in the roadway indicating and helping to protect the same. Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating any street or part thereof as a play street, no person shall drive a vehicle upon any such street or portion thereof except drivers of vehicles having business or whose residences are within such closed area, and then any said driver shall exercise the greatest care in driving upon any such street or portion thereof. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.255) 
62.03 VEHICLES ON SIDEWALKS. The driver of a vehicle shall not drive upon or within any sidewalk area except at a driveway. 
62.04 CLINGING TO VEHICLE. No person shall drive a motor vehicle on the streets of the City unless all passengers of said vehicle are inside the vehicle in the place intended for their accommodation. No person riding upon any bicycle, coaster, roller skates, in-line skates, sled or toy vehicle shall attach the same or himself or herself to any vehicle upon a roadway. 
62.05 QUIET ZONES. Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating a quiet zone, no person operating a motor vehicle within any such zone shall sound the horn or other warning device of such vehicle except in an emergency. 
CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA 
-361 ­
62.06 FUNERAL PROCESSIONS. Upon the immediate approach of a funeral procession, the driver of every other vehicle, except an authorized emergency vehicle, shall yield the right-of-way. An operator of a motor vehicle which is part of a funeral procession shall not be charged with violating traffic rules and regulations relating to traffic signals and devices while participating in the procession unless the operation is reckless. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.324A) 
62.07 TAMPERING WITH VEHICLE. It is unlawful for any person, either individually or in association with one or more other persons, to willfully injure or tamper with any vehicle or break or remove any part or parts of or from a vehicle without the consent of the owner. 
62.08 OPEN CONTAINERS IN MOTOR VEHICLES. 
1. Drivers. A driver of a motor vehicle upon a public street or highway shall not possess in the passenger area of the motor vehicle an open or unsealed bottle, can, jar, or other receptacle containing an alcoholic beverage. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.284) 
2. Passengers. A passenger in a motor vehicle upon a public street or highway shall not possess in the passenger area of the motor vehicle an open or unsealed bottle, can, jar or other receptacle containing an alcoholic beverage. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.284A) 
As used in this section “passenger area” means the area of a motor vehicle designed to seat the driver and passengers while the motor vehicle is in operation and any area that is readily accessible to the driver or a passenger while in their seating positions, including the glove compartment. An open or unsealed receptacle containing an alcoholic beverage may be transported in the trunk of the motor vehicle. An unsealed receptacle containing an alcoholic beverage may be transported behind the last upright seat of the motor vehicle if the motor vehicle does not have a trunk. 
62.09 OBSTRUCTING VIEW AT INTERSECTIONS. It is unlawful to allow any tree, hedge, billboard or other object to obstruct the view of an intersection by preventing persons from having a clear view of traffic approaching the intersection from cross streets. Any such obstruction is deemed a nuisance and in addition to the standard penalty may be abated in the manner provided by Chapter 50 of this Code of Ordinances. 
CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA 
-362 ­
62.10 RECKLESS DRIVING. No person shall drive any vehicle in such manner as to indicate a willful or a wanton disregard for the safety of persons or property. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.277) 
62.11 CARELESS DRIVING. No person shall intentionally operate a motor vehicle on a street or highway in any one of the following ways: 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.277A) 
1. 
Creating or causing unnecessary tire squealing, skidding or sliding upon acceleration or stopping. 

2. 
Simulating a temporary race. 

3. 
Causing any wheel or wheels to unnecessarily lose contact with the ground. 

4. 
Causing the vehicle to unnecessarily turn abruptly or sway. 


62.12 MILLING. It is unlawful to drive or operate a vehicle, either singly or with others, in any processional milling or repeated movement over any street to the interference with normal traffic use, or to the annoyance or offense of any person. 
62.13 TRAFFIC NOISE. It is unlawful for anyone operating a motor vehicle to squeal tires; race engine; to have loud or offensive mufflers or no muffler or any cut-out or by-pass in the exhaust system or to blow horn excessively. 
62.14 ENGINE BRAKES AND COMPRESSION BRAKES. 
1. 
It is unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to use or operate or cause to be used or operated within the City any engine brake, compression brake or mechanical exhaust device designed to aid in the braking or deceleration of any vehicle that results in loud, unusual or explosive noise from such vehicle, except in response to an imminent traffic accident. 

2. 
The usage of an engine brake, compression brake or mechanical exhaust device designed to aid in braking or deceleration in such a manner so as to be audible at a distance of three hundred (300) feet from the motor vehicle shall constitute evidence of a prima facie violation of this section. 

3. 
The scheduled fine for a violation of this section shall be fifty dollars ($50.00). 


CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA 
-363 ­
62.15 NO VEHICLES WHEN BUSES PRESENT. No vehicles are permitted on Dewey Avenue between Eighth Street and Vine Street when buses are present. 
CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA 
-364 ­[The next page is 371] 
CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA 
-365 ­
CHAPTER 63 
SPEED REGULATIONS 

63.01 General 63.05 Special Speed Restrictions 
63.02 State Code Speed Limits 63.06 Minimum Speed 
63.03 Parks and Parking Lots 63.07 Controlled Access Facilities 
63.04 Cemeteries 
63.01 GENERAL. Every driver of a motor vehicle on a street shall drive the same at a careful and prudent speed not greater than nor less than is reasonable and proper, having due regard to the traffic, surface and width of the street and of any other conditions then existing, and no person shall drive a vehicle on any street at a speed greater than will permit said driver to bring it to a stop within the assured clear distance ahead, such driver having the right to assume, however, that all persons using said street will observe the law. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.285) 
63.02 STATE CODE SPEED LIMITS. The following speed limits are established in Section 321.285 of the Code of Iowa and any speed in excess thereof is unlawful unless specifically designated otherwise in this chapter as a special speed zone. 
1. 
Business District – twenty (20) miles per hour. 

2. 
Residence or School District – twenty-five (25) miles per hour. 

3. 
Suburban District – forty-five (45) miles per hour. 


63.03 PARKS AND PARKING LOTS. A speed in excess of fifteen (15) miles per hour in any public park or parking lot, unless specifically designated otherwise in this chapter, is unlawful. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[5]) 
63.04 CEMETERIES. A speed in excess of ten (10) miles per hour in any cemetery, unless specifically designated otherwise in this chapter, is unlawful. 
63.05 SPECIAL SPEED RESTRICTIONS. In accordance with requirements of the Iowa State Department of Transportation, or whenever the Council shall determine upon the basis of an engineering and traffic investigation that any speed limit listed in Section 63.02 is greater or less than is reasonable or safe under the conditions found to exist at any intersection or other place or upon any part of the City street system, the Council shall determine and adopt by ordinance such higher or lower speed limit as it deems reasonable and safe at such location. The following special speed zones have been established: 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.290) 
1. Special 25 MPH Speed Zones. A speed in excess of twenty-five 
(25) miles per hour is unlawful on any of the following designated streets or parts thereof. 
A. First Street, from Pattee Street to Otley Avenue. 
B. Willis Avenue, from Fourth Street east to 13th Street. 
(Ord. 789 – Dec. 02 Supp.) 
2. Special 30 MPH Speed Zones. A speed in excess of thirty (30) miles per hour is unlawful on any of the following designated streets or parts thereof. 
A. Willis Avenue, from the west City limits east to Diagonal Road. 
B. Willis Avenue, from the middle of the block between West Eight Street and West Seventh Street east to West Third Street. 
C. Willis Avenue from 13th Street east to the intersection of Highway 141 by-pass. 
D. Iowa Street between 18th Street and the Highway 141 by­pass. 
(Ord. 789 – Dec. 02 Supp.) 
3. Special 35 MPH Speed Zones. A speed in excess of thirty-five 
(35) miles per hour is unlawful on any of the following designated streets or parts thereof. 
A. First Street, from Park Street to Pattee Street. 
B. First Street, from Otley Avenue to Highway 141. 
C. Park Street from the east edge of Violet Hill Cemetery to 18th Street. 
(Ord. 850 – Aug. 06 Supp.) 
4. Special 45 MPH Speed Zones. A speed in excess of forty-five 
(45) miles per hour is unlawful on any of the following designated streets or parts thereof. 
A. First Street, from Park Street to north City limits. 
CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA 
-372 ­
5. Special 50 MPH Speed Zones. A speed in excess of fifty (50) miles per hour is unlawful on any of the following designated streets or parts thereof. 
A. Highway 141 from 115 feet west of Tenth Street to Highway 144. 
6. Special 55 MPH Speed Zones. A speed in excess of fifty-five 
(55) miles per hour is unlawful on any of the following designated streets or parts thereof. 
A. Highway 141 from 1,361 feet east of 16th Street to 115 feet west of Tenth Street. 
63.06 MINIMUM SPEED. A person shall not drive a motor vehicle at such a slow speed as to impede or block the normal and reasonable movement of traffic, except when reduced speed is necessary for safe operation, or in compliance with law. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.294) 
63.07 CONTROLLED ACCESS FACILITIES. Speed limits on controlled access facilities are as specified in Chapter 140 of this Code of Ordinances. 
CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA 
-373 ­
°°°°°°°°°° 

CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA 
-374 ­
CHAPTER 64 
TURNING REGULATIONS 

64.01 Turning at Intersections 64.03 Right Turn on Red Signal Prohibited 
64.02 U-turns 64.04 Left Turn for Parking 
64.01 TURNING AT INTERSECTIONS. The driver of a vehicle intending to turn at an intersection shall do so as follows: 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.311) 
1. 
Both the approach for a right turn and a right turn shall be made as close as practical to the right-hand curb or edge of the roadway. 

2. 
Approach for a left turn shall be made in that portion of the right half of the roadway nearest the centerline thereof and after entering the intersection the left turn shall be made so as to depart from the intersection to the right of the centerline of the roadway being entered. 

3. 
Approach for a left turn from a two-way street into a one-way street shall be made in that portion of the right half of the roadway nearest the centerline thereof and by passing to the right of such centerline where it enters the intersection. A left turn from a one-way street into a two-way street shall be made by passing to the right of the centerline of the street being entered upon leaving the intersection. 


The Police Chief may cause markers, buttons or signs to be placed within or adjacent to intersections and thereby require and direct, as traffic conditions require, that a different course from that specified above be traveled by vehicles turning at intersections, and when markers, buttons or signs are so placed, no driver of a vehicle shall turn a vehicle at an intersection other than as directed and required by such markers, buttons or signs. 
64.02 U-TURNS. It is unlawful for a driver to make a U-turn except at an intersection, however, U-turns are prohibited within the Business District and at intersections where there are automatic traffic signals. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[9]) 
64.03 RIGHT TURN ON RED SIGNAL PROHIBITED. Vehicular traffic facing a steady red signal shall not proceed or make a right turn at the following locations when appropriate signs are in place. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.257 [2]) 
1. Intersection of Sixth Street and Willis Avenue. 
2. 
Intersection of First Street and North Street. 

3. 
Intersection of West Eighth Street and Willis Avenue. 

4. 
Intersection of Eighth Street and Willis Avenue. 


64.04 LEFT TURN FOR PARKING. No person shall make a left hand turn, crossing the centerline of the street, for the purpose of parking on said street. 
CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA 
-376 ­
CHAPTER 65 
STOP OR YIELD REQUIRED 

65.01 Through Streets – Stop 65.06 Stop Before Crossing Sidewalk 
65.02 Stop Required 65.07 Stop When Traffic Is Obstructed 
65.03 Four-Way Stop Intersections 65.08 Yield to Pedestrians in Crosswalks 
65.04 Yield Required 65.09 Official Traffic Controls 
65.05 School Stops 
65.01 THROUGH STREETS -STOP. Every driver of a vehicle shall stop, unless a yield is permitted by this chapter, before entering an intersection with the following designated through streets. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.345) 
1. 
Willis Avenue from the east City limits to the west City limits except at the intersections of First Street, Second Street and Third Street; 

2. 
First Street except at the intersection of Willis Avenue. 


Whenever any ordinance of the City designates and describes a through highway, it is the duty of the Police Chief, with the approval of the Council, to place and maintain a stop sign on each and every street intersecting such through highway, except as herein modified in the case of intersecting through highways or intersections where a traffic control device is placed by direction of the Council. Any vehicle entering the above described through streets shall stop at the stop sign prior to entering said through street. 
65.02 STOP REQUIRED. It is hereby declared that because of heavy cross traffic and other traffic conditions, a particular safety hazard exists at the intersections hereinafter designated, and the Police Chief is hereby authorized and directed to place stop signs at the following enumerated intersections; and drivers entering said intersections from the directions indicated shall stop at said intersections before entering said intersections. The intersections at which stop signs and a stop are required are as follows: 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.345) 
1. 
30th Street and McKinley Street – traffic from the south shall stop; 

2. 
26th Street and Iowa Street – traffic from the north shall stop; 

3. 
18th Street and Iowa Street – traffic from the north shall stop; 


CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA 
-377 ­
4. 
18th Street and Eastern Avenue – traffic from the east and traffic from the west shall stop; 

5. 
Warford Street and 18th Street – traffic from the east and traffic from the west shall stop; 

6. 
Highview Drive and McKinley Street – traffic from the south shall stop; 

7. 
Otley Avenue and 17th Street – traffic from the east and traffic from the west shall stop; 

8. 
Eastern Avenue and 17th Street – traffic from the east shall stop; 

9. 
Perry Park Avenue and 16th Street – traffic from the west shall stop; 

10. 
Iowa Street and 16th Street – traffic from the east and traffic from the west shall stop; 

11. 
Marengo Drive and 16th Street – traffic from the east shall stop; 

12. 
Otley Avenue and 16th Street – traffic from the east and traffic from the west shall stop; 

13. 
16th Street and Warford Street – traffic from the north and traffic from the south shall stop; 

14. 
16th Street and Lucinda Street – traffic from the north and traffic from the south shall stop; 

15. 
Taft Street and 16th Street – traffic from the east and traffic from the west shall stop; 

16. 
North Street and 16th Street – traffic from the west shall stop; 

17. 
Taft Street and 14th Street – traffic from the east and traffic from the west shall stop; 

18. 
Pattee Street and 11th Street – traffic from the east and traffic from the west shall stop; 

19. 
Evelyn Street and 15th Street – traffic from the west shall stop; 

20. 
Estella Street and 15th Street – traffic from the west shall stop; 

21. 
Tenth Street and Bypass – traffic from the north and traffic from the south shall stop; 

22. 
Tenth Street and Pine Street – traffic from the east and traffic from the west shall stop; 

23. 
Tenth Street and Iowa Street – traffic from the east and traffic from the west shall stop; 


CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA -378 ­
24. 
Tenth Street and Estella Street – traffic from the east and traffic from the west shall stop; 

25. 
Tenth Street and Evelyn Street – traffic from the east and traffic from the west shall stop; 

26. 
Tenth Street and Otley Avenue – traffic from the east and traffic from the west shall stop; 

27. 
Summer Street and North Street – traffic from the south shall stop; 

28. 
Winter Street and North Street – traffic from the south shall stop; 

29. 
Vine Street and North Street – traffic from the south shall stop; 

30. 
Eighth Street and Bypass – traffic from the north and traffic from the south shall stop; 

31. 
Eighth Street and Pine Street – traffic from the east and traffic from the west shall stop; 

32. 
Eighth Street and Jones Street – traffic from the east and traffic from the west shall stop; 

33. 
Eighth Street and Iowa Street – traffic from the east and traffic from the west shall stop; 

34. 
Eighth Street and Estella Street – traffic from the east shall stop; 

35. 
Eighth Street and Evelyn Street – traffic from the east and traffic from the west shall stop; 

36. 
Eighth Street and Otley Avenue – traffic from the east and traffic from the west shall stop; 

37. 
Eighth Street and Park Street – traffic from the north and traffic from the south shall stop; 

38. 
Pattee Street and Seventh Street – traffic from the east and traffic from the west shall stop; 

39. 
Seventh Street and Otley Avenue – traffic from the north shall stop; 

40. 
Seventh Street and Evelyn Street – traffic from the north and traffic from the south shall stop; 

41. 
Seventh Street and Iowa Street – traffic from the north shall stop; 

42. 
Iowa Street and East Edge Iowa Street Trailer Court – traffic from the south shall stop; 

43. 
Grove Street and Iowa Street – traffic from the south shall stop; 


CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA -379 ­
44. 
Sixth Street and Iowa Street – traffic from the north shall stop; 

45. 
Sixth Street and Evelyn Street – traffic from the east and traffic from the west shall stop; 

46. 
Sixth Street and Otley Avenue – traffic from the east and traffic from the west shall stop; 

47. 
Sixth Street and Warford Street – traffic from the north and traffic from the south shall stop; 

48. 
Sixth Street and Lucinda Street – traffic from the north and traffic from the south shall stop; 

49. 
Sixth Street and Park Street – traffic from the south shall stop; 

50. 
Fifth Street and Park Street – traffic from the south shall stop; 

51. 
Fifth Street and Paul Street – traffic from the north and traffic from the south shall stop; 

52. 
Fifth Street and North Street – traffic from the north and traffic from the south shall stop; 

53. 
Fifth Street and Rawson Street – traffic from the north shall stop; 

54. 
Bateman Street and Fifth Street – traffic from the east and traffic from the west shall stop; 

55. 
Fifth Street and Evelyn Street – traffic from the east and traffic from the west shall stop; 

56. 
Pine Street and Fifth Street – traffic from the east shall stop; 

57. 
Fourth Street and Evelyn Street – traffic from the north and traffic from the south shall stop; 

58. 
Fourth Street and Otley Avenue – traffic from the north and traffic from the south shall stop; 

59. 
Fourth Street and Warford Street – traffic from the south shall stop; 

60. 
Fourth Street and Pattee Street – traffic from the south shall stop; 

61. 
Fourth Street and Bateman Street – traffic from the south, traffic from the east and traffic from the west shall stop; 


CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA 
-380 ­
62. 
Fourth Street and Rawson Street – traffic from the north shall stop; 

63. 
Fourth Street and North Street – traffic from the north and traffic from the south shall stop; 

64. 
Fourth Street and Park Street – traffic from the south shall stop; 

65. 
Paul Street and Third Street – traffic from the east and traffic from the west shall stop; 

66. 
Third Street and North Street – traffic from the north and traffic from the south shall stop; 

67. 
Third Street and Rawson Street – traffic from the north, traffic from the east and traffic from the west shall stop; 

68. 
(Repealed by Ordinance No. 784 – Aug. 02 Supp.) 

69. 
(Repealed by Ordinance No. 784 – Aug. 02 Supp.) 

70. 
Third Street and Otley Avenue – traffic from the north and traffic from the south shall stop; 

71. 
Center Street and Third Street – traffic from the east and traffic from the west shall stop; 

72. 
(Repealed by Ordinance No. 820 – Sep. 04 Supp.) 

73. 
(Repealed by Ordinance No. 820 – Sep. 04 Supp.) 

74. 
(Repealed by Ordinance No. 784 – Aug. 02 Supp.) 

75. 
(Repealed by Ordinance No. 784 – Aug. 02 Supp.) 

76. 
(Repealed by Ordinance No. 784 – Aug. 02 Supp.) 

77. 
Second Street and North Post Office Parking – traffic from the east and traffic from the south shall stop; 

78. 
Second Street and Rawson Street – traffic from the east shall stop; 

79. 
Second Street and North Street – traffic from the north and traffic from the south shall stop; 

80. 
Second Street and Park Street – traffic from the south shall stop; 

81. 
Alley behind Post Office – traffic from the north and traffic from the south shall stop; 

82. 
West Second Street and Rawson Street – traffic from the north and traffic from the south shall stop; 

83. 
West Second Street and North Street – traffic from the north and traffic from the south shall stop; 


CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA -381 ­
84. 
West Third Street and North Street – traffic from the north and traffic from the south shall stop; 

85. 
West Fourth Street and North Street – traffic from the north and traffic from the south shall stop; 

86. 
West Fifth Street and Warford Street – traffic from the south shall stop; 

87. 
West Third Street and Pattee Park Road – traffic from the west shall stop; 

88. 
West Third Street and Otley Avenue – traffic from the east shall stop; 

89. 
Third Street and Park Street – traffic from the south shall stop; 

90. 
Second Street and Estella Street – traffic from the east and traffic from the west shall stop; 

91. 
14th Street and Otley Avenue – traffic from the north and traffic from the south shall stop; 

92. 
15th Street and Otley Avenue – traffic from the north and traffic from the south shall stop; 

93. 
Tenth Street and Pattee Street – traffic from the south shall stop; 

94. 
West Third Street and Dewey Avenue – traffic from the north and traffic from the south shall stop; 

95. 
Seventh Street and Bateman Street – traffic from the east and traffic from the west shall stop; 

96. 
Sixth Street and North Street – traffic from the north and traffic from the south shall stop; 

97. 
Seventh Street and North Street – traffic from the south shall stop; 

98. 
Second Street and South Street – traffic from the north shall stop; 

99. 
Summer Street and Dewey Avenue – traffic from the north shall stop; 

100. 
Vine Street and Dewey Avenue – traffic from the north shall stop; 

101. 
Seventh Street and Dewey Avenue – traffic from the east and traffic from the west shall stop; 

102. 
Eighth Street and Willis Avenue – traffic from the north and traffic from the south shall stop; traffic from the east and west shall stop when the permanent traffic lights so designate; 


CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA 
-382 ­
103. 
Eighth Street and Warford Street – traffic from the north, south and west shall stop; (Ord. 811 – Mar. 04 Supp.) 

104. 
Eighth Street and Lucinda Street – traffic from the north, south and east shall stop; (Ord. 811 – Mar. 04 Supp.) 

105. 
Fifth Street and Estella Street – traffic from the east and traffic from the west shall stop; 

106. 
Alley behind Stokely Lumber – traffic from the west shall stop; 

107. 
(Repealed by Ordinance No. 784 – Aug. 02 Supp.) 

108. 
18th Street and Circle Drive at 1200 18th Street – traffic from the north and traffic from the south shall stop. (Ord. 783 – Aug. 02 Supp.) 

109. 
West 8th and Willis Avenue – traffic from the north shall stop. 

110. 
6th Street and Willis Avenue – traffic from the north and south shall stop. (Ord. 806 – Dec. 03 Supp.) 

111. 
West 8th Street and Warford Street – traffic from the east and west shall stop. 

112. 
West 9th Street and Warford Street – traffic from the east and west shall stop. 

113. 
6th Street and Lucinda Street – traffic from the east shall stop. 

114. 
Railroad Street and Otley Avenue – traffic from the south shall stop. 

115. 
Railroad Street and 2nd Street – traffic from the northwest shall stop. 

116. 
2nd Street and Otley Avenue – traffic from the north shall stop. 


(#111-116 – Ord. 821 – Sep. 04 Supp.) 
117. 
Dewey Street and Second Street – traffic from the north and traffic from the south shall stop. 

118. 
Dewey Street and Third Street – traffic from the north and traffic from the south shall stop. 

119. 
Dewey Street and Fourth Street – traffic from the north and traffic from the south shall stop. 

120. 
Dewey Street and Fifth Street -traffic from the north and traffic from the south shall stop. 

121. 
Dewey Street and Sixth Street -traffic from the north and traffic from the south shall stop. 


CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA 
-383 ­
122. 
Dewey Street and Seventh Street -traffic from the north and traffic from the south shall stop. 

123. 
Dewey Street and Eighth Street -traffic from the north and traffic from the south shall stop. 


(#117-123 – Ord. 875 – Mar. 09 Supp.) 
65.03 FOUR-WAY STOP INTERSECTIONS. Every driver of a vehicle shall stop before entering the following designated four-way stop intersections: 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.345) 
1. 
Intersection of 18th Street and McKinley Street. 

2. 
Intersection of 16th Street and McKinley Street. 

3. 
Intersection of 16th Street and Park Street (Note: Dallas County requires traffic from the north and traffic from the east to stop at this four-way stop intersection.) 

4. 
Intersection of Ninth Street and Pattee Street. 

5. 
Intersection of Eighth Street and North Street. 

6. 
Intersection of Eighth Street and Dewey Avenue. 

7. 
Intersection of Eighth Street and Pattee Street. 

8. 
Intersection of Eighth Street and Bateman Street. 

9. 
(Repealed by Ord. 820 – Sep. 04 Supp.) 

10. 
(Repealed by Ord. 820 – Sep. 04 Supp.) 

11. 
Intersection of Second Street and Center Street. 

12. 
Intersection of Second Street and Willis Avenue. 

13. 
Intersection of Third Street and Willis Avenue. 


(Subsections 12 & 13 – Ord. 780 – Jul. 02 Supp.) 
14. 
Intersection of Second Street and Warford Street. 

15. 
Intersection of Second Street and Lucinda Street. 

16. 
Intersection of Second Street and Pattee Street. 

17. 
Intersection of Third Street and Warford Street. 

18. 
Intersection of Third Street and Lucinda Street. 

19. 
Intersection of Third Street and Pattee Street. 


(Subsections 14 -19 – Ord. 784 – Aug. 02 Supp.) 
65.04 YIELD REQUIRED. It is hereby declared that because of heavy cross traffic and other traffic conditions, a particular safety hazard exists at the intersections hereinafter designated, and the Police Chief is hereby authorized and directed to place yield signs at the following enumerated intersections; and drivers entering said intersections from the directions indicated shall yield at said intersections before entering said intersections. The intersections at which yield signs and a yield are required are as follows: 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.345) 
1. 
Fourth Street and Park Street – traffic from the north shall yield; 

2. 
West Second Street and Park Street – traffic from the south shall yield; 

3. 
West Third Street and Park Street – traffic from the south shall yield; 

4. 
West Fourth Street and Park Street – traffic from the south shall yield; 

5. 
West Fifth Street and Park Street – traffic from the south shall yield; 

6. 
West Third Street and Paul Street – traffic from the east and traffic from the west shall yield; 

7. 
Lucinda Street and Third Street – traffic from the west shall yield; 

8. 
West Second Street and Paul Street – traffic from the south and traffic from the north shall yield; 

9. 
West Second Street and Central Street – traffic from the south and traffic from the north shall yield; 

10. 
West Second Street and Dewey Avenue – traffic from the south and traffic from the north shall yield; 

11. 
West Second Street and Warford Street – traffic from the north shall yield; 

12. 
West Third Street and Warford Street – traffic from the south shall yield; 

13. 
West Fourth Street and Warford Street – traffic from the south and traffic from the north shall yield; 

14. 
West Sixth Street and Warford Street – traffic from the south shall yield; 

15. 
West Seventh Street and Warford Street – traffic from the south shall yield; 

16. 
West Fifth Street and Park Street – traffic from the south shall yield; 

17. 
Paul Street and Second Street – traffic from the east and traffic from the west shall yield; 

18. 
Fourth Street and Rawson Street – traffic from the east and traffic from the west shall yield; 


19. 
Third Street and Bateman Street – traffic from the east and traffic from the west shall yield; 

20. 
Second Street and Bateman Street – traffic from the east and traffic from the west shall yield; 

21. 
15th Street and Lucinda Street – traffic from the north shall yield; 

22. 
14th Street and Lucinda Street – traffic from the south and traffic from the north shall yield; 

23. 
13th Street and Lucinda Street – traffic from the south shall yield; 

24. 
11th Street and Lucinda Street – traffic from the south and traffic from the north shall yield; 

25. 
Tenth Street and Lucinda Street – traffic from the south and traffic from the north shall yield; 

26. 
Ninth Street and Lucinda Street – traffic from the south and traffic from the north shall yield; 

27. 
Seventh Street and Lucinda Street – traffic from the south and traffic from the north shall yield; 

28. 
Fifth Street and Lucinda Street – traffic from the north shall yield; 

29. 
Fourth Street and Lucinda Street – traffic from the south shall yield; 

30. 
Fifth Street and Warford Street – traffic from the north shall yield; 

31. 
Seventh Street and Warford Street – traffic from the south and traffic from the north shall yield; 

32. 
Ninth Street and Warford Street – traffic from the south and traffic from the north shall yield; 

33. 
Tenth Street and Warford Street – traffic from the south and traffic from the north shall yield; 

34. 
11th Street and Warford Street – traffic from the south and traffic from the north shall yield; 

35. 
13th Street and Warford Street – traffic from the south and traffic from the north shall yield; 

36. 
14th Street and Warford Street – traffic from the north shall yield; 

37. 
17th Street and Warford Street – traffic from the south and traffic from the north shall yield; 

38. 
30th Street and Willis Avenue – traffic from the north shall yield; 


CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA -386 ­
39. 
12th Street and Otley Avenue – traffic from the south and traffic from the north shall yield; 

40. 
Fifth Street and Otley Avenue – traffic from the south and traffic from the north shall yield; 

41. 
12th Street and Iowa Street – traffic from the north shall yield; 

42. 
Fifth Street and Iowa Street – traffic from the east shall yield; 

43. 
Grove Street and Pine Street – traffic from the east and traffic from the west shall yield; 

44. 
Second Street and Dewey Avenue – traffic from the east and traffic from the west shall yield; 

45. 
Fifth Street and Pattee Street – traffic from the north shall yield; 

46. 
Sixth Street and Pattee Street – traffic from the south and traffic from the north shall yield; 

47. 
Ann Street and Second Street – traffic from the east and traffic from the west shall yield. 


65.05 SCHOOL STOPS. At the school crossing zones designated by resolution of the Council every driver of a vehicle approaching said zone shall bring the vehicle to a full stop at a point ten (10) feet from the approach side of the crosswalk marked by an authorized school stop sign and thereafter proceed in a careful and prudent manner until the vehicle shall have passed through such school crossing zone. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.249) 
65.06 STOP BEFORE CROSSING SIDEWALK. The driver of a vehicle emerging from a private roadway, alley, driveway, or building shall stop such vehicle immediately prior to driving onto the sidewalk area and thereafter shall proceed into the sidewalk area only when able to do so without danger to pedestrian traffic and shall yield the right-of-way to any vehicular traffic on the street into which the vehicle is entering. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.353) 
65.07 STOP WHEN TRAFFIC IS OBSTRUCTED. Notwithstanding any traffic control signal indication to proceed, no driver shall enter an intersection or a marked crosswalk unless there is sufficient space on the other side of the intersection or crosswalk to accommodate the vehicle. 
65.08 YIELD TO PEDESTRIANS IN CROSSWALKS. Where traffic control signals are not in place or in operation, the driver of a vehicle shall yield the right-of-way, slowing down or stopping, if need be, to yield to a pedestrian crossing the roadway within any marked crosswalk or within any unmarked crosswalk at an intersection. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.327) 
65.09 OFFICIAL TRAFFIC CONTROLS. Every driver shall observe and comply with the directions provided by official traffic control signals at the following intersections: 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.256) 
1. 
Intersection of Willis Avenue and First Street; 

2. 
(REPEALED BY ORDINANCE NO. 780 – JUL. 02 SUPP. 

3. 
(REPEALED BY ORDINANCE NO. 780 – JUL. 02 SUPP. 


[The next page is 401] 
CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA 
-388 ­
CHAPTER 66 
LOAD AND WEIGHT RESTRICTIONS 

66.01 Temporary Embargo 66.04 Load Limits on Bridges 
66.02 Permits for Excess Size and Weight 66.05 Truck Route 
66.03 Load Limits Upon Certain Streets 
66.01 TEMPORARY EMBARGO. If the Council declares an embargo when it appears by reason of deterioration, rain, snow or other climatic conditions that certain streets will be seriously damaged or destroyed by vehicles weighing in excess of an amount specified by the signs, no such vehicles shall be operated on streets so designated by such signs. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.471 & 472) 
66.02 PERMITS FOR EXCESS SIZE AND WEIGHT. The Police Chief may, upon application and good cause being shown therefor, issue a special permit in writing authorizing the applicant to operate or move a vehicle or combination of vehicles of a size or weight or load exceeding the maximum specified by State law or the City over those streets or bridges named in the permit which are under the jurisdiction of the City and for which the City is responsible for maintenance. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.473 & 321E.1) 
66.03 LOAD LIMITS UPON CERTAIN STREETS. When signs are erected giving notice thereof, no person shall operate any vehicle with a gross weight in excess of the amounts specified on such signs at any time upon any of the following streets or parts of streets: 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.473 & 475) 
-NONE ­
66.04 LOAD LIMITS ON BRIDGES. Where it has been determined that any City bridge has a capacity less than the maximum permitted on the streets of the City, or on the street serving the bridge, the Police Chief may cause to be posted and maintained signs on said bridge and at suitable distances ahead of the entrances thereof to warn drivers of such maximum load limits, and no person shall drive a vehicle weighing, loaded or unloaded, upon said bridge in excess of such posted limit. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.471) 
CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA -401 ­
66.05 TRUCK ROUTE. Truck route regulations are established as follows: 
1. 
Truck or Commercial Vehicles Defined. For the purpose of this section a “truck” or “commercial vehicle” means any vehicle rated by the manufacturer as a one and one-half ton or greater capacity and having a box or bed for the purpose of transporting goods or merchandise. 

2. 
Truck Routes Designated. Every truck or commercial vehicle, having no fixed terminal within the City or making no scheduled or definite stops within the City for the purpose of loading or unloading shall travel over or upon the following streets within the City and none other: 


(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.473) 
A. State Highway 141 from east City limits to west City limits; 
B. State Highway 144 from south City limits to north City limits; 
C. Willis Avenue from First Street to west City limits. 
3. Additional Routes for Truck or Commercial Vehicles Weighing Eight (8) Tons or Less. Every truck or commercial vehicle weighing 8 tons or less shall be permitted to travel over or upon the following streets within the City in addition to truck routes designated in Subsection 2 and none other. 
A. Park Street, known as 130th Street in the County, from the east City limits to the west City limits. 
4. Deliveries Off Truck Route. Any truck or commercial vehicle, having a fixed terminal, making a scheduled or definite stop within the City for the purpose of loading or unloading shall proceed over or upon the designated routes set out in this section to the nearest point of its scheduled or definite stop and shall proceed thereto, load or unload and return, by the most direct route to its point of departure from said designated route. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.473) 
5. Employer’s Responsibility. The owner, or any other person, employing or otherwise directing the driver of any vehicle shall not require or knowingly permit the operation of such vehicle upon a street in any manner contrary to this section. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.473) 
CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA 
-402 ­
CHAPTER 67 
PEDESTRIANS 

67.01 Walking in Street 67.03 Pedestrian Crossing 
67.02 Hitchhiking 67.04 Use Sidewalks 
67.01 WALKING IN STREET. Pedestrians shall at all times when walking on or along a street, walk on the left side of the street. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.326) 
67.02 HITCHHIKING. No person shall stand in the traveled portion of a street for the purpose of soliciting a ride from the driver of any private vehicle. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.331) 
67.03 PEDESTRIAN CROSSING. Every pedestrian crossing a roadway at any point other than within a marked crosswalk or within an unmarked crosswalk at an intersection shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles upon the roadway. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.328) 
67.04 USE SIDEWALKS. Where sidewalks are provided it is unlawful for any pedestrian to walk along and upon an adjacent street. 
CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA 
-403 ­
°°°°°°°°°° 

CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA 
-404 ­
CHAPTER 68 
ONE-WAY TRAFFIC 
68.01 ONE-WAY TRAFFIC REQUIRED. Upon the following streets and alleys vehicular traffic, other than permitted cross traffic, shall move only in the indicated direction when appropriate signs are in place. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236 [4]) 
1. 
(REPEALED BY ORDINANCE NO. 781 – JUL. 02 SUPP.) 

2. 
Railroad Street is southbound from Willis Avenue to Otley Avenue. 

3. 
Warford Street is eastbound from Third Street to 18th Street. 

4. 
Lucinda Street is westbound from 18th Street to Third Street. 

5. 
(REPEALED BY ORDINANCE NO. 781 – JUL. 02 SUPP.) 

6. 
Fourth Street is northbound from Willis Avenue to Bateman Street. 

7. 
Fifth Street is southbound from Bateman Street to Willis Avenue. 

8. 
McColl Street is southbound from Willis Avenue to First Avenue. 


CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA 
-405 ­
°°°°°°°°°° 

CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA 
-406 ­
CHAPTER 69 
PARKING REGULATIONS 

69.01 Park Adjacent to Curb 69.09 Loading Zone 
69.02 Park Adjacent to Curb -One-way Street 69.10 All Night Parking Prohibited 
69.03 Angle Parking 69.11 Truck, Tractor and Trailer Parking Limited 
69.04 Angle Parking – Manner 69.12 Parking Time Limits 
69.05 Parking for Certain Purposes Illegal 69.13 Snow Removal 
69.06 Parking Prohibited 69.14 Snow Routes 
69.07 Persons With Disabilities Parking 69.15 Controlled Access Facilities 
69.08 No Parking Zones 69.16 Front Yard Parking Regulations 
69.01 PARK ADJACENT TO CURB. No person shall stand or park a vehicle in a roadway other than parallel with the edge of the roadway headed in the direction of lawful traffic movement and with the right-hand wheels of the vehicle within eighteen (18) inches of the curb or edge of the roadway except as hereinafter provided in the case of angle parking and vehicles parked on the left-hand side of one-way streets. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.361) 
69.02 PARK ADJACENT TO CURB -ONE-WAY STREET. No person shall stand or park a vehicle on the left-hand side of a one-way street other than parallel with the edge of the roadway headed in the direction of lawful traffic movement and with the left-hand wheels of the vehicle within eighteen (18) inches of the curb or edge of the roadway except as hereinafter provided in the case of angle parking. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.361) 
69.03 ANGLE PARKING. Angle or diagonal parking is permitted only in the following locations: 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.361) 
1. 
Railroad Street, on the west side, from Willis Avenue to Evelyn Street; 

2. 
Railroad Street, on the east side, from Willis Avenue to Otley Avenue; 

3. 
Otley Avenue, on the north side, from Second Street to Third Street; 

4. 
Lucinda Street, on the south side, from First Street to Third Street. 


(Ord. 859 – Oct. 07 Supp.) 
5. Warford Street, on the south side, from First Street to Third Street. 
(Ord. 859 – Oct. 07 Supp.) 
69.04 ANGLE PARKING -MANNER. Upon those streets or portions of streets which have been signed or marked for angle parking, no person shall park or stand a vehicle other than at an angle to the curb or edge of the roadway or in the center of the roadway as indicated by such signs and markings. No part of any vehicle, or the load thereon, when parked within a diagonal parking district, shall extend into the roadway more than a distance of sixteen (16) feet when measured at right angles to the adjacent curb or edge of roadway. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.361) 
69.05 PARKING FOR CERTAIN PURPOSES ILLEGAL. No person shall park a vehicle upon public property for more than forty-eight (48) hours or for any of the following principal purposes: 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236 [1]) 
1. 
Sale. Displaying such vehicle for sale; 

2. 
Repairing. For lubricating, repairing or for commercial washing of such vehicle except such repairs as are necessitated by an emergency; 

3. 
Advertising. Displaying advertising; 

4. 
Merchandise Sales. Selling merchandise from such vehicle except in a duly established market place or when so authorized or licensed under this Code of Ordinances. 


69.06 PARKING PROHIBITED. No one shall stop, stand or park a vehicle except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a peace officer or traffic control device, in any of the following places: 
1. Crosswalk. On a crosswalk. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358 [5]) 
2. Center Parkway. On the center parkway or dividing area of any divided street. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236 [1]) 
3. Mailboxes. Within twenty (20) feet on either side of a mailbox which is so placed and so equipped as to permit the depositing of mail from vehicles on the roadway. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236 [1]) 
4. Sidewalks. On or across a sidewalk. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358 [1]) 
5. Driveway. In front of a public or private driveway. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358 [2]) 
CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA 
-408 ­
6. Intersection. Within, or within ten (10) feet of an intersection of any street or alley. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358 [3]) 
7. Fire Hydrant. Within five (5) feet of a fire hydrant. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358 [4]) 
8. Stop Sign or Signal. Within ten (10) feet upon the approach to any flashing beacon, stop or yield sign, or traffic control signal located at the side of a roadway. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358 [6]) 
9. Railroad Crossing. Within fifty (50) feet of the nearest rail of a railroad crossing, except when parked parallel with such rail and not exhibiting a red light. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358 [8]) 
10. Fire Station. Within twenty (20) feet of the driveway entrance to any fire station and on the side of a street opposite the entrance to any fire station within seventy-five (75) feet of said entrance when properly sign posted. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358 [9]) 
11. Excavations. Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when such stopping, standing or parking would obstruct traffic. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358 [10]) 
12. Double Parking. On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge or curb of a street. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358 [11]) 
13. Hazardous Locations. When, because of restricted visibility or when standing or parked vehicles would constitute a hazard to moving traffic, or when other traffic conditions require, the Council may cause curbs to be painted with a yellow color and erect no parking or standing signs. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358 [13]) 
14. Churches, Nursing Homes and Other Buildings. A space of fifty 
(50) feet is hereby reserved at the side of the street in front of any theatre, auditorium, hotel having more than twenty-five (25) sleeping rooms, hospital, nursing home, taxicab stand, bus depot, church, or other building where large assemblages of people are being held, within which space, when clearly marked as such, no motor vehicle shall be left standing, parked or stopped except in taking on or discharging 
CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA 
-409 ­
passengers or freight, and then only for such length of time as is necessary for such purpose.† 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.360) 
15. Alleys. No person shall park a vehicle within an alley in such a manner or under such conditions as to leave available less than ten (10) feet of the width of the roadway for the free movement of vehicular traffic, and no person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle within an alley in such a position as to block the driveway entrance to any abutting property. The provisions of this subsection shall not apply to a vehicle parked in any alley which is eighteen (18) feet wide or less; provided said vehicle is parked to deliver goods or services. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[1]) 
16. Ramps. In front of a curb cut or ramp which is located on public or private property in a manner which blocks access to the curb cut or ramp. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358[15]) 
17. 
Parking or Terrace. Upon the parking or terrace, designated as that area between the curb line and the property line upon street right-of­way. Exceptions to this section must fully comply with Municipal Code Section 135.10. Vehicles parking as an exception hereunder must be perpendicular to the street. (Ord. 772 – Feb. 02 Supp.) 

18. 
In More Than One Space. In any designated parking space so that any part of the vehicle occupies more than one such space or protrudes beyond the markings designating such space. 

19. 
Designated Fire Lanes. Any area, on public or private property, designated as a fire lane by the Fire Chief, or the Chief’s designee, and clearly identified as such by appropriate markings. 


A. Removal of Parked or Unattended Vehicle. Any vehicle parked in violation of this subsection is considered to be a safety hazard. Such vehicles are subject to removal by towing at the direction of the police or fire department. All costs incurred, including towing and storage, are to be paid by the vehicle owner. 
B. Exception. The provisions of this subsection do not apply to authorized emergency vehicles. 
C. Costs. The cost of signs and all markings will be the responsibility of the property owner. Signs and markings will be 
† EDITOR’S NOTE: See also Section 69.09. 
in compliance with the standards identified in the Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices. (Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358[13])
(Ord. 836 – May 06 Supp.) 
69.07 PERSONS WITH DISABILITIES PARKING. The following regulations shall apply to the establishment and use of persons with disabilities parking spaces: 
1. 
Establishment. Persons with disabilities parking spaces shall be established and designated in accordance with Chapter 321L of the Code of Iowa and Iowa Administrative Code, 661-18. No unauthorized person shall establish any on-street persons with disabilities parking space without first obtaining Council approval. 

2. 
Improper Use. The following uses of a persons with disabilities parking space, located on either public or private property, constitute improper use of a persons with disabilities parking permit, which is a violation of this Code of Ordinances: 


(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321L.4[2]) 
A. Use by an operator of a vehicle not displaying a persons with disabilities parking permit; 
B. Use by an operator of a vehicle displaying a persons with disabilities parking permit but not being used by a person issued a permit or being transported in accordance with Section 321L.2[1b] of the Code of Iowa; 
C. Use by a vehicle in violation of the rules adopted under Section 321L.8 of the Code of Iowa. 
3. Wheelchair Parking Cones. No person shall use or interfere with a wheelchair parking cone in violation of the following: 
A. A person issued a persons with disabilities parking permit must comply with the requirements of Section 321L.2A (1) of the Code of Iowa when utilizing a wheelchair parking cone. 
B. A person shall not interfere with a wheelchair parking cone which is properly placed under the provisions of Section 321L.2A 
(1) of the Code of Iowa. 
4. Temporary Persons With Disabilities Parking Spaces. 
A. Temporary persons with disabilities parking will be available for the churches and funeral homes for Saturday and Sunday services and funerals (including visitation). A request shall be made at City Hall twenty-four (24) hours in advance for the use of temporary persons with disabilities parking at churches and funeral homes in the City when the event requires additional persons with disabilities parking. The time that will be allowed for the use of temporary persons with disabilities parking and the placement of signs shall be two (2) hours before the start of the service, funeral or other event. The temporary persons with disabilities parking signs are to be removed two (2) hours after the completion of the service, funeral or other event. 
B. The number of temporary persons with disabilities parking spaces to be allowed shall be limited to three (3). 
C. The signs that are to be used for the marking of temporary persons with disabilities parking spaces must comply with the Americans with Disabilities Act and all three must be uniform in size and weight. These signs must be portable and light enough in weight as not to cause damage to a motor vehicle if struck in the act of parking a motor vehicle. These signs are not to be placed into or onto any type of permanent mount. If parking is diagonal, the sign is to be placed centered on the curb or sidewalk of the parking stall being designated for temporary persons with disabilities parking. The placement of the sign should not impede pedestrian traffic on the sidewalk, but should still be visible to the operators of all motor vehicles if the parking stall is vacant. If parking is parallel the sign is to be placed at the front right of the parking stall on the curb or sidewalk and should not impede pedestrian traffic on the sidewalk but should still be visible to the operators of all motor vehicles if the parking stall is vacant. The temporary persons with disabilities parking signs should only be used in standard permanently marked (white striped) parking stalls. If parking stalls are not marked (white striped), the temporary persons with disabilities parking signs are to be placed in such a manner as to allow adequate spacing for persons with disabilities parking. 
69.08 NO PARKING ZONES. No one shall stop, stand or park a vehicle in any of the following specifically designated no parking zones except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the direction of a peace officer or traffic control signal. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236 [1]) 
1. 
Second Street on the east side from Estella Street to South Street; 

2. 
Third Street on the east side from South Street to Otley Avenue; 


3. 
West Third Street on the east side from Dewey Avenue to Park Street; 

4. 
West Second Street on the east side from Warford Street to Park Street; 

5. 
Park Street on the south side from First Street to the west City limits; (Ord. 874 – May 08 Supp.) 

6. 
Dewey Avenue on the north side from First Street to West Fifth Street; 

7. 
Rawson Street on the north side from First Street to West Fourth Street; 

8. 
Rawson Street on the south side from First Street to Second Street; 

9. 
Rawson Street on the south side from Third Street to Fourth Street; 

10. 
Second Street on the east side from Bateman Street to Paul Street; 

11. 
Second Street on the west side from Paul Street to Park Street; 

12. 
Park Street on the south side from Fourth Street to Sixth Street; 

13. 
Third Street on the east side from Paul Street to Rawson Street; 

14. 
Fourth Street on the west side from Rawson Street to Park Street; 

15. 
Fifth Street on the east side from Park Street to Lucinda Street; 

16. 
Sixth Street on the west side from Bateman Street to Paul Street; 

17. 
Park Street on the north side from Fifth Street to Sixth Street; 

18. 
North Street on the north side from West Third Street to alley (1300 block); 

19. 
Bateman Street on the north and south sides from First Street to Second Street; 

20. 
Willis Avenue on the north and south sides from West Tenth Street to First Street; 

21. 
West Ninth Street on the east side from alley to Warford Street; 

22. 
West Fifth Street on the west side from Willis Avenue to Pattee Park Road; 

23. 
Pattee Park Road on the north and south sides from West Fifth Street to West Third Street; 


CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA 
-413 ­
24. 
West Third Street on the east and west sides from Willis Avenue to Pattee Park Road; 

25. 
West Second Street on the west side from alley to Otley Avenue; 

26. 
Otley Avenue on the south side from West Third Street to Second Street; 

27. 
Pattee Street on the south side from First Street to West Second Street; 

28. 
Lucinda Street on the south side from First Street to West Second Street; 

29. 
Warford Street on the north and south sides from alley to West Second Street; 

30. 
Second Street on the east side from Estella Street to South Street; 

31. 
Third Street on the west side from Bateman Street to Pattee Street; 

32. 
Evelyn Street on the north side from Third Street to Eighth Street; 

33. 
First Street on the east and west sides from Warford Street to Lucinda Street; 

34. 
Second Street on the east side from South Street to Estella Street; 

35. 
West Fifth Street on the west side from Willis Avenue to Elm Street; 

36. 
West Second Street on the east side from Warford Street to Park Street; 

37. 
Park Street on the north side from First Street 178 feet west to the alleyway between 1st Street and West 2nd Street; 


(Ord. 874 – May 08 Supp.) 
38. 
First Street on the east and west sides from Pattee Street to north City limits; 

39. 
First Street on the east and west sides from Willis Avenue to South By-pass; 

40. 
Otley Avenue on the south side from First Street to West Third Street; 

41. 
Warford Street on the north side from alley between Fifth and Sixth Streets to 18th Street; (Ord. 814 – Apr. 04 Supp.) 

42. 
Warford Street on the south side from 18th Street east to the Armory; 


CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA -414 ­
43. 
Lucinda Street on the north side from Fourth Street to 18th Street; 

44. 
Pattee Street on the south side from Third Street to Sixth Street; 

45. 
Bateman Street on the south side from Fifth Street to Sixth Street; 

46. 
Bateman Street on the north side from Second Street to Third Street; 

47. 
Rawson Street on the north and south sides from First Street to Fourth Street; 

48. 
Rawson Street on the north side from Fourth Street to Fifth Street; 

49. 
Park Street on the south side from Fourth Street to Sixth Street; 

50. 
Park Street on the north side from Fifth Street to Sixth Street; 

51. 
Otley Avenue on the north and south sides from First Street to Second Street; 

52. 
Otley Avenue on the north side from Tenth Street to School Drive between the hours of 10:00 a.m. to 12:00 midnight; 

53. 
Evelyn Street on the north side from Third Street to Fourth Street; 

54. 
Evelyn Street on the north side from Fourth Street to Tenth Street; 

55. 
Estella Street on the north side from First Street to Twelfth Street; 

56. 
Fourth Street on the west side from Willis Avenue to Warford Street; 

57. 
Fourth Street on the west side from Pattee Street to Park Street; 

58. 
Fifth Street on the east side from Willis Avenue to Warford Street; 

59. 
Fifth Street on the east side from Lucinda Street to Park Street; 

60. 
Fifth Street on the east and west sides from Otley Avenue to Evelyn Street; 

61. 
Sixth Street on the west side from alley south of Otley Avenue to Evelyn Street; 

62. 
Fifth Street on the east side from Pine Street to Iowa Street; 

63. 
Sixth Street on the west side from Willis Avenue to Paul Street; 

64. 
Seventh Street on the east side from Pattee Street to Bateman Street; 

65. 
Seventh Street on the west side from Willis Avenue to Warford Street; 


CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA -415 ­
66. 
Seventh Street on the east and west sides from Willis Avenue to Otley Avenue; 

67. 
Seventh Street on the west side from Otley Avenue to Evelyn Street; 

68. 
Eighth Street on the east side from Willis Avenue to Pattee Street; 

69. 
Tenth Street on the east and west sides from Willis Avenue to By-Pass 141; 

70. 
15th Street on the west side from Willis Avenue to Iowa Street; 

71. 
16th Street on the east side from Willis Avenue to Otley Avenue; 

72. 
17th Street on the west side from Willis Avenue to Lucinda Street; 

73. 
18th Street on the east and west sides from Willis Avenue to McKinley Street; 

74. 
Seventh Street on the east side from Pattee Street to Lucinda Street; 

75. 
30th Street on the west side; 

76. 
31st Street on the east side; 

77. 
Highview Drive on the east side; 

78. 
South Tenth Street on the east side; 

79. 
Summer Meadow Drive on the south side; 

80. 
McKinley Street on the north side from 14th Street to 16th Street; 

81. 
Pattee Street on both sides from Third Street to Fifth Street, except on Sunday, when parking is permitted; 

82. 
West Fifth Street on the west side from Dewey Avenue to North Street; 

83. 
North Street on both sides from First Street to West Fifth Street; 

84. 
Eighth Street on the west side from Willis Avenue to Iowa Highway 141; 

85. 
West Sixth Street on the east side south of Willis Avenue; 

86. 
Pine Street on the south side from Fifth Street to Eighth Street; 

87. 
Ninth Street on the west side from Willis Avenue to Pattee Street; 

88. 
Eastern Avenue on the north side; 

89. 
Lucinda Street on the north side from the western edge of the Lucinda Street entrance to the Brenton National Bank parking lot to First Street; 


CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA -416 ­
90. 
Sugar Creek Drive on the east side; 

91. 
Estella Street on the south side from First Street to Second Street; 

92. 
Center Street on the south side from First Street to Second Street; 

93. 
McColl Street on the east side from Willis Avenue to First Street, except for the purpose of loading or unloading vehicles; 

94. 
Pattee Street on both sides from Eighth Street to 11th Street; 

95. 
11th Street on the west side from the corner of Record, McKinley and Pattee Streets to Lucinda Street; 

96. 
Pattee Street on the south side from Sixth Street to Eighth Street, except that from Seventh Street west to the alley is hereby designated a loading zone; 

97. 
Taft Street on the north side between 16th Street and 17th Street; 

98. 
West Fourth Street on the east side between Bateman Street and Paul Street; 

99. 
Evelyn Street on the north side between 12th Street and Tenth Street; 

100. 
West Fourth Street on the west side from Willis Avenue to Warford Street, between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. on weekdays; 

101. 
16th Street on the west side from Willis Avenue to Iowa Street; 

102. 
Seventh Street on the east side from Willis Avenue to Lucinda Street; 

103. 
West Fourth Street on the west side from Park Street to Paul Street; 

104. 
West Fourth Street on the east side from Park Street for 100 feet; 

105. 
16th Street on the east side from Otley Avenue to Iowa Street; 

106. 
Fifth Street on the east side from Evelyn Street to Iowa Street; 

107. 
14th Street on the east side from Willis Avenue to Otley Avenue; 

108. 
Alley in Block 10 of the Original Town of City of Perry, Iowa; 

109. 
North Street on both sides for 50 feet east from First Street; 

110. 
Fourth Street on the west side from Lucinda Street to Pattee Street except parking shall be allowed on Sundays and holidays; 

111. 
South Street on the north side from First Street to Third Street; 

112. 
Tenth Street on the west side from Willis Avenue to Pattee Street; 


CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA -417 ­
(Ord. 868 – Dec. 07 Supp.) 
113. 
Eighth Street on the west side from Iowa Highway 141 to Southgate Drive; 

114. 
Paul Street on the north side between First Street and Third Street; 

115. 
Eighth Street on the east side between Bateman Street and Dewey Avenue between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m.; 

116. 
Dewey Avenue on the south side between Eighth Street and Winter Street including the school drop-off areas, between the hours of 


8:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. when school is in session; 
117. 
Dewey Avenue on the north side from Eighth Street to Winter Street between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. when school is in session; 

118. 
Eighth Street on the east side from Otley Avenue to Willis Avenue, between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. on weekdays when school is in session; 

119. 
Eighth Street on the west side from Willis Avenue to Pattee Street, between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. on weekdays when school is in session; 

120. 
Summer Street on the west side from Dewey Avenue to North Street; 

121. 
Vine Street on the west side from Dewey Avenue to North Street; 

122. 
Third Street on the east side between Willis Avenue and Warford Street (one parking place directly in front of the west doors of the First United Methodist Church); 

123. 
Seventh Street on the west side from Southgate Drive to the cul­de-sac south of Highway 141; 

124. 
Willis Avenue on the south side from First Street to Second Street; 

125. 
North Street on the south side from West Fifth Street to and including the entrance to the parking lot of Cecil Perkins Park; 

126. 
Fifth Street on the east side from Warford Street to Lucinda Street; 

127. 
Warford Street on the north side (the first parking space east of Second Street is for taxi cab parking only); 

128. 
Bateman Street on the north and south sides from Fourth Street to Fifth Street; 


CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA 
-418 ­
129. 
Rawson Street on the south side from First Street to West Second Street; 

130. 
Second Street on the west side from Bateman Street north 75 feet; 

131. 
Rawson Street on the north side from Fifth Street east 80 feet; 

132. 
Bateman Street on the south side from Third Street west 85 feet; 

133. 
Bateman Street on the south side from Fourth Street west 80 feet; 

134. 
Warford Street on the north side from 18th Street to the Perry 

High School circle drive. (Ord. 774 – Feb. 02 Supp.) 

135. 
West Fourth Street on the west side north of North Street from the stop sign for thirty (30) feet. (Ord. 807 – Jan. 04 Supp.) 

136. 
Clear View Drive on the west side from Pine Street to the cul-de­sac. (Ord. 816 – Jun. 04 Supp.) 

137. 
Southgate Street on the south side from just east of Tenth Street to Seventh Street on the west. (Ord. 869 – Dec. 07 Supp.) 

138. 
McKinley Street from 18th Street to the East Perry City limits on the north and south sides of McKinley. (Ord. 873 – May 08 Supp.) 

139. 
16th Street from Willis Avenue to Warford Street on the east and west sides of 16th Street. (Ord. 881 – Jan. 10 Supp.) 


69.09 LOADING ZONES. 
1. 
In compliance with Section 321.360 of the Code of Iowa, the Council grants a loading zone to the First Christian Church, 1224 Lucinda Street, in the City. Such loading zone will be painted on the side of the street by the City. The First Christian Church is responsible for paying the City for the proper signage required to enforce this section. 

2. 
In compliance with Section 321.360 of the Code of Iowa, the City grants a loading zone to the business located at 1223 Otley Avenue. This loading zone will be designated by a yellow curb and appropriate signage. This loading zone shall be located on the west side of Third Street extending south from the south side of the sidewalk at the intersection of Third Street and Otley Avenue for a distance of fifty (50) feet. The business located at 1223 Otley Avenue is responsible for paying the City for the proper signage required to enforce this section.


(Ord. 766 – Mar. 01 Supp.) 
69.10 ALL NIGHT PARKING PROHIBITED. No person, except physicians or other persons on emergency calls, shall park a vehicle on any of the following named streets for a period of time longer than thirty (30) minutes between the hours of two o’clock (2:00) a.m. and six o’clock (6:00) a.m. of any day. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236 [1]) 
1. 
Willis Avenue on both sides from First Street to Third Street; 

2. 
Warford Street on both sides from First Street to Third Street; 

3. 
Lucinda Street on both sides from First Street to Third Street; 

4. 
Pattee Street on both sides from First Street to Third Street; 

5. 
Otley Avenue on both sides from Second Street to Third Street; 

6. 
Second Street on both sides from Cornwall Street to Bateman Street; 

7. 
Third Street on both sides from Lucinda Street to Otley Avenue; 

8. 
Railroad Street on both sides from Willis Avenue to Otley Avenue. 


69.11 TRUCK, TRACTOR AND TRAILER PARKING LIMITED. No person shall park a farm tractor, road tractor, truck tractor, trailer, trailer coach, farm machinery, implement of husbandry, motor truck, semi-trailer, or other motor vehicle with trailer attached in any public parking lot or on any street excepting only when such vehicles are actually engaged in the delivery or receiving of merchandise or cargo. When actually receiving or delivering merchandise or cargo, such vehicle shall be stopped or parked in a manner which will not interfere with other traffic. The provisions of this section do not apply to pickup, light delivery or panel delivery trucks. 
69.12 PARKING TIME LIMITS. 
1. Two Hours. It is unlawful to park any vehicle for a continuous period of more than two (2) hours between the hours of eight o’clock 
(8:00) a.m. and six o’clock (6:00) p.m. on each weekday including Saturday, upon the following designated streets: 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236 [1]) 
A. Second Street from Otley Avenue to Bateman Street, on the east and west sides; 
B. Warford Street from First Street to Third Street, on the north and south sides; 
C. Lucinda Street from First Street to Third Street, on the north and south sides; 
D. Pattee Street from First Street to Third Street, on the south side; 
E. Third Street from Lucinda Street to Willis Avenue, on the east and west sides; 
F. Railroad Street from Willis Avenue to Otley Avenue, on the east and west sides; 
G. Willis Avenue on the north side from First Street to Third Street and on the south side from Second Street to Third Street. 
2. Three Hours. It is unlawful to park any vehicle for a continuous period of more than three (3) hours between the hours of eight o’clock 
(8:00) a.m. and six o’clock (6:00) p.m. on each weekday, including Saturday, on the municipal parking lot located at the northeast corner of First Street and Warford Street. 
3. 
Twenty-four Hours. It is unlawful to park any vehicle for a continuous period of more than twenty-four (24) hours on the municipal parking lot located on the South Half (S½) of Lots 12 and 13 in Block 33 of the Original Town. 

4. 
Forty-eight Hours. It is unlawful to park any vehicle for a continuous period of more than forty-eight (48) hours upon the following described premises: 

A. The municipal parking lot located at the northwest corner of the intersection of Willis Avenue and First Avenue in Block 34 of the Original Town; 
B. The municipal parking lot located adjacent to the United States Post Office on the West Half (W½) of Block 63 of the Original Town; 
C. Any City street. (Ord. 790 – Apr. 03 Supp.) 

5. 
Fifteen Minutes. It is unlawful to park any vehicle for a continuous period of more than fifteen (15) minutes upon the following described premises: 


A. The south side of Lucinda Street between Second Street and Third Street, in the fourth parking space from the southeast corner of Second Street and Lucinda Street; 
B. The west side of Railroad Street between Willis Avenue and Otley Street, in the third parking space from the northwest corner of Willis Avenue and Otley Streets. This space is reserved as parking for library book drop-off only. 
(Ord. 779 – Jul. 02 Supp.) 
6. Thirty Minutes. It is unlawful to park any vehicle for a continuous period of more than thirty (30) minutes between the hours of 
7:30 a.m. and 4:30 p.m. on Mondays through Fridays upon the following described premises: 
CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA 
-421 ­
A. The west side of the Security Bank Building, 1102 Willis Avenue, in the five stalls from the northeast corner of First Street and Willis Avenue. 
(Ord. 876 – Mar. 09 Supp.) 
69.13 SNOW REMOVAL. No person shall park, abandon or leave unattended any vehicle on any public street, alley, or City-owned off-street parking area during a snow emergency unless the snow has been removed or plowed from such street, alley or parking area and the snow has ceased to fall. A snow emergency shall be defined as any accumulation of snow in the amount of one-half inch, or any amount in excess thereof. A snow emergency-parking ban shall continue from its inception through the duration of the snow or ice storm and the forty-eight (48) hour time period after cessation of the storm except as above provided upon streets, which have been fully opened.
(Ord. 870 – Jan. 08 Supp.) 
69.14 SNOW ROUTES. The Council may designate certain streets in the City as snow routes. When conditions of snow or ice exist on the traffic surface of a designated snow route, it is unlawful for the driver of a vehicle to impede or block traffic. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[12]) 
69.15 CONTROLLED ACCESS FACILITIES. Parking restrictions on controlled access facilities are as specified in Chapter 140 of this Code of Ordinances. 
69.16 FRONT YARD PARKING REGULATIONS. It shall be unlawful for any person, corporation or legal entity to park a motor vehicle or vehicle in the front yard of any residential lot unless the motor vehicle or vehicle is parked completely upon a driveway, driveway extension or combination thereof, or in a permanent roofed enclosure. However, this provision shall not apply to motor vehicles or vehicles being used to move, deliver or take articles to and from a yard, building or structure located thereon, or used in connection with providing a temporary service thereon, for a reasonable amount of time while in the active process of said use. (Ord. 773 – Feb. 02 Supp.) 
[The next page is 451] 
CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA 
-422 ­
CHAPTER 70 
TRAFFIC CODE ENFORCEMENT PROCEDURES 
70.01 Arrest or Citation 70.04 Parking Violations: Vehicle Unattended 
70.02 Scheduled Violations 70.05 Presumption in Reference to Illegal Parking 
70.03 Parking Violations: Alternate 70.06 Impounding Vehicles 
70.01 ARREST OR CITATION. Whenever a peace officer has reasonable cause to believe that a person has violated any provision of the Traffic Code, such officer may: 
1. 
Immediate Arrest. Immediately arrest such person and take such person before a local magistrate, or 

2. 
Issue Citation. Without arresting the person, prepare in quintuplicate a combined traffic citation and complaint as adopted by the Iowa Commissioner of Public Safety, or issue a uniform citation and complaint utilizing a State-approved computerized device. 


(Code of Iowa, Sec. 805.6 & 321.485) 
70.02 SCHEDULED VIOLATIONS. For violations of the Traffic Code which are designated by Section 805.8 of the Code of Iowa to be scheduled violations, the scheduled fine for each of those violations shall be as specified in Section 805.8 of the Code of Iowa. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 805. &, 805.8) 
70.03 PARKING VIOLATIONS: ALTERNATE. Admitted violations of parking restrictions imposed by this Code of Ordinances in Chapter 69 may be charged upon a simple notice of a fine payable by cash, check or money order and mailed to the Perry Police Department or placed in the designated drop box at the Perry Police Department. The simple notice of a fine shall be in the amount of fifteen dollars ($15.00) for all violations except Snow Removal and Snow Route parking violations (Sections 69.13 and 69.14), which shall be in the amount of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) or fifty dollars ($50.00) for a second or subsequent violation occurring within twenty-four (24) months. Violations of Persons with Disabilities Parking (Section 69.07) shall be one hundred dollars ($100.00). 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236 [1a] & 321L.4[2]) 
1. Fine for Nonpayment. If such fines for violations under Chapter 69 are not paid within thirty (30) days, they shall be increased by five dollars ($5.00) except for violations under Section 69.07, Persons with Disabilities Parking shall remain as one hundred dollars ($100.00). 
Failure to pay the simple fine shall be grounds for the filing of a complaint in District Court. 
2. 
Contesting Simple Fine. Persons wishing to contest the simple fine may do so by appearing in person in the office of the Perry Police Department no more than ten (10) calendar days after the date of issuance of the simple fine, between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. Monday through Friday excepting holidays. 

3. 
Contesting Simple Fine Procedure. Persons wishing to contest the simple fine will do so in writing on forms provided by the Police Department during the above stated times. At the time of filing of the contest, a date and time of court appearance will be established and notice thereof provided to the person contesting the citation. The person contesting the simple fine will be required to post an unsecured appearance bond in the amount specified pursuant to Section 805.6(1) of the Code of Iowa providing for the setting of unsecured appearance bonds of a scheduled fine. The department shall then file a complaint with the office of the Clerk of Dallas County District Court. 


(Ord. 878 – Mar. 09 Supp.) 
70.04 PARKING VIOLATIONS: VEHICLE UNATTENDED. When a vehicle is parked in violation of any provision of the Traffic Code, and the driver is not present, the notice of fine or citation as herein provided shall be attached to the vehicle in a conspicuous place. 
70.05 PRESUMPTION IN REFERENCE TO ILLEGAL PARKING. In any proceeding charging a standing or parking violation, a prima facie presumption that the registered owner was the person who parked or placed such vehicle at the point where, and for the time during which, such violation occurred, shall be raised by proof that: 
1. 
Described Vehicle. The particular vehicle described in the information was parked in violation of the Traffic Code, and 

2. 
Registered Owner. The defendant named in the information was the registered owner at the time in question. 


70.06 IMPOUNDING VEHICLES. A peace officer is hereby authorized to remove, or cause to be removed, a vehicle from a street, public alley, public parking lot or highway to the nearest garage or other place of safety, or to a garage designated or maintained by the City, under the circumstances hereinafter enumerated: 
1. Disabled Vehicle. When a vehicle is so disabled as to constitute an obstruction to traffic and the person or persons in charge of the vehicle are by reason of physical injury incapacitated to such an extent as to be unable to provide for its custody or removal. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236 [1]) 
2. Illegally Parked Vehicle. When any vehicle is left unattended and is so illegally parked as to constitute a definite hazard or obstruction to the normal movement of traffic. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236 [1]) 
3. 
Snow Removal. When any vehicle is left parked in violation of a ban on parking during snow removal operations. 

4. 
Parked Over Forty-eight Hour Period. When any vehicle is left parked for a continuous period of forty-eight (48) hours or more. If the owner is found, the owner shall be given an opportunity to remove the vehicle. 


(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236 [1]) 
5. Costs. In addition to the standard penalties provided, the owner or driver of any vehicle impounded for the violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall be required to pay the reasonable cost of towing and storage. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236 [1]) 
CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA 
-453 ­[The next page is 461] 
CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA 
-454 ­
CHAPTER 75 
ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLES AND SNOWMOBILES 
75.01 Purpose 75.05 Operation of All-Terrain Vehicles 
75.02 Definitions 75.06 Hours of Operation 
75.03 General Regulations 75.07 Negligence 
75.04 Operation of Snowmobiles 75.08 Accident Reports 
75.01 PURPOSE. The purpose of this chapter is to regulate the operation of all-terrain vehicles and snowmobiles within the City. 
75.02 DEFINITIONS. For use in this chapter the following terms are defined: 
1. “All-terrain vehicle” or “ATV” means a motorized flotation-tire vehicle with not less than three (3) low pressure tires, but not more than six (6) low pressure tires, or a two-wheeled, off-road motorcycle, that is limited in engine displacement to less than eight hundred (800) cubic centimeters and in total dry weight to less than eight hundred fifty (850) pounds and that has a seat or saddle designed to be straddled by the operator and handlebars for steering control. Two-wheeled, off-road motorcycles shall be considered all-terrain vehicles only for the purpose of titling and registration. An operator of a two-wheeled, off-road motorcycle is exempt from the safety instruction and certification program requirements of Section 321I.24 and 321I.25 of the Code of Iowa. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321I.1[1]) 
2. “Snowmobile” means a motorized vehicle weighing less than one thousand (1,000) pounds which uses sled-type runners or skis, endless belt-type tread, or any combination of runners, skis or tread, and is designed for travel on snow or ice. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321G.1 [18]) 
75.03 GENERAL REGULATIONS. No person shall operate an ATV within the City in violation of Chapter 321I of the Code of Iowa or a snowmobile within the City in violation of the provisions of Chapter 321G of the Code of Iowa or in violation of rules established by the Natural Resource Commission of the Department of Natural Resources governing their registration, numbering, equipment and manner of operation. 
(Code of Iowa, Ch. 321G & Ch. 321I) 
CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA 
-461 ­
75.04 OPERATION OF SNOWMOBILES. The operators of snowmobiles shall comply with the following restrictions as to where snowmobiles may be operated within the City: 
1. Streets. Snowmobiles shall be operated only upon streets which have not been plowed during the snow season and on such other streets as may be designated by resolution of the Council. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321G.9[4a]) 
2. Exceptions. Snowmobiles may be operated on prohibited streets only under the following circumstances: 
A. Emergencies. Snowmobiles may be operated on any street in an emergency during the period of time when and at locations where snow upon the roadway renders travel by conventional motor vehicles impractical. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321G.9[4c]) 
B. Direct Crossing. Snowmobiles may make a direct crossing of a prohibited street provided all of the following occur: 
(1) 
The crossing is made at an angle of approximately ninety degrees (90°) to the direction of the street and at a place where no obstruction prevents a quick and safe crossing; 

(2) 
The snowmobile is brought to a complete stop before crossing the street; 

(3) 
The driver yields the right-of-way to all on-coming traffic which constitutes an immediate hazard; and 

(4) 
In crossing a divided street, the crossing is made only at an intersection of such street with another street. 


(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321G.9[2]) 
3. Railroad Right-of-way. Snowmobiles shall not be operated on an operating railroad right-of-way. A snowmobile may be driven directly across a railroad right-of-way only at an established crossing and notwithstanding any other provisions of law may, if necessary, use the improved portion of the established crossing after yielding to all oncoming traffic. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321G.13[1h]) 
4. Trails. Snowmobiles shall not be operated on all-terrain vehicle trails except where so designated. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321G.9[4 g]) 
CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA 
-462 ­
5. 
Parks and Other City Land. Snowmobiles shall not be operated in any park, playground or upon any other City-owned property without the express permission of the City. A snowmobile shall not be operated on any City land without a snow cover of at least one-tenth of one inch. 

6. 
Sidewalk or Parking. Snowmobiles shall not be operated upon the public sidewalk or that portion of the street located between the curb line and the sidewalk or property line commonly referred to as the “parking” except for purposes of crossing the same to a public street upon which operation is authorized by this chapter. 


75.05 OPERATION OF ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLES. The operators of ATVs shall comply with the following restrictions as to where ATVs may be operated within the City: 
1. Streets. ATVs may be operated on streets only in accordance with Section 321.234A of the Code of Iowa or on such streets as may be designated by resolution of the Council for the sport of driving ATVs. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321I.10[1& 2A]) 
2. Trails. ATVs shall not be operated on snowmobile trails except where designated. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321I.10[3]) 
3. Railroad Right-of-way. ATVs shall not be operated on an operating railroad right-of-way. An ATV may be driven directly across a railroad right-of-way only at an established crossing and notwithstanding any other provisions of law may, if necessary, use the improved portion of the established crossing after yielding to all oncoming traffic. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321I.14[h]) 
4. 
Parks and Other City Land. ATVs shall not be operated in any park, playground or upon any other City-owned property without the express permission of the City. 

5. 
Sidewalk or Parking. ATVs shall not be operated upon the public sidewalk or that portion of the street located between the curb line and the sidewalk or property line commonly referred to as the “parking.” 


75.06 HOURS OF OPERATION. No ATV or snowmobile shall be operated in the City closer than fifty (50) feet to any dwelling or building which is usually occupied by one or more persons between the hours of eleven o’clock 
(11:00) p.m. and seven o’clock (7:00) a.m. except for emergency situations or for loading and unloading from a transport trailer. 
CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA 
-463 ­
75.07 NEGLIGENCE. The owner and operator of an ATV or snowmobile are liable for any injury or damage occasioned by the negligent operation of the ATV or snowmobile. The owner of an ATV or snowmobile shall be liable for any such injury or damage only if the owner was the operator of the ATV or snowmobile at the time the injury or damage occurred or if the operator had the owner’s consent to operate the ATV or snowmobile at the time the injury or damage occurred. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321G.18 & 321I.19) 
75.08 ACCIDENT REPORTS. Whenever an ATV or snowmobile is involved in an accident resulting in injury or death to anyone or property damage amounting to one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or more, either the operator or someone acting for the operator shall immediately notify a law enforcement officer and shall file an accident report, in accordance with State law. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321G.10 & 321I.11) 
(Ch. 75 – Ord. 825 – Oct. 04 Supp.) 
CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA 
-464 ­
CHAPTER 76 
BICYCLE, SKATEBOARD AND 
IN-LINE SKATES REGULATIONS 

76.01 Scope of Regulations 76.11 Improper Riding 
76.02 Traffic Code Applies 76.12 Parking 
76.03 Double Riding Restricted 76.13 Equipment Requirements 
76.04 Two Abreast Limit 76.14 License Required 
76.05 Bicycle Paths 76.15 Application for License 
76.06 Speed 76.16 Duration and Renewal of License 
76.07 Emerging from Alley or Driveway 76.17 Registration of Ownership 
76.08 Carrying Articles 76.18 Transfer of Ownership 
76.09 Riding on Sidewalks 76.19 Penalties 
76.10 Towing 
76.01 SCOPE OF REGULATIONS. These regulations shall apply whenever a bicycle is operated upon any street or upon any public path set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles, subject to those exceptions stated herein. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236 [10]) 
76.02 TRAFFIC CODE APPLIES. Every person riding a bicycle or using a skateboard or in-line skates upon a roadway shall be granted all of the rights and shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to the driver of a vehicle by the laws of the State declaring rules of the road applicable to vehicles or by the traffic code of the City applicable to the driver of a vehicle, except as to those provisions which by their nature can have no application. Whenever such person dismounts from a bicycle or stops using the skateboard or in-line skates, the person shall be subject to all regulations applicable to pedestrians. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.234) 
76.03 DOUBLE RIDING RESTRICTED. A person propelling a bicycle shall not ride other than astride a permanent and regular seat attached thereto. No bicycle shall be used to carry more persons at one time than the number for which it is designed and equipped. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.234 [3 and 4]) 
76.04 TWO ABREAST LIMIT. Persons riding bicycles upon a roadway shall not ride more than two (2) abreast except on paths or parts of roadways set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles. All bicycles ridden on the roadway shall be kept to the right and shall be operated as near as practicable to the right-hand edge of the roadway. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236 [10]) 
CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA 
-465 ­
76.05 BICYCLE PATHS. Whenever a usable path for bicycles has been provided adjacent to a roadway, bicycle riders shall use such path and shall not use the roadway. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236 [10]) 
76.06 SPEED. No person shall operate a bicycle, skateboard or in-line skates at a speed greater than is reasonable and prudent under the conditions then existing. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236 [10]) 
76.07 EMERGING FROM ALLEY OR DRIVEWAY. The operator of a bicycle, skateboard or in-line skates emerging from an alley, driveway or building shall, upon approaching a sidewalk or the sidewalk area extending across any alleyway, yield the right-of-way to all pedestrians approaching on said sidewalk or sidewalk area, and upon entering the roadway shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles approaching on said roadway. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236 [10]) 
76.08 CARRYING ARTICLES. No person operating a bicycle shall carry any package, bundle or article which prevents the rider from keeping at least one hand upon the handle bars. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236 [10]) 
76.09 RIDING ON SIDEWALKS. The following shall apply to riding bicycles, skateboards or in-line skates on sidewalks: 
1. Business District. No person shall ride a bicycle, skateboard or in-line skates upon a sidewalk within the Business District, as defined in Section 60.02(1) of this Code of Ordinances. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236 [10]) 
2. Other Locations. When signs are erected on any sidewalk or roadway prohibiting the riding of bicycles, skateboards or in-line skates thereon by any person, no person shall disobey the signs. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236 [10]) 
3. Yield Right-of-way. Whenever any person is riding a bicycle, skateboard or in-line skates upon a sidewalk, such person shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian and shall give audible signal before overtaking and passing. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236 [10]) 
76.10 TOWING. It is unlawful for any person riding a bicycle, skateboard or in-line skates to be towed or to tow any other vehicle upon the streets of the City. 
76.11 IMPROPER RIDING. No person shall ride a bicycle, skateboard or in-line skates in an irregular or reckless manner such as zigzagging, stunting, speeding or otherwise so as to disregard the safety of the operator or others. 
76.12 PARKING. No person shall park a bicycle upon a street other than upon the roadway against the curb or upon the sidewalk in a rack to support the bicycle or against a building or at the curb, in such a manner as to afford the least obstruction to pedestrian traffic. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236 [10]) 
76.13 EQUIPMENT REQUIREMENTS. Every person riding a bicycle shall be responsible for providing and using equipment as provided herein: 
1. Lamps Required. Every bicycle when in use at nighttime shall be equipped with a lamp on the front which shall emit a white light visible from a distance of at least three hundred (300) feet to the front and with a lamp on the rear exhibiting a red light visible from a distance of three hundred (300) feet to the rear except that a red reflector on the rear, of a type which shall be visible from all distances from fifty (50) feet to three hundred (300) feet to the rear when directly in front of lawful upper beams of headlamps on a motor vehicle, may be used in lieu of a rear light. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.397) 
2. Brakes Required. Every bicycle shall be equipped with a brake which will enable the operator to make the braked wheel skid on dry, level, clean pavement. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236 [10]) 
76.14 LICENSE REQUIRED. No person shall ride or propel a bicycle on any street, sidewalk or upon any public path set apart for the use of bicycles unless such bicycle is licensed by the City and there is affixed to said bicycle such tag, sticker, plate or other device as may be issued by the City as evidence of license. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236 [10]) 
76.15 APPLICATION FOR LICENSE. Application for a bicycle license shall be made to the Police Department on forms and in a manner prescribed by that department. There shall be a fee for licensing or registration of bicycles. Such fee shall be set by resolution of the Council from time to time as deemed necessary. 
76.16 DURATION AND RENEWAL OF LICENSE. The bicycle license shall expire on July 31 five (5) years after the year of issuance or renewal. 
There shall be a sixty (60) day grace period for the renewal of expired bicycle licenses, said grace period to be the sixty (60) days between July 31 and September 30 of the year in which a bicycle license expires. 
76.17 REGISTRATION OF OWNERSHIP. All applications for a bicycle license shall be made in the name of the owner of the bicycle to be licensed, and the Police Department shall require reasonable proof of ownership by the applicant. The Police Department shall cause to be kept a record of the serial number of each license issued, the date it was issued, the name and address of the owner of the bicycle licensed, the manufacturer serial number on the frame of the bicycle licensed, and any other pertinent information deemed appropriate by the Police Department. 
76.18 TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP. Whenever there shall be a change in the ownership of a bicycle for which ownership has been registered pursuant to this chapter, the new owner shall, within ten (10) days of transfer, show proof of ownership to the Police Department so that the official registration may be changed accordingly. 
76.19 PENALTIES. Any person violating the provisions of this chapter may be subject to impounding of that person’s bicycle, skateboard or in-line skates by the Police Department, an administrative processing fee, and any applicable fines that pertain to this chapter. The length of impoundment shall be not less than five (5) days for the first offense, ten (10) days for a second offense, and thirty (30) days for each additional offense thereafter. Fines and fees shall be set by resolution of the Council from time to time as deemed necessary. 
[The next page is 475] 
CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA 
-468 ­
CHAPTER 80 
ABANDONED VEHICLES 

80.01 Definitions 80.06 Fees for Impoundment 
80.02 Authority to Take Possession of Abandoned Vehicles 80.07 Disposal of Abandoned Vehicles 
80.03 Notice by Mail 80.08 Disposal of Totally Inoperable Vehicles 
80.04 Notification in Newspaper 80.09 Proceeds from Sales 
80.05 Extension of Time 80.10 Duties of Demolisher 
80.01 DEFINITIONS. For use in this chapter the following terms are defined: 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.89[1]) 
1. “Abandoned vehicle” means any of the following: 
A. A vehicle that has been left unattended on public property for more than twenty-four (24) hours and lacks current registration plates or two (2) or more wheels or other parts which renders the vehicle totally inoperable. 
B. A vehicle that has remained illegally on public property for more than twenty-four (24) hours. 
C. A vehicle that has been unlawfully parked or placed on private property without the consent of the owner or person in control of the property for more than twenty-four (24) hours. 
D. A vehicle that has been legally impounded by order of a police authority and has not been reclaimed for a period of ten 
(10) 
days. However, a police authority may declare the vehicle abandoned within the ten-day period by commencing the notification process. 

E. 
Any vehicle parked on the highway determined by a police authority to create a hazard to other vehicle traffic. 

F. 
A vehicle that has been impounded pursuant to Section 321J.4B of the Code of Iowa by order of the court and whose owner has not paid the impoundment fees after notification by the person or agency responsible for carrying out the impoundment order. 


2. “Demolisher” means any city or public agency organized for the disposal of solid waste, or any person whose business it is to convert a vehicle to junk, processed scrap or scrap metal, or otherwise to wreck, or dismantle vehicles. 
3. “Police authority” means the Iowa state patrol or any law enforcement agency of a county or city. 
80.02 AUTHORITY TO TAKE POSSESSION OF ABANDONED VEHICLES. A police authority, upon the authority’s own initiative or upon the request of any other authority having the duties of control of highways or traffic, shall take into custody an abandoned vehicle on public property and may take into custody any abandoned vehicle on private property. A police authority taking into custody an abandoned vehicle which has been determined to create a traffic hazard shall report the reasons constituting the hazard in writing to the appropriate authority having duties of control of the highway. The police authority may employ its own personnel, equipment and facilities or hire a private entity, equipment and facilities for the purpose of removing, preserving, storing, or disposing of abandoned vehicles. If a police authority employs a private entity to dispose of abandoned vehicles, the police authority shall provide the private entity with the names and addresses of the registered owners, all lienholders of record, and any other known claimant to the vehicle or the personal property found in the vehicle. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.89[2]) 
80.03 NOTICE BY MAIL. The police authority or private entity which takes into custody an abandoned vehicle shall notify, within twenty (20) days, by certified mail, the last known registered owner of the vehicle, all lienholders of record, and any other known claimant to the vehicle or to personal property found in the vehicle, addressed to their last known addresses of record, that the abandoned vehicle has been taken into custody. Notice shall be deemed given when mailed. The notice shall describe the year, make, model and serial number of the vehicle, describe the personal property found in the vehicle, set forth the location of the facility where the vehicle is being held, and inform the persons receiving the notice of their right to reclaim the vehicle and personal property within ten (10) days after the effective date of the notice upon payment of all towing, preservation, and storage charges resulting from placing the vehicle in custody and upon payment of the costs of the notice. The notice shall also state that the failure of the owner, lienholders or claimants to exercise their right to reclaim the vehicle or personal property within the time provided shall be deemed a waiver by the owner, lienholders and claimants of all right, title, claim and interest in the vehicle or personal property and that failure to reclaim the vehicle or personal property is deemed consent to the sale of the vehicle at a public auction or disposal of the vehicle to a demolisher and to disposal of the personal property by sale or destruction. The notice shall state that any person claiming rightful possession of the vehicle or personal property who disputes the planned disposition of the vehicle or property by the police authority or private entity or of the assessment of fees and charges provided by this section may ask for an evidentiary hearing before the police authority to contest those matters. If the persons receiving the notice do not ask for a hearing or exercise their right to reclaim the vehicle or personal property within the ten (10) day reclaiming period, the owner, lienholders or claimants shall no longer have any right, title, claim, or interest in or to the vehicle or the personal property. A court in any case in law or equity shall not recognize any right, title, claim, or interest of the owner, lienholders or claimants after the expiration of the ten 
(10) day reclaiming period. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.89[3a]) 
80.04 NOTIFICATION IN NEWSPAPER. If the identity of the last registered owner cannot be determined, or if the registration contains no address for the owner, or if it is impossible to determine with reasonable certainty the identity and addresses of all lienholders, notice by one publication in one newspaper of general circulation in the area where the vehicle was abandoned shall be sufficient to meet all requirements of notice under Section 80.03. The published notice may contain multiple listings of abandoned vehicles and personal property but shall be published within the same time requirements and contain the same information as prescribed for mailed notice in Section 80.03. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.89[3b]) 
80.05 EXTENSION OF TIME. The owner, lienholders or claimants may, by written request delivered to the police authority or private entity prior to the expiration of the ten (10) day reclaiming period, obtain an additional five (5) days within which the motor vehicle or personal property may be reclaimed. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.89[3c]) 
80.06 FEES FOR IMPOUNDMENT. The owner, lienholder or claimant shall pay three dollars ($3.00) if claimed within five (5) days of impounding, plus one dollar ($1.00) for each additional day within the reclaiming period plus towing charges if stored by the City, or towing and storage fees, if stored in a public garage, whereupon said vehicle shall be released. The amount of towing charges, and the rate of storage charges by privately owned garages, shall be established by such facility. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.89[3a]) 
80.07 DISPOSAL OF ABANDONED VEHICLES. If an abandoned vehicle has not been reclaimed as provided herein, the police authority or private entity shall make a determination as to whether or not the motor vehicle should be sold for use upon the highways, and shall dispose of the motor vehicle in accordance with State law. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.89[4]) 
CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA 
-477 ­
80.08 DISPOSAL OF TOTALLY INOPERABLE VEHICLES. The City or any person upon whose property or in whose possession is found any abandoned motor vehicle, or any person being the owner of a motor vehicle whose title certificate is faulty, lost or destroyed, may dispose of such motor vehicle to a demolisher for junk, without a title and without notification procedures, if such motor vehicle lacks an engine or two (2) or more wheels or other structural part which renders the vehicle totally inoperable. The police authority shall give the applicant a certificate of authority. The applicant shall then apply to the County Treasurer for a junking certificate and shall surrender the certificate of authority in lieu of the certificate of title. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.90[2e]) 
80.09 PROCEEDS FROM SALES. Proceeds from the sale of any abandoned vehicle shall be applied to the expense of auction, cost of towing, preserving, storing and notification required, in accordance with State law. Any balance shall be held for the owner of the motor vehicle or entitled lienholder for ninety (90) days, and then shall be deposited in the State Road Use Tax Fund. Where the sale of any vehicle fails to realize the amount necessary to meet costs the police authority shall apply for reimbursement from the Department of Transportation. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.89[4]) 
80.10 DUTIES OF DEMOLISHER. Any demolisher who purchases or otherwise acquires an abandoned motor vehicle for junk shall junk, scrap, wreck, dismantle or otherwise demolish such motor vehicle. A demolisher shall not junk, scrap, wreck, dismantle or demolish a vehicle until the demolisher has obtained the junking certificate issued for the vehicle. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.90[3a]) 
CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA 
-478 ­
CHAPTER 81 
RAILROAD REGULATIONS 

81.01 Definitions 81.03 Obstructing Streets 
81.02 Warning Signals 81.04 Crossing Maintenance 
81.01 DEFINITIONS. For use in this chapter, the following terms are defined: 
1. “Railroad train” means an engine or locomotive, with or without cars coupled thereto, operated upon rails. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.1) 
2. “Operator” means any individual, partnership, corporation or other association which owns, operates, drives or controls a railroad train. 
81.02 WARNING SIGNALS. Operators shall sound a horn at least one thousand (1,000) feet before a street crossing is reached and after sounding the horn, shall ring the bell continuously until the crossing is passed. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 327G.13) 
81.03 OBSTRUCTING STREETS. Operators shall not operate any train in such a manner as to prevent vehicular use of any highway, street or alley for a period of time in excess of ten (10) minutes except: 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 327G.32) 
1. 
Comply with Signals. When necessary to comply with signals affecting the safety of the movement of trains. 

2. 
Avoid Striking. When necessary to avoid striking any object or person on the track. 

3. 
Disabled. When the train is disabled. 

4. 
Safety Regulations. When necessary to comply with governmental safety regulations including, but not limited to, speed ordinances and speed regulations. 

5. 
In Motion. When the train is in motion except while engaged in switching operations. 

6. 
No Traffic. When there is no vehicular traffic waiting to use the crossing. 


An employee is not guilty of a violation of this section if the employee’s action was necessary to comply with the direct order or instructions of a railroad corporation or its supervisors. Guilt is then with the railroad corporation. 
81.04 CROSSING MAINTENANCE. Operators shall construct and maintain good, sufficient and safe crossings over any street traversed by their rails. 
(Bourett vs. Chicago & N.W. Ry. 152 Iowa 579, 132 N.W. 973 [1943]) (Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.11) 
[The next page is 495] 
CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA 
-480 ­
CHAPTER 90 
WATER SERVICE SYSTEM 

90.01 BOARD OF TRUSTEES. The management of the City’s Waterworks Utility is the responsibility of the Utility Board of Trustees established and operated as described in Chapter 25 of this Code of Ordinances. 
CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA 
-495 ­
°°°°°°°°°° 

CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA 
-496 ­
CHAPTER 91 
WATER CONSERVATION 

91.01 Purpose 91.05 Penalties 
91.02 Water Shortages 91.06 Water Appeal Board 
91.03 Conditions 91.07 Municipal Infraction 
91.04 General Procedure 91.08 Reduction in Flow of Water to Any Person 
91.01 PURPOSE. The purpose of this chapter is to protect the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the City by providing for an orderly process for the conservation of water in the event of a water shortage as determined by the Council. 
91.02 WATER SHORTAGES. When the City’s water supply becomes insufficient to meet all customary and usual demands, the Council may establish, and declare by resolution, a public Water Watch, Water Warning or Water Emergency, during which time the following measures and provisions shall be in effect to produce an orderly and equitable reduction of water consumption until, by resolution, the Council finds and declares the water shortage condition to be ended. 
91.03 CONDITIONS. 
1. Water Watch. A Water Watch may be declared when a water shortage poses a potential threat to the ability of the water system to meet the needs of its customers currently or in the foreseeable future. Indicators of the need to impose a Water Watch include, but are not limited to: 
A. System operating at seventy-five percent (75%) of pumping capacity; 
B. Moderate decrease in the pumping water level of wells; or 
C. Moderate decrease in recovery rate of water level in wells. 
2. Water Warning. A Water Warning may be declared when a water shortage poses a serious threat to the ability of the water system to meet the needs of its customers currently and in the foreseeable future. Indicators of the need to impose a Water Warning include, but are not limited to: 
A. System operating at eighty-five percent (85%) of pumping capacity; 
B. Significant decrease in the pumping water level of wells; or 
C. Significant decrease in recovery rate of water level in wells. 
3. Water Emergency. A Water Emergency may be declared when a water shortage poses a serious threat to the ability of the water system to meet the needs of its customers. Indicators of the need to impose a Water Emergency include, but are not limited to: 
A. System operating at ninety-five percent (95%) of pumping capacity; and 
B. Serious decrease in recovery rate of water level in wells. 
91.04 GENERAL PROCEDURE. 
1. Water Watch. Under a Water Watch, all customers of the Municipal Water Service are encouraged to limit or curtail all nonessential uses of water between the hours of eight o’clock (8:00) a.m. and ten o’clock (10:00) p.m. in order to conserve precious water resources. Customers are encouraged to comply with the following voluntary standards: 
A. No watering of lawns, shrubs or gardens. 
B. No water should be used to wash streets, parking lots, driveways, sidewalks or building exteriors. 
C. No water should be used for nonessential cleaning of commercial and industrial equipment, machinery and interior spaces. 
D. Water should be served at restaurants only upon the request of the customer. 
E. Voluntary reduction of use of water. 
2. Water Warning. Under a Water Warning, no user shall use processed water of the Municipal Water Service in any manner contrary to the following: 
A. Outdoor watering or irrigation of lawn is prohibited. 
B. Watering or irrigation of flower and vegetable gardens, trees and shrubs less than 4 years old and new seedlings or sod is permitted once per week with an application not to exceed one (1) inch. Watering is to be done between the hours of ten o’clock 
(10:00) p.m. and eight o’clock (8:00) a.m. 
C. Car washing is prohibited except in commercial establishments that provide that service. 
D. No water shall be used to fill private swimming pools, children’s wading pools, reflecting pools or any other outdoor pool or pond. 
E. No water shall be used to wash streets, parking lots, driveways, sidewalks or building exteriors. 
F. No water shall be used for nonessential cleaning of commercial and industrial equipment, machinery and interior spaces. 
G. Water shall be served at restaurants only upon the request of the customer. 
H. Tank water sales may be limited based on previous usage. 
Water reclaimed or recycled after some other primary use, such as water that has been used for washing or cooling, may be used without restriction. Additionally, water derived from sources other than the City Water Utility may be used without restriction. 
3. Water Emergency. Under a Water Emergency, the following restrictions will be in effect: 
A. All outside water use, except for fire and health hazard prevention, is prohibited. 
B. All commercial and industrial uses of water not essential in providing products or services is prohibited. 
C. Water use not necessary for the preservation of life or the general welfare of the community is prohibited. 
4. Water Emergency Base Allocation. Under a Water Emergency, each user (including the City) will be afforded a monthly allocation of water. 
A. Base Allocation. The base allocation of water for residential use shall be 3,000 gallons per household per billing period. For commercial, industrial or institutional use, the base allocation shall be established by resolution as a percentage of the average water used during the previous winter (November through April). 

B. Appeal and Adjustment of the Base Allocation. Any person may file an appeal with the Water Appeal Board to adjust the base allocation amount. The Water Appeal Board may grant an adjustment to the appellant based on the following criteria: 
CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA -499 ­
(1) 
For single-family residential use, the base allocation may be increased by 1,000 gallons per person per billing period at the appellant’s residence for a period of more than thirty (30) days. 

(2) 
For commercial, industrial, institutional or other residential uses, the base allocation may be increased based upon factors appropriate to the individual customer, such as usage, production, service and occupancy data provided by the customer. 


C. Premium Rate for Imprudent Consumption. In addition to the water rates, all persons shall pay a premium rate of $1.00 per 100 gallons of water consumed in excess of the base allocation. 
D. Adjustment of Premium Rate Charges. Any person may file for adjustment of the premium rate charges for imprudent water consumption with the Water Appeal Board. The Water Appeal Board may grant an adjustment of the premium rate charges in accordance with the following criteria: 
(1) 
Adjustments may be granted for over-consumption due to mechanical failures such as broken or leaky pipes or fixtures but not for over-consumption due to human carelessness. 

(2) 
The applicant shall furnish proof that the mechanical failure was repaired promptly. This should be in the form of a licensed plumber’s invoice or statement or a materials receipt. 

(3) 
The adjustment shall be granted only for the billing period prior to the correction of the failure. 

(4) 
For those accounts granted an adjustment of the premium rate charges, the minimum adjusted rate shall be forty percent (40%) of the actual bill, which shall include the premium rate charges and sales tax. 


91.05 PENALTIES. The following penalties shall apply for violations of Water Warning or Water Emergency use restrictions imposed under this chapter. 
1. First Violation. For a first violation, the utility shall issue a written notice of violation to the water user violating the water use restrictions imposed during a Water Warning or Water Emergency. 
CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA 
-500 ­
2. 
Second Violation. For a second violation within a Water Warning or Water Emergency, a one-month surcharge shall be imposed in an amount equal to fifty percent (50%) of the previous month’s water bill. 

3. 
Subsequent Violations. For any subsequent violation within the Water Warning or Water Emergency, a one-month surcharge shall be imposed in an amount equal to fifty percent (50%) of the previous month’s water bill and, in addition, the utility shall interrupt water service to that customer at the premises at which the violation occurred. Service shall not be restored until the customer has paid the reconnection fee and has provided reasonable assurance that future violations of Water Warning or Water Emergency use restrictions will not occur. 


Any customer charged with a violation of the Water Warning or Water Emergency use restriction may request a hearing before the Water Appeal Board. The Water Appeal Board may conclude that a violation did not occur or that the circumstances under which the violation occurred warrant a complete or partial mitigation of the penalty. 
91.06 WATER APPEAL BOARD. A Water Appeal Board shall be appointed during any Water Warning or Water Emergency. The Water Appeal Board shall consist of the Mayor, the Superintendent of the Water System, and three representatives of the community who shall be appointed by the Mayor with the approval of the Council. The Water Appeal Board shall hear appeals of any action taken pursuant to a Water Warning or Water Emergency except that, if a customer is charged with a municipal infraction relating to this chapter, that proceeding shall be conducted pursuant to Section 364.22 of the Code of Iowa. 
91.07 MUNICIPAL INFRACTION. A second or subsequent violation of the Water Warning or Water Emergency use restrictions by any person within a twelve-month period constitutes a municipal infraction. Any person who, in making application to the Water Appeal Board for adjustment of the base allocation or premium charges, intentionally provides false or incorrect statements or information commits a municipal infraction. 
91.08 REDUCTION IN FLOW OF WATER TO ANY PERSON. The Superintendent is authorized, after giving notice and opportunity for hearing 
CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA 
-501 ­
before the Water Appeal Board, to reduce the flow of water to any person determined to be using water in any manner not in accordance with this chapter during a Water Warning or Water Emergency. 
[The next page is 515] 
CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA 
-502 ­
CHAPTER 95 
SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM 

95.01 Purpose 95.06 Service Outside the City 
95.02 Definitions 95.07 Right of Entry 
95.03 Superintendent 95.08 Use of Easements 
95.04 Prohibited Acts 95.09 Special Penalties 
95.05 Sewer Connection Required 95.10 Sump Pump Inspection Program 
95.01 PURPOSE. The purpose of the chapters of this Code of Ordinances pertaining to Sanitary Sewers is to establish rules and regulations governing the treatment and disposal of sanitary sewage within the City in order to protect the public health, safety and welfare. 
95.02 DEFINITIONS. For use in these chapters, unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the following terms are defined: 
1. “B.O.D.” (denoting Biochemical Oxygen Demand) means the quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure in five (5) days at twenty 
(20) degrees C., expressed in milligrams per liter or parts per million. 
2. 
“Building drain” means that part of the lowest horizontal piping of a building drainage system which receives the discharge from soil, waste, and other drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer, beginning five (5) feet (1.5 meters) outside the inner face of the building wall. 

3. 
“Building sewer” means that part of the horizontal piping from the building wall to its connection with the main sewer or the primary treatment portion of an on-site wastewater treatment and disposal system conveying the drainage of one building site. 

4. 
“Combined sewer” means a sewer receiving both surface run-off and sewage. 

5. 
“Customer” means any person responsible for the production of domestic, commercial or industrial waste which is directly or indirectly discharged into the public sewer system. 

6. 
“Garbage” means solid wastes from the domestic and commercial preparation, cooking, and dispensing of food, and from the handling, storage and sale of produce. 


CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA 
-515 ­
7. 
“Industrial wastes” means the liquid wastes from industrial manufacturing processes, trade, or business as distinct from sanitary sewage. 

8. 
“Inspector” means the person duly authorized by the Council to inspect and approve the installation of building sewers and their connections to the public sewer system; and to inspect such sewage as may be discharged therefrom. 

9. 
“Natural outlet” means any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake, or other body of surface or groundwater. 

10. 
“On-site wastewater treatment and disposal system” means all equipment and devices necessary for proper conduction, collection, storage, treatment, and disposal of wastewater from four or fewer dwelling units or other facilities serving the equivalent of fifteen persons (1500 gpd) or less. 

11. 
“pH” means the logarithm of the reciprocal of the weight of hydrogen ions in grams per liter of solution. 

12. 
“Public sewer” means a sewer in which all owners of abutting properties have equal rights, and is controlled by public authority. 

13. 
“Sanitary sewage” means sewage discharging from the sanitary conveniences of dwellings (including apartment houses and hotels), office buildings, factories or institutions, and free from storm, surface water, and industrial waste. 

14. 
“Sanitary sewer” means a sewer which carries sewage and to which storm, surface, and groundwaters are not intentionally admitted. 

15. 
“Sewage” means a combination of the water-carried wastes from residences, business buildings, institutions, and industrial establishments, together with such ground, surface, and storm waters as may be present. 

16. 
“Sewage treatment plant” means any arrangement of devices and structures used for treating sewage. 

17. 
“Sewage works” or “sewage system” means all facilities for collecting, pumping, treating, and disposing of sewage. 

18. 
“Sewer” means a pipe or conduit for carrying sewage. 

19. 
“Sewer service charges” means any and all charges, rates or fees levied against and payable by customers, as consideration for the servicing of said customers by said sewer system. 

20. 
“Slug” means any discharge of water, sewage, or industrial waste which in concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow exceeds for any period of duration longer than fifteen (15) minutes more 


CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA -516 ­
than five (5) times the average twenty-four (24) hour concentration or flows during normal operation. 
21. 
“Storm drain” or “storm sewer” means a sewer which carries storm and surface waters and drainage but excludes sewage and industrial wastes, other than unpolluted cooling water. 

22. 
“Superintendent” means the Superintendent of sewage works and/or of water pollution control of the City or any authorized deputy, agent, or representative. 

23. 
“Suspended solids” means solids that either float on the surface of, or are in suspension in water, sewage, or other liquids, and which are removable by laboratory filtering. 

24. 
“Watercourse” means a channel in which a flow of water occurs, either continuously or intermittently. 


95.03 SUPERINTENDENT. The Superintendent shall exercise the following powers and duties: 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4]) 
1. 
Operation and Maintenance. Operate and maintain the City sewage system. 

2. 
Inspection and Tests. Conduct necessary inspections and tests to assure compliance with the provisions of these Sanitary Sewer chapters. 

3. 
Records. Maintain a complete and accurate record of all sewers, sewage connections and manholes constructed showing the location and grades thereof. 


95.04 PROHIBITED ACTS. No person shall do, or allow, any of the following: 
1. Damage Sewer System. Maliciously, willfully, or negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any structure, appurtenance or equipment which is a part of the sewer system. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.1) 
2. 
Surface Run-off or Groundwater. Connect a roof downspout, sump pump, exterior foundation drain, areaway drain, or other source of surface run-off or groundwater to a building sewer or building drain which in turn is connected directly or indirectly to a public sanitary sewer. 

3. 
Manholes. Open or enter any manhole of the sewer system, except by authority of the Superintendent. 


4. 
Objectionable Wastes. Place or deposit in any unsanitary manner on public or private property within the City, or in any area under the jurisdiction of the City, any human or animal excrement, garbage, or other objectionable waste. 

5. 
Septic Tanks. Construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool, or other facility intended or used for the disposal of sewage except as provided in these chapters. 


(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3f]) 
6. Untreated Discharge. Discharge to any natural outlet within the City, or in any area under its jurisdiction, any sanitary sewage, industrial wastes, or other polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with subsequent provisions of these chapters. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3f]) 
95.05 SEWER CONNECTION REQUIRED. The owners of any houses, buildings, or properties used for human occupancy, employment, recreation or other purposes, situated within the City and abutting on any street, alley or right-of-way in which there is now located, or may in the future be located, a public sanitary or combined sewer, are hereby required to install, at such owner’s expense, suitable toilet facilities therein and a building sewer connecting such facilities directly with the proper public sewer, and to maintain the same all in accordance with the provisions of these Sanitary Sewer chapters, such compliance to be completed within sixty (60) days after date of official notice from the City to do so provided that said public sewer is located within one hundred fifty (150) feet of the property line of such owner and is of such design as to receive and convey by gravity such sewage as may be conveyed to it. Billing for sanitary sewer service will begin the date of official notice to connect to the public sewer. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12 [3f]) (IAC, 567-69.1[3]) 
95.06 SERVICE OUTSIDE THE CITY. The owners of property outside the corporate limits of the City so situated that it may be served by the City sewer system may apply to the Council for permission to connect to the public sewer upon the terms and conditions stipulated by resolution of the Council. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.4 [2 & 3]) 
95.07 RIGHT OF ENTRY. The Superintendent and other duly authorized employees of the City bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all properties for the purposes of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, and testing in accordance with the provisions of these Sanitary Sewer chapters. The Superintendent or representatives shall have no authority to inquire into any processes including metallurgical, chemical, oil, refining, ceramic, paper, or other industries beyond that point having a direct bearing on the kind and source of discharge to the sewers or waterways or facilities for waste treatment. 
95.08 USE OF EASEMENTS. The Superintendent and other duly authorized employees of the City bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all private properties through which the City holds a duly negotiated easement for the purposes of, but not limited to, inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, repair, and maintenance of any portion of the sewage works lying within said easement. All entry and subsequent work, if any, on said easement, shall be done in full accordance with the terms of the duly negotiated easement pertaining to the private property involved. 
95.09 SPECIAL PENALTIES. The following special penalty provisions shall apply to violations of these Sanitary Sewer chapters: 
1. 
Notice of Violation. Any person found to be violating any provision of these chapters except subsections 1, 3 and 4 of Section 95.04, shall be served by the City with written notice stating the nature of the violation and providing a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory correction thereof. The offender shall, within the period of time stated in such notice, permanently cease all violations. 

2. 
Continuing Violations. Any person who shall continue any violation beyond the time limit provided for in subsection 1 hereof shall be in violation of this Code of Ordinances. Each day in which any such violation shall continue shall be deemed a separate offense. 

3. 
Liability Imposed. Any person violating any of the provisions of these chapters shall become liable to the City for any expense, loss, or damage occasioned the City by reason of such violation. 


95.10 SUMP PUMP INSPECTION PROGRAM. 
1. 
Properties Within City Limits. All properties within the Perry City limits shall allow the City to conduct a sump pump inspection in accordance with the rules, regulations and fees as established by the Council by resolution. These inspections will begin immediately following the effective date of the ordinance codified by this section (September 2, 2003) and continue throughout the City until each property has been inspected at least once. 

2. 
Change of Ownership. All improved properties that will have recorded at the County Recorder’s Office a transfer of title or a change in the possessor of the property shall, within 90 days prior to the aforementioned, allow the City to conduct a sump pump inspection in 


accordance with the rules, regulations and fees as established by the Council by resolution. 
3. Right of Spot Inspection. Any property which is suspect to having changed the sump pump hook-up of the property following initial inspection by the City shall be subject to another inspection. The necessity of this inspection can be documented with changes in flow rates for a particular area. 
Enforcement of the Sump Pump Inspection Program shall be by municipal infraction. 
(Ord. 799 – Sep. 03 Supp.) 
CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA 
-520 ­
CHAPTER 96 
BUILDING SEWERS AND CONNECTIONS 

96.01 Permit 96.06 Interceptors Required 
96.02 Permit Fee and Connection Charge 96.07 Sewer Tap 
96.03 Plumber Required 96.08 Inspection Required 
96.04 Excavations 96.09 Property Owner’s Responsibility 
96.05 Connection Requirements 96.10 Abatement of Violations 
96.01 PERMIT. No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connection with or opening into, use, alter or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof without first obtaining a written permit from the City. The application for the permit shall set forth the location and description of the property to be connected with the sewer system and the purpose for which the sewer is to be used, and shall be supplemented by any plans, specifications, or other information considered pertinent. The permit shall require the owner to complete construction and connection of the building sewer to the public sewer within thirty (30) days after the issuance of the permit, except that when a property owner makes sufficient showing that due to conditions beyond the owner’s control or peculiar hardship, such time period is inequitable or unfair, an extension of time within which to comply with the provisions herein may be granted. Any sewer connection permit may be revoked at any time for a violation of these chapters. 
96.02 PERMIT FEE AND CONNECTION CHARGE. There are two (2) classes of building sewer permits, one for residential and commercial service, and one for service to establishments producing industrial wastes. The person who makes the application for either class of permit shall pay a fee in the amount of one hundred dollars ($100.00) to the City Clerk to cover the cost of issuing the permit and supervising, regulating, and inspecting the work. In addition, there shall be a charge in an amount to reimburse the City for costs borne by the City in making the sewer tap to the property served. 
(Ord. 815 – Jun. 04 Supp.) 
96.03 PLUMBER REQUIRED. All installations of building sewers and connections to the public sewer shall be made by a plumber approved by the City. The Superintendent shall have the power to suspend the approval of any plumber for violation of any of the provisions of these Sanitary Sewer chapters; a suspension, unless revoked, shall continue until the next regular meeting of the Council. The Superintendent shall notify the plumber immediately by personal written notice of the suspension, the reasons for the suspension, and the time and place of the Council meeting at which the plumber will be granted a hearing. At this Council meeting the Superintendent shall make a written report to the Council stating the reasons for the suspension, and the Council, after fair hearing, shall affirm or revoke the suspension or take any further action that is necessary and proper. The plumber shall provide a surety bond in the minimum sum of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) secured by a responsible surety bonding company authorized to operate within the State, conditioned to indemnify and save the City harmless against all losses or damages that may arise from or be occasioned by the making of connections with the public sewers or excavations therefor or by carelessness, negligence or unskillfulness in making the same. Such bond shall remain in force and must be executed for a period of one year except that on such expiration it shall remain in force as to all penalties, claims and demands that may have accrued thereunder prior to such expiration. In lieu of a surety bond, a cash deposit of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) may be filed with the City. 
96.04 EXCAVATIONS. All excavations required for the installation of a building sewer shall be made in accordance with the following and with the provisions of Chapter 135 where applicable. 
1. 
Barricades and Lighting. Adequate barricades and warning lights shall be so placed as to protect the public from hazard. 

2. 
Public Convenience. Streets and alleys shall be opened in the manner that will cause the least inconvenience to the public and admit the uninterrupted passage of water along the gutter on the street. 

3. 
Construction Methods. All excavation required for the installation of a building sewer shall be open trench work unless otherwise approved by the City. Pipe laying and backfill shall be performed in accordance with A.S.T.M. Specification D2321-89, except that no backfill shall be placed until the work has been inspected. 

4. 
Restoration of Public Property. Streets, sidewalks, parkways and other public property disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the City, at the expense of the property owner. 

5. 
Completion by the City. Should any excavation in any street or alley be left open or unfinished for a period of twenty-four (24) hours or should the work be improperly done, the Superintendent shall have the right to finish or correct such work and the expense shall be charged to the property owner. 


96.05 CONNECTION REQUIREMENTS. Any connection with a public sanitary sewer must be made under the direct supervision of the Superintendent and in accordance with the following: 
1. 
Old Building Sewers. Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only when they are found, on examination and test conducted by the owner and observed by the Superintendent, to meet all requirements of this chapter. 

2. 
Separate Building Sewers. A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every occupied building; except where one building stands at the rear of another on an interior lot and no sewer is available or can be constructed to the rear building through an adjoining alley, court, yard, or driveway. In such cases the building sewer from the front building may be extended to the rear building and the whole considered as one building sewer. 

3. 
Installation. The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall conform to the requirements of Division 4, Plumbing Rules and Regulations, of the State Building Code, applicable rules and regulations of the City, or the procedures set forth in A.S.T.M. Specification D2321-89. All such connections shall be made gastight and watertight. Any deviation from the prescribed procedures and materials must be approved by the Superintendent before installation. 

4. 
Water Lines. When possible, building sewers should be laid at least ten (10) feet horizontally from a water service. The horizontal separation may be less, provided the water service line is located at one side and at least twelve (12) inches above the top of the building sewer. 

5. 
Size. Building sewers shall be sized for the peak expected sewage flow from the building with a minimum building sewer size of four (4) inches. 

6. 
Alignment and Grade. All building sewers shall be laid to a straight line and at a uniform grade of not less than the following: 

A. Four (4) inch lines: one-fourth (¼) inch per foot. 
B. Six (6) inch lines: one-eighth (1/8) inch per foot. 
C. Minimum velocity of 2.00 feet per second with the sewer half full. 
D. Any deviation in alignment or grade shall be made only with the written approval of the Superintendent and shall be made only with approved fittings. 

7. 
Depth. Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building at an elevation below the basement floor. The depth of cover above the sewer shall be sufficient to afford protection from frost. 


CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA 
-523 ­
8. 
Sewage Lifts. In all buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary sewage carried by such drain shall be lifted by approved artificial means and discharged to the building sewer. 

9. 
Pipe Specifications. Building sewer pipe shall be free from flaws, splits, or breaks. Materials shall be as specified in Division 4 of the State Building Code except that the building sewer pipe, from the property line to the public sewer, shall comply with the current edition of one of the following: 

A. Clay sewer pipe -A.S.T.M. C200-69 (extra strength). 
B. Extra heavy cast iron soil pipe -A.S.T.M. A74-69. 
C. Cast iron water pipe -A.S.T.M. A377-66. 
D. P.V.C. -A.S.T.M. D3034-97 (SDR 23.5). 

10. 
Bearing Walls. No building sewer shall be laid parallel to, or within three (3) feet of any bearing wall, which might thereby be weakened. 

11. 
Jointing. Fittings, type of joint, and jointing material shall be compatible with the type of pipe used, subject to the approval of the Superintendent. Solvent-welded joints are not permitted. 

12. 
Unstable Soil. No sewer connection shall be laid so that it is exposed when crossing any watercourse. Where an old watercourse must of necessity be crossed or where there is any danger of undermining or settlement, cast iron soil pipe or vitrified clay sewer pipe thoroughly encased in concrete shall be required for such crossings. Such encasement shall extend at least six (6) inches on all sides of the pipe. The cast iron pipe or encased clay pipe shall rest on firm, solid material at either end. 

13. 
Preparation of Basement or Crawl Space. No connection for any residence, business or other structure with any sanitary sewer shall be made unless the basement floor is poured, or in the case of a building with a slab or crawl space, unless the ground floor is installed with the area adjacent to the foundation of such building cleared of debris and backfilled. The backfill shall be well compacted and graded so that the drainage is away from the foundation. Prior to the time the basement floor is poured, or the first floor is installed in buildings without basements, the sewer shall be plugged and the plug shall be sealed by the Superintendent. Any accumulation of water in any excavation or basement during construction and prior to connection to the sanitary 


CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA -524 ­
sewer shall be removed by means other than draining into the sanitary sewer. 
96.06 INTERCEPTORS REQUIRED. The purpose of this section is to aid in the prevention of sanitary sewer blockages and obstructions from contribution and accumulation of fat, oil, and grease (FOG) into the WPCF. Such discharges from commercial kitchens, restaurants, food processing facilities and all other establishments, where fat, oil and grease (FOG) of vegetable or animal origin are discharged directly or indirectly into the WPCF, can contribute to line blockages and/or spills in violations of Title 40, Code of Federal Regulations 40 CFR, Part 403. 
1. 
Grease, oil, sludge and sand interceptors shall be provided by gas and service stations, convenience stores, car washes, garages, restaurants, and other facilities when, in the opinion of the Water Pollution Control Facility Superintendent, they are necessary for the proper handling of such wastes that contain grease in excessive amounts or any flammable waste, sand or other harmful ingredients. Such interceptors shall not be required for private living quarters or dwelling units. When required, such interceptors shall be installed in accordance with this chapter and section of the City of Perry Code of Ordinances. 

2. 
Definitions of words and phrases used in this chapter have the following meaning unless the context clearly indicates otherwise: 


A. “Best Management Practices or BMPs” means and includes schedules of activities, prohibitions of practices, maintenance procedures, and other management practices to prevent or reduce the pollution of waters of the State. For purposes of this section, best management practices include procedures and practices that reduce the discharge of fat, oil and grease (FOG) to the building sewer, to the city sanitary sewer system and to the WPCF. 
B. “Design Liquid Depth” means the maximum depth of liquid when the tank is filled with water. 
C. “Food Service Establishment or FSE” means an operation or enterprise that stores, prepares, packages, serves, vends, or otherwise provides food for human consumption. Such facilities may include, but are not limited to, those that process meat or other food ingredients as an intermediate step or for final human consumption, food service operations in a summer camp, residential substance abuse treatment facility, halfway house, correctional facility, school, restaurant, commercial kitchen, caterer, church, hotel, school, hospital, prison, correctional facility, care institution or similar facility. 
D. “Grease Interceptor” means a tank that serves one or more fixtures and is remotely located. Grease interceptors include, but are not limited to, tanks that capture wastewater from dishwashers, garbage disposals, floor drains, pot and pan sinks and trenches as allowed by local plumbing codes. For purposes of this section, a grease interceptor is a multi-compartment tank located underground outside of a building that reduces the amount of FOG in wastewater prior to its discharge into the WPCF. 
E. “WPCF” means Water Pollution Control Facility or Municipal Waste Water Treatment Plant. This facility treats sanitary waste prior to its release. 
F. “Grease Trap” means a device designed to retain grease from one to a maximum of four fixtures. Not all grease traps are approved by the manufacturer for use on heated water (e.g., dishwasher) or in-line to a waste disposal unit (e.g., garbage disposal and grinders). For the purpose of this section, a grease trap is a small device located within a building. 
G. “Minimum Design Capability” means the design features of a grease interceptor and its ability or volume required to effectively intercept and retain greases from grease-laden wastewaters discharged to the WPCF. 
3. Grease interceptor installation required after effective date. The owner or operator of a building or facility likely to discharge FOG to the WPCF, including FSEs, shall be required to install an approved grease interceptor, and to thereafter operate and maintain same as provided in this section if: 
A. The building or facility is proposed or constructed after the effective date; or 
B. The building or facility exists on the effective date and is thereafter expanded or renovated to include an FSE where such FSE did not previously exist; or 
C. An FSE within a building or facility exists on the effective date and application is thereafter made for a building permit for the facility with valuation of $50,000.00 or more. 
D. The inceptors shall be constructed of impervious material capable of withstanding abrupt and extreme changes in temperature. They shall be of substantial construction, watertight 
CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA -526 ­
and equipped with easily removable covers that shall be gastight and watertight. 
4. Exemption from grease interceptor installation requirement. A building or facility within which an FSE is in existence on the effective date shall be exempt from the requirement to install a grease receptor if: 
A. The FSE has an existing grease interceptor or grease trap in place as of the effective date and provided that: 
(1) 
The owner or occupant of the FSE continues to use the interceptor or trap. 

(2) 
The interceptor or trap is of sufficient capacity and design. 

(3) 
The interceptor or trap is operated and maintained so as to comply with FOG discharge limits. 


B. Repair, remodeling or renovation of the wastewater plumbing system in an existing FSE involves only: 
(1) 
The repair of leaks or the clearing of stoppages in drains, soil, waste or vent piping. 

(2) 
The removal and reinstallation of a sink, toilet or hot water heater; provided that such work does not involve replacement, rearrangement or moving of wastewater valves, traps or pipes. 


5. Operation, maintenance and cleaning of grease interceptors is as follows: 
A. The owner or operator of an FSE which is required to pass wastewater through a grease interceptor shall operate and maintain the grease interceptor so that wastewater exiting the grease interceptor shall not exceed four hundred (400) milligrams per liter of FOG. 
B. The owner or operator of the FSE shall cause the grease interceptor to be cleaned as hereinafter required when FOG and solids reach 25% of the design liquid level of the grease interceptor, or sooner if necessary to prevent carryover of grease from the grease interceptor into the City sanitary sewer system. Interceptors shall be cleaned at three (3) month intervals or less. A longer cleaning interval must be approved by the WPCF Director. If the owner or operator of the FSE, or an employee of the owner or operator, and has completed to the satisfaction of the WPCF Director, the person or persons may clean the grease 
CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA -527 ­
interceptor. Alternatively, the owner or operator of an FSE may employ a waste hauler that uses the proper equipment to clean the grease interceptor, provided that the waste hauler personnel performing the grease interceptor cleaning has satisfactorily completed a course of training on grease interceptor cleaning offered by the WPCF Director of the City of Perry. 
C. Any person who cleans a grease interceptor shall do so in accordance with the following procedures and requirements. The person cleaning the grease interceptor shall: 
(1) 
Completely empty and remove the contents (liquids and sludge) of all vaults of the grease interceptor, and remove the grease mat and scrapings from the interior walls. 

(2) 
Not deposit waste and wastewater removed from a grease interceptor, back into the grease interceptor from which the waste or wastewater was removed or into any other grease interceptor, for the purpose of reducing the volume of waste and wastewater to be disposed of. 

(3) 
Not introduce enzymes, emulsifying chemicals, hot water or other agents into a grease interceptor to dissolve or emulsify grease or as a grease abatement method. Introduction of bacteria as a grease degradation agent is permitted with prior written approval by the WPCF Director. 

(4) 
Dispose of waste and wastewater removed from a grease interceptor at the WPCF or at a facility approved for disposal of such waste by the WPCF Director. Waste and wastewater removed from a grease interceptor shall not be discharged to any private sanitary or storm sewer or to the City sanitary or storm sewer system. 

(5) 
Not use an automatic grease removal system to clean a grease interceptor without prior written approval of the WPCF Director, and if, the use of an automatic grease removal system is approved shall operate same in a manner that the grease wastewater discharge limit as measured from the system’s outlet, is consistently achieved. 


D. If grease interceptor cleaning is performed by a licensed waste hauler, the owner or operator of the FSE shall witness all cleaning/maintenance activities to verify that the grease 
CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA 
-528 ­
interceptor is being fully cleaned and properly maintained according to the requirement of this section. 
E. The waste hauler shall provide a copy of the disposal receipt for all waste and wastewater removed from a grease interceptor to the owner or operator of the FSE. 
F. As part of each cleaning of a grease interceptor, the owner or operator of the FSE, or the licensed waste hauler employed by the owner or operator, shall perform the following maintenance activities: 
(1) 
Check that the sanitary “tees” on the inlet and outlet sides of the grease interceptor are not obstructed, loose, or missing. 

(2) 
Verify that the baffle is secure and in place. 

(3) 
Inspect the grease interceptor for any cracks or other defects. 

(4) 
Check that lids are securely and properly seated after completion or cleaning. 


G. The WPCF Director may make exception to the above requirements, or may approve alternative operational requirements or cleaning and maintenance methods, provided that such exceptions or approval shall be made in writing by the WPCF Director. 
6. Records and record keeping will be completed as follows: 
A. Required Records. The owner or operator of an FSE which is required to pass wastewater through a grease interceptor or trap shall maintain a written record of grease interceptor or trap maintenance, including a log showing the dates upon which the grease interceptor or trap was inspected and the estimated amount of FOG present in the grease interceptor or trap at each inspection, the date upon which waste and wastewater was removed from the grease interceptor or trap and disposed of, and the location and means of such disposal of waste and wastewater, and the name and employer or the person or persons performing each of the placement of any approved or unapproved additive into the grease interceptor, grease trap or building sewer on a constant, regular or scheduled basis, including the type and amount of additive placed on each such occasion. Only additives approved by the WPCF Director pursuant to section 96.06(5B),(5C) may be used in a grease interceptor. 
CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA -529 ­
B. Record Keeping. The log shall at all times be kept and maintained on a day-to-day basis, so as to show a record of waste and wastewater removal, waste and wastewater disposal and approved additive placement for a continuous period of three (3) years. All such records shall be kept secure at the premises of the FSE for a continuous period of three (3) years and shall be made available for non-routine inspection by the City of Perry, the WPCF Director and its operation contractor, or the employees and agents of any of them at any time during normal business hours. 
7. Inspection of grease interceptors and related sewers and equipment. The owner or operator of an FSE which is required to pass its wastewater through a grease interceptor shall: 
A. Provide, operate and maintain, at its expense, safe and accessible monitoring facilities (such as a suitable manhole), and shall make such monitoring facilities available for inspection, and for sampling and flow measurement of the building sewer or internal drainage systems. There shall be ample room in or near such monitoring facility to allow accurate sampling and preparation of samples for analysis. 
B. Shall allow personnel authorized by the WPCF Director or by the City Building Official or designee, bearing proper credentials and identification, to enter upon or into any building, facility or property housing an FSE at any reasonable time and without prior notification, for the purpose of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, testing or record review, in accordance with this section. 
C. Shall, upon request by the WPCF Director’s authorized representative, open any grease interceptor for the purpose of confirming that maintenance frequency is appropriate, that all necessary parts of the installation are in place, including but not limited to, baffles, and effluent tees, and that all grease interceptors and related equipment and piping is maintained in efficient operating condition. 
D. Shall accommodate compliance inspections and sampling events by the authorized representatives of the WPCF Director or of the City Building Official. Staff may conduct routine inspections and sampling event of any food service establishment. Non-routine inspection and sampling events shall occur more frequently when there is a history of noncompliance with this section and when blockages occur in the City’s sanitary sewer system downstream of the FSE. 
CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA -530 ­
(Ord. 882 – Jan. 10 Supp.) 
96.07 SEWER TAP. Connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall be made at the “Y” branch, if such branch is available at a suitable location. If no properly located “Y” branch is available, the property owner shall at the owner’s expense install a “Y” saddle in the public sewer at the location specified by the Superintendent. At no time shall a building sewer be constructed so as to enter a manhole unless special written permission is received from the Superintendent and in accordance with the Superintendent’s direction if such connection is approved. 
96.08 INSPECTION REQUIRED. All connections with the sanitary sewer system before being covered shall be inspected and approved, in writing, by the Superintendent. As soon as all pipe work from the public sewer to inside the building has been completed, and before any backfilling is done, the Superintendent shall be notified and the Superintendent shall inspect and test the work as to workmanship and material; no sewer pipe laid under ground shall be covered or trenches filled until after the sewer has been so inspected and approved. If the Superintendent refuses to approve the work, the plumber or owner must proceed immediately to correct the work. 
96.09 PROPERTY OWNER’S RESPONSIBILITY. All costs and expenses incident to the installation, connection and maintenance of the building sewer shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify the City from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the building sewer. 
96.10 ABATEMENT OF VIOLATIONS. Construction or maintenance of building sewer lines whether located upon the private property of any owner or in the public right-of-way, which construction or maintenance is in violation of any of the requirements of this chapter, shall be corrected, at the owner’s expense, within thirty (30) days after date of official notice from the Council of such violation. If not made within such time the Council shall, in addition to the other penalties herein provided, have the right to finish and correct the work and assess the cost thereof to the property owner. Such assessment shall be collected with and in the same manner as general property taxes. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3]) 
[The next page is 537] 
CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA 
-531 ­
CHAPTER 97 
USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS 

97.01 Storm Water 97.05 Restricted Discharges -Powers 
97.02 Surface Waters Exception 97.06 Special Facilities 
97.03 Prohibited Discharges 97.07 Control Manholes 
97.04 Restricted Discharges 97.08 Testing of Wastes 
97.01 STORM WATER. No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any storm water, surface water, groundwater, roof run-off, sub­surface drainage, uncontaminated cooling water, or unpolluted industrial process waters to any sanitary sewer. Storm water and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to such sewers as are specifically designated as combined sewers or storm sewers, or to a natural outlet approved by the Superintendent. Industrial cooling water or unpolluted process waters may be discharged on approval of the Superintendent, to a storm sewer, combined sewer, or natural outlet. 
97.02 SURFACE WATERS EXCEPTION. Special permits for discharging surface waters to a public sanitary sewer may be issued by the Council upon recommendation of the Superintendent where such discharge is deemed necessary or advisable for purposes of flushing, but any permit so issued shall be subject to revocation at any time when deemed to the best interests of the sewer system. 
97.03 PROHIBITED DISCHARGES. No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the following described waters or wastes to any public sewers: 
1. 
Flammable or Explosive Material. Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil, or other flammable or explosive liquid, solid, or gas. 

2. 
Toxic or Poisonous Materials. Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids or gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, create a public nuisance, or create any hazard in the receiving waters of the sewage treatment plant, including but not limited to cyanides in excess of two (2) milligrams per liter as CN in the wastes as discharged to the public sewer. 

3. 
Corrosive Wastes. Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 


5.0 or having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment, and personnel of the sewage works. 
4. 
Solid or Viscous Substances. Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of such size capable of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers, or other interference with the proper operation of the sewage works such as, but not limited to, ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood, unground garbage, whole blood, paunch manure, hair and fleshings, entrails and paper dishes, cups, milk containers, etc., either whole or ground by garbage grinders. 

5. 
Excessive B.O.D., Solids or Flow. Any waters or wastes having 


(a) a five (5) day biochemical oxygen demand greater than three hundred 
(300) parts per million by weight, or (b) containing more than three hundred fifty (350) parts per million by weight of suspended solids, or 
(c) having an average daily flow greater than two percent (2%) of the average sewage flow of the City, shall be subject to the review of the Superintendent. Where necessary in the opinion of the Superintendent, the owner shall provide, at the owner’s expense, such preliminary treatment as may be necessary to (a) reduce the biochemical oxygen demand to three hundred (300) parts per million by weight, or (b) reduce the suspended solids to three hundred fifty (350) parts per million by weight, or (c) control the quantities and rates of discharge of such waters or wastes. Plans, specifications, and any other pertinent information relating to proposed preliminary treatment facilities shall be submitted for the approval of the Superintendent and no construction of such facilities shall be commenced until said approvals are obtained in writing. 
97.04 RESTRICTED DISCHARGES. No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged the following described substances, materials, waters, or wastes if it appears likely in the opinion of the Superintendent that such wastes can harm either the sewers, sewage treatment process, or equipment, have an adverse effect on the receiving stream or can otherwise endanger life, limb, public property, or constitute a nuisance. In forming an opinion as to the acceptability of these wastes, the Superintendent will give consideration to such factors as the quantities of subject wastes in relation to flows and velocities in the sewers, materials of construction of the sewers, nature of the sewage treatment process, capacity of the sewage treatment plant, degree of treatability of wastes in the sewage treatment plant, and other pertinent factors. The substances restricted are: 
1. 
High Temperature. Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than one hundred fifty (150) degrees F (65 degrees C). 

2. 
Fat, Oil, Grease. Any water or waste containing fats, wax, grease, or oils, whether emulsified or not, in excess of one hundred (100) 


milligrams per liter or six hundred (600) milligrams per liter of dispersed or other soluble matter. 
3. 
Viscous Substances. Water or wastes containing substances which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures between thirty-two (32) and one hundred fifty (150) degrees F (0 and 65 degrees C). 

4. 
Garbage. Any garbage that has not been properly shredded, that is, to such a degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than one-half (½) inch in any dimension. 

5. 
Acids. Any waters or wastes containing strong acid iron pickling wastes, or concentrated plating solution whether neutralized or not. 

6. 
Toxic or Objectionable Wastes. Any waters or wastes containing iron, chromium, copper, zinc, and similar objectionable or toxic substances; or wastes exerting an excessive chlorine requirement, to such degree that any such material received in the composite sewage at the sewage treatment works exceeds the limits established by the Superintendent for such materials. 

7. 
Odor or Taste. Any waters or wastes containing phenols or other taste or odor producing substances, in such concentrations exceeding limits which may be established by the Superintendent as necessary, after treatment of the composite sewage, to meet the requirements of state, federal, or other public agencies of jurisdiction for such discharge to the receiving waters. 

8. 
Radioactive Wastes. Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or concentration as may exceed limits established by the Superintendent in compliance with applicable State or Federal regulations. 

9. 
Excess Alkalinity. Any waters or wastes having a pH in excess of 


10.5. 
10. Unusual Wastes. Materials which exert or cause: 
A. Unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids (such as, but not limited to, Fullers earth, lime slurries, and lime residues) or of dissolved solids (such as, but not limited to, sodium chloride and sodium sulfate). 
B. Excessive discoloration (such as, but not limited to dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions). 
CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA 
-539 ­
C. Unusual B.O.D., chemical oxygen demand, or chlorine requirements in such quantities as to constitute a significant load on the sewage treatment works. 
D. Unusual volume of flow or concentration of wastes constituting “slugs” as defined herein. 
11. 
Noxious or Malodorous Gases. Any noxious or malodorous gas or other substance which either singly or by interaction with other wastes is capable of creating a public nuisance or hazard to life or of preventing entry into sewers for their maintenance and repair. 

12. 
Damaging Substances. Any waters, wastes, materials or substances which react with water or wastes in the sewer system to release noxious gases, develop color of undesirable intensity, form suspended solids in objectionable concentration or create any other condition deleterious to structures and treatment processes. 

13. 
Untreatable Wastes. Waters or wastes containing substances which are not amenable to treatment or reduction by the sewage treatment processes employed, or are amenable to treatment only to such degree that the sewage treatment plant effluent cannot meet the requirements of other agencies having jurisdiction over discharge to the receiving waters. 


97.05 RESTRICTED DISCHARGES -POWERS. If any waters or wastes are discharged, or are proposed to be discharged to the public sewers, which waters contain the substances or possess the characteristics enumerated in Section 97.04 and which in the judgment of the Superintendent may have a deleterious effect upon the sewage works, processes, equipment, or receiving waters, or which otherwise create a hazard to life or constitute a public nuisance, the Superintendent may: 
1. 
Rejection. Reject the wastes by requiring disconnection from the public sewage system; 

2. 
Pretreatment. Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to the public sewers; 

3. 
Controls Imposed. Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge; and/or 

4. 
Special Charges. Require payment to cover the added cost of handling and treating the wastes not covered by existing taxes or sewer charges under the provisions of Chapter 99. 


97.06 SPECIAL FACILITIES. If the Superintendent permits the pretreatment or equalization of waste flows, the design and installation of the plants and equipment shall be subject to the review and approval of the Superintendent and subject to the requirements of all applicable codes, ordinances, and laws. Where preliminary treatment or flow-equalizing facilities are provided for any waters or wastes, they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective operation by the owner at the owner’s expense. 
97.07 CONTROL MANHOLES. When required by the Superintendent, the owner of any property serviced by a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable control manhole together with such necessary meters and other appurtenances in the building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling, and measurement of the wastes. Such manhole, when required, shall be accessibly and safely located, and shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by the Superintendent. The manhole shall be installed by the owner at the owner’s expense, and shall be maintained by the owner so as to be safe and accessible at all times. 
97.08 TESTING OF WASTES. All measurements, tests, and analyses of the characteristics of waters and wastes to which reference is made in this chapter shall be determined in accordance with the latest edition of Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater, published by the American Public Health Association, and shall be determined at the control manhole provided, or upon suitable samples taken at said control manhole. In the event that no special manhole has been required, the control manhole shall be considered to be the nearest downstream manhole in the public sewer to the point at which the building sewer is connected. Sampling shall be carried out by customarily accepted methods to reflect the effect of constituents upon the sewage works and to determine the existence of hazards to life, limb, and property. (The particular analyses involved will determine whether a twenty-four (24) hour composite of all outfalls of a premises is appropriate or whether a grab sample or samples should be taken. Normally, but not always, B.O.D. and suspended solids analyses are obtained from twenty-four (24) hour composites of all outfalls whereas pH’s are determined from periodic grab samples). 
CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA 
-541 ­
°°°°°°°°°° 

CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA 
-542 ­
CHAPTER 98 
ON-SITE WASTEWATER SYSTEMS 

98.01 When Prohibited 98.06 Maintenance of System 
98.02 When Required 98.07 Systems Abandoned 
98.03 Compliance with Regulations 98.08 Disposal of Septage 
98.04 Permit Required 98.09 Minimum Lot Area 
98.05 Discharge Restrictions 
98.01 WHEN PROHIBITED. Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, it is unlawful to construct or maintain any on-site wastewater treatment and disposal system or other facility intended or used for the disposal of sewage. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3f]) 
98.02 WHEN REQUIRED. When a public sanitary sewer is not available under the provisions of Section 95.05, every building wherein persons reside, congregate or are employed shall be provided with an approved on-site wastewater treatment and disposal system complying with the provisions of this chapter. 
(IAC, 567-69.1[3]) 
98.03 COMPLIANCE WITH REGULATIONS. The type, capacity, location and layout of a private on-site wastewater treatment and disposal system shall comply with the specifications and requirements set forth by the Iowa Administrative Code 567, Chapter 69, and with such additional requirements as are prescribed by the regulations of the County Board of Health. 
(IAC, 567-69.1[3 & 4]) 
98.04 PERMIT REQUIRED. No person shall install or alter an on-site wastewater treatment and disposal system without first obtaining a permit from the County Board of Health. 
98.05 DISCHARGE RESTRICTIONS. It is unlawful to discharge any wastewater from an on-site wastewater treatment and disposal system (except under an NPDES permit) to any ditch, stream, pond, lake, natural or artificial waterway, drain tile or to the surface of the ground. 
(IAC, 567-69.1[3]) 
98.06 MAINTENANCE OF SYSTEM. The owner of an on-site wastewater treatment and disposal system shall operate and maintain the system in a sanitary manner at all times and at no expense to the City. 
98.07 SYSTEMS ABANDONED. At such time as a public sewer becomes available to a property served by an on-site wastewater treatment and disposal system, as provided in Section 95.05, a direct connection shall be made to the public sewer in compliance with these Sanitary Sewer chapters and the on-site wastewater treatment and disposal system shall be abandoned and filled with suitable material. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3f]) 
98.08 DISPOSAL OF SEPTAGE. No person shall dispose of septage from an on-site treatment system at any location except an approved disposal site. 
98.09 MINIMUM LOT AREA. No permit shall be issued for any on-site wastewater treatment and disposal system employing sub-surface soil absorption facilities where the area of the lot is less than fifteen hundred (1500) square feet. 
CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA 
-544 ­
CHAPTER 99 

SEWER SERVICE CHARGES 

99.01 Purpose 	99.07 Payment of Bills 
99.02 Definitions 	99.08 Application of Sewage Treatment Works User Charges 
99.03 Level of User Charges 	99.09 Special Rates 
99.04 Determination of Concentration of Wastes 99.10 Records 
99.05 Charges for Contributors of Unmeasured Water 99.11 Lien for Nonpayment 
99.06 Metered Water That Does Not Enter 	99.12 Deposit the Sewer System 99.13 Special Agreements Permitted 
99.01 PURPOSE. The purpose of this chapter is to enable the collection of the costs of operation and maintenance of the sewage treatment works in the City from all users in proportion to the contribution of each to the total sewage loading of the treatment works; to recover sufficient revenue to equal the cost of all treatment works operation and maintenance, including replacements and to enable collection of revenue at least sufficient to provide for amortization of and payment of interest on indebtedness incurred in the construction of the sewage treatment works. 
99.02 DEFINITIONS. 
1. 
“Commercial user” means a customer discharging wastes into the sanitary sewer system who cannot be classified as a residential user or an industrial user. 

2. 
“Dwelling” means a house, an apartment or a portion of a house or building divided from the remainder of the house or building so as to be a private living section and containing a kitchen or cooking facilities. 

3. 
“Industrial Class A User” means an industrial user discharging wastes into the sanitary sewer system with a B.O.D. concentration of less than 100 mg/L and a total suspended solids concentration of less than 100 mg/L. 

4. 
“Industrial Class B User” means an industrial user discharging wastes into the sanitary sewer system with a B.O.D. concentration of 100 mg/L or more or a total suspended solids concentration of 100 mg/L or more. 

5. 
“Industrial user” means a customer discharging waste into the sanitary sewer system who is required by the State or the United States Environmental Protection Agency to execute an Operation Permit Treatment Agreement with the City. 


CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA 
-545 ­
6. “Residential user” means a customer discharging wastes into the sanitary sewer system from two (2) or less dwelling units of the same building. 
99.03 LEVEL OF USER CHARGES. 
1. 
User Charges. The user charge for all classifications shall be an amount of money per thousand gallons of potable water delivered to customers during a billing period, as measured by the potable water system meter or other reliable means. It shall be computed for each individual user by multiplying the volume of potable water delivered to said user by the appropriate classification user rate. These separate user rates shall be fixed from time to time by resolution of the Council. Separate minimum monthly amounts and/or monthly surcharges for each classification for the purposes of financial security and future improvements to the sewer system may be set by resolution of the Council. 

2. 
Determination of Level of Charges. From time to time, the City Clerk and/or City Administrator shall assess the costs for: (1) operation and maintenance including billing, collection and administrative costs; 


(2) the cost of replacements, for the sewage treatment works of the City so as to recover said operation and maintenance costs, and to maintain as adequate reserve for replacements; and (3) the cost of debt service. The fraction of the charges dedicated to replacements shall not be less than twenty percent (20%) of the total of other operation and maintenance costs unless analysis of replacement experience indicates the need for an increase or reduction in this fraction, provided, however, that this fraction shall be such as to always provide adequate revenues to meet the replacement needs of the treatment works over its service life. The Superintendent shall assist in this assessment, and engineering assistance may be employed as well. The Council shall then by resolution fix each classification’s user rate so as to recover operation, maintenance, debt service and replacement costs. In so doing, the Council may adjust the level for excessive recovery and shall adjust the level for insufficient recovery for said costs. 
99.04 DETERMINATION OF CONCENTRATION OF WASTES. 
Concentrations of pollutants from industrial users shall be determined by the Superintendent from periodic sampling of the user’s sewage. The Superintendent shall obtain a sufficient number of regularly spaced samples to obtain a representative measurement of such concentration. The volume of sewage discharged shall be established by suitable periodic measurement 
CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA 
-546 ­
techniques or by permanent installation of metering equipment. These measurements shall be the sole basis for determining the classification of industrial users as Class A or Class B. 
99.05 CHARGES FOR CONTRIBUTORS OF UNMEASURED WATER. Residential users having private water systems, or otherwise unmetered intake and use of water, shall pay debt service and user charges based on at least 2,000 gallons per resident per month. All other classifications under similar circumstances shall pay debt service and user charges based on a volume established by the Superintendent from an estimate agreed to by the customer or determined by installation of special metering equipment at the customer’s expense. Any negotiated. or agreed upon rate shall be subject to approval by the Council. 
99.06 METERED WATER THAT DOES NOT ENTER THE SEWER SYSTEM. Users that purchase potable water that does not enter the sanitary sewer system shall be exempt from debt service and user charges for such water to the extent that such water is measurable and is reliably measured. For the purpose of this section, the Superintendent shall solely decide the method and form of accurate measurement. Debit meters that deduct sewer usage from water usage are expressly forbidden. 
99.07 PAYMENT OF BILLS. The sewage treatment works user charge and the debt service charge are due and payable under the same terms and conditions provided for payment of solid waste disposal service, and sewer service may be discontinued in accordance with the provisions contained in Section 106.07(3) if the combined service account referred to therein becomes delinquent, and the provisions contained in Section 106.09 relating to lien notices shall also apply in the event of a delinquent account. Late payment fees as set by resolution of the Council may be added to delinquent bills. 
99.08 APPLICATION OF SEWAGE TREATMENT WORKS USER CHARGES. All sewer user charges shall be deposited by the Clerk in a non-lapsing fund consisting of at least two accounts, to-wit: 
1. An Operation and Maintenance Account, into which shall be deposited that fraction of the total user charges dedicated to operation and maintenance. Funds in this account shall be used only for the purpose of defraying operation and maintenance costs of the treatment works. Balances remaining in the fund at the end of the fiscal year shall be carried forward to the next succeeding fiscal year. 
CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA 
-547 ­
2. A Replacement Account, into which shall be deposited that fraction of the user charges dedicated to replacements. Funds in this account shall be used only for the purpose of defraying operation and maintenance costs of the treatment works. Balances remaining in the fund at the end of the fiscal year shall be carried forward to the next succeeding fiscal year. 
Any transfer of funds from other revenue sources to meet temporary shortages in these accounts may be refunded following an appropriate adjustment in the sewage treatment works user charge rates. 
99.09 SPECIAL RATES. Where, in the judgment of the City, special conditions exist to the extent that the application of the normal user charges would be inequitable or unfair to either the City or the customer, a special rate shall be proposed and submitted to the Council for approval by resolution. 
99.10 RECORDS. The superintendent shall maintain records of volumes of flow and concentration of pollutants utilized in determining Industrial Class A and Class B users. The City Clerk shall maintain records of revenue and of cost of operation and maintenance, including replacement, adequate to document compliance with the provisions of this chapter. 
99.11 LIEN FOR NONPAYMENT. The owner of the premises served and any lessee or tenant thereof shall be jointly and severally liable for sewer service charges to the premises. Sewer service charges remaining unpaid and delinquent shall constitute a lien upon the premises served and shall be certified by the City Clerk, Finance Officer or Water Clerk to the County Treasurer for collection in the same manner as property taxes. (Ord. 804 – Nov. 03 Supp.) 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.84) 
99.12 DEPOSIT. There shall be required from every customer a fee as set by resolution of the Council as a deposit collected by the Water Department, intended to guarantee the payment of bills for service. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.84) 
99.13 SPECIAL AGREEMENTS PERMITTED. No statement in these chapters shall be construed as preventing a special agreement, arrangement or contract between the Council, and any industrial concern whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or character may be accepted subject to special conditions, rate and cost as established by the Council. 
[The next page is 551] 
CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA -548 ­
CHAPTER 100 
STORM WATER UTILITY 

100.01 Purpose 100.04 Rates 
100.02 Definitions 100.05 Payment of Bills 
100.03 Storm Water Drainage System District Established 100.06 Lien for Nonpayment 
100.01 PURPOSE. The purpose of this chapter is to establish a Storm Water Utility and provide a means of funding the construction, operation and maintenance of storm water management facilities including, but not limited to, detention and retention basins, storm water sewers, inlets, ditches and drains, and cleaning of streets. The Council finds that the construction, operation and maintenance of the City’s storm and surface water drainage system should be funded through charging users of property that may connect or discharge directly, or indirectly, into the storm and surface water drainage system. 
100.02 DEFINITIONS. For use in this chapter, unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the following terms are defined: 
1. 
“Connection” means the physical act or process of tapping a public storm water sewer or drainage line, or joining onto an existing side sewer, for the purpose of connecting private impervious surface or other storm and surface water sources or systems to the public storm and surface water system. It also includes creation or maintenance of impervious surface that causes or is likely to cause an increase in the quantity or decrease in quality or both from the natural state of storm water runoff, and which drains, directly or indirectly, to the storm and surface water system. 

2. 
“Customer” means, in addition to any person receiving storm water service from the City, the owner of the property served, and as between such parties the duties, responsibilities, liabilities and obligations hereinafter imposed shall be joint and several. 

3. 
“Storm and surface water drainage system” means any combination of publicly owned storm and surface water quantity and quality facilities, pumping, or lift facilities, storm and secondary drain pipes and culverts, open channels, creeks and ditches, force mains, laterals, manholes, catch basins and inlets, including the grates and covers thereof, detention and retention facilities, laboratory facilities and equipment, and any other publicly owned facilities for the collection, conveyance, treatment and disposal of storm and surface water system 


within the City, to which sanitary sewage flows are not intentionally admitted. 
4. “User” means any person who uses property that maintains connection to, discharges to, or otherwise receives services from the City for storm water management. The occupant of occupied property is deemed the user. If the property is not occupied, the person who has the right to occupy it shall be deemed the user. 
100.03 STORM WATER DRAINAGE SYSTEM DISTRICT ESTABLISHED. Pursuant to the authority of Section 384.84[5] of the Code of Iowa, the entire City is hereby declared a Storm Water Drainage System District for the purpose of establishing, imposing, adjusting and providing for the collection of rates for the operation and maintenance of storm water management facilities. The entire City, as increased from time to time by annexation, shall constitute a single Storm Water Drainage System District. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.84[5]) 
100.04 RATES. Each customer shall pay for storm and surface water drainage system service provided by the City. The rates for the operation and maintenance of the storm water management facilities shall be collected by imposing a monthly rate on each residential, commercial and industrial customer within the City. The Council may adopt rules, charges, rates, and fees for the use of the City’s storm and surface water system, and for services provided by the City relating to that system. Such rules may include delinquency and interest charges and penalties. Such charges and fees shall be just and equitable based upon the actual costs of operation, maintenance, acquisition, extension and replacement of the City’s system, the costs of bond repayment, regulation, administration, and services of the City. There shall be levied and collected fees therefor established by and through a proposal and submission to the Council by resolution. Where in the judgment of the City, special conditions exist to the extent that the application of the normal user charges would be inequitable or unfair to either the City or the customer, a special rate shall be proposed and submitted to the Council for approval by resolution. 
100.05 PAYMENT OF BILLS. All Storm Water Drainage System District charges are due and payable under the same terms and conditions provided for payment of solid waste disposal service, and storm water drainage may be discontinued in accordance with the provisions contained in Section 106.07(3) if the combined service account referred to therein becomes delinquent and the provisions contained in Sections 106.09 relating to lien exemptions and lien notice shall also apply in the event of a delinquent account. Late payment fees as set by resolution of the Council may be added to delinquent bills. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.84[2b] and [2d]) 
100.06 LIEN FOR NONPAYMENT. The owner of the premises served and any lessee or tenant thereof shall be jointly and severally liable for charges for the operation and maintenance of the storm water management facilities. Any such charges remaining unpaid and delinquent shall constitute a lien upon the premises served and shall be certified by the Clerk to the County Treasurer for collection in the same manner as property taxes. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.84[3a]) 
(Ch. 100 – Ord. 822 – Oct. 04 Supp.) 
CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA 
-553 ­[The next page is 565] 
CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA 
-554 ­
CHAPTER 105 
SOLID WASTE CONTROL 

105.01 Purpose 105.07 Littering Prohibited 
105.02 Definitions 105.08 Open Dumping Prohibited 
105.03 Sanitary Disposal Required 105.09 Toxic and Hazardous Waste 
105.04 Health and Fire Hazard 105.10 Waste Storage Containers 
105.05 Open Burning Restricted 105.11 Prohibited Practices 
105.06 Separation of Yard Waste Required 105.12 Sanitary Disposal Project Designated 
105.01 PURPOSE. The purpose of the chapters in this Code of Ordinances pertaining to Solid Waste Control is to provide for the sanitary storage, collection and disposal of solid waste and, thereby, to protect the citizens of the City from such hazards to their health, safety and welfare as may result from the uncontrolled disposal of solid waste. 
105.02 DEFINITIONS. For use in these chapters the following terms are defined: 
1. 
“Collector” means any person authorized to gather solid waste from public and private places. 

2. 
“Director” means the director of the State Department of Natural Resources or any designee. 


(Code of Iowa, Sec. 455B.101[2b]) 
3. “Discard” means to place, cause to be placed, throw, deposit or drop. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 455B.361[2]) 
4. 
“Dwelling unit” means any room or group of rooms located within a structure and forming a single habitable unit with facilities which are used, or are intended to be used, for living, sleeping, cooking and eating. 

5. 
“Garbage” means all solid and semisolid, putrescible animal and vegetable waste resulting from the handling, preparing, cooking, storing, serving and consuming of food or of material intended for use as food, and all offal, excluding useful industrial by-products, and includes all such substances from all public and private establishments and from all residences. 


(IAC, 567-100.2) 
6. “Landscape waste” means any vegetable or plant waste except garbage. The term includes trees, tree trimmings, branches, stumps, brush, weeds, leaves, grass, shrubbery and yard trimmings. 
(IAC, 567-20.2[455B]) 
CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA -565 ­
7. “Litter” means any garbage, rubbish, trash, refuse, waste materials or debris. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 455B.361[1]) 
8. 
“Owner” means, in addition to the record titleholder, any person residing in, renting, leasing, occupying, operating or transacting business in any premises, and as between such parties the duties, responsibilities, liabilities and obligations hereinafter imposed shall be joint and several. 

9. 
“Refuse” means putrescible and non-putrescible waste, including but not limited to garbage, rubbish, ashes, incinerator residues, street cleanings, market and industrial solid waste and sewage treatment waste in dry or semisolid form. 


(IAC, 567-100.2) 
10. 
“Residential premises” means a single-family dwelling and any multiple-family dwelling. 

11. 
“Residential waste” means any refuse generated on the premises as a result of residential activities. The term includes landscape waste grown on the premises or deposited thereon by the elements, but excludes garbage, tires, trade wastes and any locally recyclable goods or plastics. 


(IAC, 567-20.2[455B]) 
12. “Rubbish” means non-putrescible solid waste consisting of combustible and non-combustible waste, such as ashes, paper, cardboard, tin cans, yard clippings, wood, glass, bedding, crockery or litter of any kind. 
(IAC, 567-100.2) 
13. “Sanitary disposal” means a method of treating solid waste so that it does not produce a hazard to the public health or safety or create a nuisance. 
(IAC, 567-100.2) 
14. “Sanitary disposal project” means all facilities and appurtenances including all real and personal property connected with such facilities, which are acquired, purchased, constructed, reconstructed, equipped, improved, extended, maintained, or operated to facilitate the final disposition of solid waste without creating a significant hazard to the public health or safety, and which are approved by the Director. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 455B.301) 
CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA 
-566 ­
15. “Solid waste” means garbage, refuse, rubbish, and other similar discarded solid or semisolid materials, including but not limited to such materials resulting from industrial, commercial, agricultural, and domestic activities. Solid waste may include vehicles, as defined by subsection one of Section 321.1 of the Code of Iowa. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 455B.301) 
105.03 SANITARY DISPOSAL REQUIRED. It is the duty of each owner to provide for the sanitary disposal of all refuse accumulating on the owner’s premises before it becomes a nuisance. Any such accumulation remaining on any premises for a period of more than thirty (30) days shall be deemed a nuisance and the City may proceed to abate such nuisances in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 50 or by initiating proper action in district court. 
(Code of Iowa, Ch. 657) 
105.04 HEALTH AND FIRE HAZARD. It is unlawful for any person to permit to accumulate on any premises, improved or vacant, or on any public place, such quantities of solid waste that constitute a health, sanitation or fire hazard. 
105.05 OPEN BURNING RESTRICTED. No person shall allow, cause or permit open burning of combustible materials where the products of combustion are emitted into the open air without passing through a chimney or stack, except that open burning is permitted in the following circumstances: 
(IAC, 567-23.2[455B] and 567-100.2) 
1. Disaster Rubbish. The open burning of rubbish, including landscape waste, for the duration of the community disaster period in cases where an officially declared emergency condition exists. 
(IAC, 567-23.2[3a]) 
2. Trees and Tree Trimmings. The open burning of trees and tree trimmings at a City-operated burning site, provided such burning is conducted in compliance with the rules established by the State Department of Natural Resources. 
(IAC, 567-23.2[3b]) 
3. Flare Stacks. The open burning or flaring of waste gases, provided such open burning or flaring is conducted in compliance with applicable rules of the State Department of Natural Resources. 
(IAC, 567-23.2[3c]) 
CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA 
-567 ­
4. Landscape and Yard Waste. The open burning of yard waste during periods designated by resolution of the Council. The burning of residential yard waste shall be restricted to private property, in the rear of the property, at least thirty (30) feet from any building inhabited by other than the landowner or tenant conducting the open burning. The burning of landscape waste produced in clearing, grubbing and construction operations shall be limited to areas located at least one-fourth (¼) mile from any building inhabited by other than the landowner or tenant conducting the open burning. Rubber tires shall not be used to ignite landscape waste. (Ord. 880 – Aug. 09 Supp.) 
(IAC, 567-23.2[3d]) 
5. Recreational Fires. Open fires for cooking, heating, recreation and ceremonies, provided they comply with the limits for emission of visible air contaminants established by the State Department of Natural Resources. Rubber tires shall not be burned in a recreational fire. 
(IAC, 567-23.2[3e]) 
6. Training Fires. Fires set for the purpose of bona fide training of public or industrial employees in fire fighting methods, provided that the training fires are conducted in compliance with rules established by the State Department of Natural Resources. 
(IAC, 567-23.2[3g]) 
7. Variance. Any person wishing to conduct open burning of materials not permitted herein may make application for a variance to the Director. 
(IAC, 567-23.2[2]) 
105.06 SEPARATION OF YARD WASTE REQUIRED. All yard waste shall be separated by the owner or occupant from all other solid waste accumulated on the premises and shall be composted on the premises or burned on the premises in accordance with the provisions of Section 105.05(4) or placed in acceptable containers or bundled and tagged and either transported to a designated municipal yard waste collection site or picked up on the premises as the Council may designate. The Council shall designate from time to time by resolution approved containers for yard waste, approved bundling and tagging of yard waste, the purchasing sites for yard waste bags or tags and the price to be charged for yard waste bags or tags. The Council shall designate from time to time approved yard waste collection sites or a schedule of on-premises pickup times of yard waste. As used in this section, “yard waste” means any debris such as grass clippings, leaves, garden waste, brush and trees. Yard waste does not include tree stumps. 
105.07 LITTERING PROHIBITED. No person shall discard any litter onto or in any water or land, except that nothing in this section shall be construed to affect the authorized collection and discarding of such litter in or on areas or receptacles provided for such purpose. When litter is discarded from a motor vehicle, the driver of the motor vehicle shall be responsible for the act in any case where doubt exists as to which occupant of the motor vehicle actually discarded the litter. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 455B.363) 
105.08 OPEN DUMPING PROHIBITED. No person shall dump or deposit or permit the dumping or depositing of any solid waste on the surface of the ground or into a body or stream of water at any place other than a sanitary disposal project approved by the Director, unless a special permit to dump or deposit solid waste on land owned or leased by such person has been obtained from the Director. However, this section does not prohibit the use of dirt, stone, brick or similar inorganic material for fill, landscaping, excavation, or grading at places other than a sanitary disposal project. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 455B.307 and IAC, 567-100.2) 
105.09 TOXIC AND HAZARDOUS WASTE. No person shall deposit in a solid waste container or otherwise offer for collection any toxic or hazardous waste. Such materials shall be transported and disposed of as prescribed by the Director. As used in this section, “toxic and hazardous waste” means waste materials, including but not limited to, poisons, pesticides, herbicides, acids, caustics, pathological waste, flammable or explosive materials and similar harmful waste which requires special handling and which must be disposed of in such a manner as to conserve the environment and protect the public health and safety. 
(IAC, 567-100.2) 
(IAC, 567-102.14[2] and 400-27.14[2]) 

105.10 WASTE STORAGE CONTAINERS. Every person owning, managing, operating, leasing or renting any premises, dwelling unit or any place where refuse accumulates shall provide and at all times maintain in good order and repair portable containers for refuse in accordance with the following: 
1. Container Specifications. Waste storage containers shall comply with the following specifications: 
A. Residential. Residential waste shall be placed in heavy-duty disposable garbage bags, shall be of not less than eight (8) gallons or more than thirty-five (35) gallons in nominal capacity, and shall be leak proof and water proof. The total weight of any contents shall not exceed forty (40) pounds. Disposable garbage bags shall be kept securely tied, shall be of sufficient strength to maintain integrity when lifted, and shall be placed outside no more than twenty-four (24) hours prior to scheduled pickup. 
B. Commercial. Every person owning, managing, operating, leasing or renting any commercial premises where an excessive amount of refuse accumulates and where its storage in portable containers as required above is impractical, shall maintain metal bulk storage containers (dumpsters) approved by the City. 
C. Multiple Family. Any person owning or managing a multiple family dwelling unit containing three (3) or more apartments or dwelling units shall provide and maintain at such person’s own expense metal bulk storage containers (dumpsters) approved by the City. One (1) dumpster is required for every four 
(4) apartments or dwelling units on the premises. 
2. 
Storage of Waste Bags. Residential solid waste bags shall be stored upon the residential premises. Commercial solid waste containers shall be stored upon private property, unless the owner has been granted written permission from the City to use public property for such purposes. Each garbage dumpster shall be placed on an 8-foot by 6-foot concrete or asphalt pad which will allow for ease of movement and prevent difficulties of emptying dumpsters when the ground is wet, and the storage site shall be well drained and fully accessible to collection equipment, public health personnel and fire inspection personnel. All owners of residential and commercial premises shall be responsible for proper storage of all garbage and yard waste to prevent materials from being blown or scattered around neighboring yards and streets. 

3. 
Location of Bags for Collection. Bags for the storage of solid waste awaiting collection shall be placed on the front street curb no more than 24 hours prior to the regular garbage pickup for the owner or occupant of the premises served. There will be no alley pickup of solid waste bags. 

4. 
Permanent Structures. No permanent structures will be built on the terrace or parking to hold filled garbage bags until the time of their regularly scheduled pickup. 

5. 
Four disposable garbage bags of not less than eight (8) gallons or more than thirty-five (35) gallons in nominal capacity will be considered a pickup. If the property owner or occupant served has more than four 


(4) bags it will be necessary to make arrangements for an additional pickup. Any additional pickup of garbage must be prearranged and prepaid through the purchase of a sticker. 
CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA -570 ­
6. Pickup of bulky rubbish which is too large or heavy to be collected through residential solid waste collection can be removed if prearrangement and prepayment is made through the purchase of a sticker or tag. 
(Ord. 871 – Jan. 08 Supp.) 
105.11 PROHIBITED PRACTICES. It is unlawful for any person to: 
1. 
Unlawful Use of Containers. Deposit refuse in any solid waste containers not owned by such person without the written consent of the owner of such containers. 

2. 
Interfere with Collectors. Interfere in any manner with solid waste collection equipment or with solid waste collectors in the lawful performance of their duties as such, whether such equipment or collectors be those of the City, or those of any other authorized waste collection service. 

3. 
Incinerators. Burn rubbish or garbage except in incinerators designed for high temperature operation, in which solid, semisolid, liquid or gaseous combustible refuse is ignited and burned efficiently, and from which the solid residues contain little or no combustible material, as acceptable to the Environmental Protection Commission. 

4. 
Scavenging. Take or collect any solid waste which has been placed out for collection on any premises, unless such person is an authorized solid waste collector. 

5. 
Distribution of Advertising. Place, deposit, distribute, circulate or scatter any paper, advertisement, handbill, card, circular or wastepaper in or upon any public street, alley, public place, automobile or other vehicle parked upon any street or alley, yard or porch of any dwelling or vestibule or hallway of any building opening on any public street or alley, provided, however, that newspapers and advertising circulars folded therein may be distributed to the dwellings and/or buildings if they are either placed inside the building and/or dwelling, or if they are placed under some object of such weight that they will not be blown by the wind into any public street or alley. 

6. 
Non-compliance with Weight Restrictions on Solid Waste Bags. City of Perry Solid Waste Employees will not pick up garbage in any bags that weigh more than forty (40) pounds. Continued non­compliance to the weight restrictions could result in a compliance violation. 


(Ord. 871 – Jan. 08 Supp.) 
CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA 
-571 ­
105.12 SANITARY DISPOSAL PROJECT DESIGNATED. The sanitary landfill facilities operated by North Dallas Landfill are hereby designated as the official “Public Sanitary Disposal Project” for the disposal of solid waste produced or originating within the City. 
CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA 
-572 ­
CHAPTER 106 
COLLECTION OF SOLID WASTE 

106.01 Collection Service 106.06 Right of Entry 
106.02 Collection Vehicles 106.07 Collection Fees 
106.03 Loading 106.08 Lien for Nonpayment 
106.04 Frequency of Collection 106.09 Lien Notice 
106.05 Bulky Rubbish 
106.01 COLLECTION SERVICE. The City shall provide for the collection of all solid waste except bulky rubbish as provided in Section 106.05 within the City. The City shall also provide for the collection of certain recyclable solid waste materials within the City. 
106.02 COLLECTION VEHICLES. Vehicles or containers used for the collection and transportation of garbage and similar putrescible waste or solid waste containing such materials shall be leakproof, durable and of easily cleanable construction. They shall be cleaned to prevent nuisances, pollution or insect breeding and shall be maintained in good repair. 
(IAC, 567-104.9[455B]) 
106.03 LOADING. Vehicles or containers used for the collection and transportation of any solid waste shall be loaded and moved in such a manner that the contents will not fall, leak, or spill therefrom, and shall be covered to prevent blowing or loss of material. Where spillage does occur, the material shall be picked up immediately by the collector or transporter and returned to the vehicle or container and the area properly cleaned. 
106.04 FREQUENCY OF COLLECTION. All solid waste shall be collected from residential premises at least once each week and from commercial, industrial and institutional premises as frequently as may be necessary, but not less than once each week. 
106.05 BULKY RUBBISH. Bulky rubbish which is too large or heavy to be collected in the normal manner of other solid waste may be collected by the collector upon request in accordance with procedures therefor established by the Council. 
106.06 RIGHT OF ENTRY. Solid waste collectors are hereby authorized to enter upon private property for the purpose of collecting solid waste therefrom as required by this chapter; however, solid waste collectors shall not enter dwelling units or other residential and commercial buildings. 
106.07 COLLECTION FEES. The collection and disposal of solid waste as provided by this chapter are declared to be beneficial to the property served. There shall be levied and collected fees therefor in accordance with the following: 
(Goreham vs. Des Moines, 1970, 179 NW 2nd, 449) 
1. Solid Waste Collection Fees. Where, in the judgment of the City, special conditions exist to the extent that the application of the current normal user charges (established by resolution of the Council) would be inequitable or unfair to either the City or the customer, a rate shall be proposed and submitted to the Council for approval by resolution. 
(Ord. 777 – Jul. 02 Supp.) 
2. 
Payment of Fees. The fees provided herein are due and payable at the office of the Clerk on or before the 20th of each month. 

3. 
Service Discontinued. Solid waste, sewer availability and water service to delinquent customers shall be discontinued in accordance with the following: 


(Code of Iowa, Section 384.84) 
A. Notice. The Water Department shall notify each delinquent customer that service will be discontinued if payment of the combined service account, including late payment charges, is not received by the date specified in the notice of delinquency. Such notice shall be sent by ordinary mail and shall inform the customer of the nature of the delinquency and afford the customer the opportunity for a hearing prior to the discontinuance. 
B. Notice to Landlords. If the customer is a tenant, and if the owner or landlord of the property has made a written request for notice, the notice of delinquency shall also be given to the owner or landlord. 
C. Hearing. If a hearing is requested within ten (10) days after notice of the proposed disconnection, the Clerk, Water Superintendent and Water Pollution Control Director shall conduct an informal hearing and shall make a determination as to whether the discontinuance of service is justified. The decision of this panel is final, with no appeal process allowed. 
D. Fees. A fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) per service shall be charged before service is restored to a delinquent customer. No fee shall be charged for the usual or customary trips in the regular changes of occupancy of property. 
4. Collection Requirements. To insure the uniform, safe and sanitary treatment of solid waste in the City, it is mandatory that any person on the Perry Municipal Water System owning, occupying or managing any premises in the City which produces or generates solid waste subscribe to the solid waste collection services provided by the City and pay the charges therefor prescribed, with the exceptions of premises that consistently produce or generate material that cannot be safely handled by City personnel and equipment and the use of single-use construction dumpsters in excess of the yard-and-a-half size. Such exceptions are to be authorized at the discretion of the City staff. 
106.08 LIEN FOR NONPAYMENT. The owner of the premises served and any lessee or tenant thereof shall be jointly and severally liable for garbage charges to the premises. Garbage collection charges remaining unpaid and delinquent shall constitute a lien upon the premises served and shall be certified by the City Clerk, Finance Officer or Water Clerk to the County Treasurer for collection in the same manner as property taxes. (Ord. 805 – Nov. 03 Supp.) 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.84) 
106.09 LIEN NOTICE. A lien for delinquent service charges shall not be certified to the County Treasurer unless prior written notice of intent to certify a lien is given to the customer. If the customer is a tenant and if the owner or landlord of the property has made a written request for notice, the notice shall also be given to the owner or landlord. The notice shall be sent to the appropriate persons by ordinary mail not less than thirty (30) days prior to certification of the lien to the County Treasurer. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.84) 
CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA 
-575 ­[The next page is 585] 
CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA 
-576 ­
CHAPTER 110 
NATURAL GAS FRANCHISE 

110.01 Grant of Franchise 110.06 Indemnification 
110.02 State Code Restrictions and Limitations 110.07 Maintain Facilities 
110.03 Use of Public Ways 110.08 Quantity and Quality 
110.04 Relocation of Installations 110.09 Franchise Fee 
110.05 Excavations 110.10 Franchise Effective 
110.01 GRANT OF FRANCHISE. There is hereby granted to MidAmerican Energy Company, an Iowa corporation, hereinafter called “Company,” and to its successors and assigns the right and franchise to acquire, construct, erect, maintain and operate in the City of Perry, Iowa, hereinafter called the “City,” a gas distribution system, to furnish natural gas along, under and upon the streets, avenues, alleys and public places to serve customers within and without the City, and to furnish and sell natural gas to the City and its inhabitants. For the term of this franchise the Company is granted the right of eminent domain, the exercise of which is subject to City Council approval upon application by the Company. This franchise shall be effective for a twenty (20) year period from and after the effective date of the ordinance codified by this chapter, provided, however, that there may be a re-evaluation prior to the end of year 10, with the opportunity for both parties to request amendments. If neither party requests such re-evaluation by means of a written notice to the other party during the last 60 days of year 10, this franchise will continue without change for the remaining 10 years. If the parties are unable to agree to amend the ordinance, then the City may terminate this franchise agreement at the end of year 10. 
110.02 STATE CODE RESTRICTIONS AND LIMITATIONS. The rights and privileges hereby granted are subject to the restrictions and limitations of Chapter 364 of the Code of Iowa, or as subsequently amended or changed. 
110.03 USE OF PUBLIC WAYS. Company shall have the right to excavate in any public street for the purpose of laying, relaying, repairing or extending gas pipes, mains, conduits, and other facilities provided that the same shall be so placed as not to interfere with the construction of any water pipes, drain or sewer or the flow of water therefrom, which have been or may hereafter be located by authority of the City. 
110.04 RELOCATION OF INSTALLATIONS. The Company shall, at its cost and expense, locate and relocate its installations in, on, over or under any public street or alley in the City in such manner as the City may at any time reasonably require for the purposes of facilitating the construction, reconstruction, maintenance or repair of the street or alley or any public improvement of, in or about any such street or alley or reasonably promoting the efficient operation of any such improvement. If the City has a reasonable alternative route for the street, alley or public improvements, which alternative route would not cause the relocation of the Company installations, the City shall consider said alternative route. If relocation of the Company facilities could be avoided by relocating other franchisee’s or facility user’s equipment and facilities, and said other franchisee’s or user’s cost of relocation is less than the Company’s cost of relocation, the City shall consider the route that requires the other franchisees or users to relocate. If project funds from a source other than the City are available to pay for the relocation of utility facilities, the City shall use its best efforts to secure said funds and provide them to the Company to compensate the Company for the costs of relocation. 
110.05 EXCAVATIONS. In making excavations in any streets, avenues, alleys and public places for the installation of gas pipes, conduits or apparatus, Company shall not unreasonably obstruct the use of the streets and shall replace the surface, restoring the original condition as nearly as practicable. 
110.06 INDEMNIFICATION. Company shall indemnify and save harmless City from any and all claims, suits, losses, damages, costs or expenses on account of injury or damage to any person or property, caused or occasioned, or allegedly caused or occasioned, in whole or in part, by Company's negligence in construction, reconstruction, excavation, operation or maintenance of the gas utilities authorized by this franchise, provided, however, that the Company shall not be obligated to defend, indemnify and save harmless the City for any costs or damages arising from the negligence of the City, its officers, employees or agents. 
110.07 MAINTAIN FACILITIES. The Company shall extend its mains and pipes and operate and maintain the system in accordance with the applicable regulations of the Iowa Utilities Board or its successors. 
110.08 QUANTITY AND QUALITY. During the term of this franchise, the Company shall furnish natural gas in the quantity and quality consistent with applicable Iowa laws and regulations. 
110.09 FRANCHISE FEE. In consideration of the right to construct and maintain such natural gas facilities and equipment along, upon, across and under the streets, highways, avenues, alleys, bridges and public places of the City there is hereby imposed upon the Company and, by its acceptance of this franchise, it agrees that there shall be collected from the Company’s retail customers within the corporate limits of the City (excluding, however, the sale of natural gas to the City as a customer, St. Patrick’s Catholic School, public school facilities and Dallas County facilities which are or may in the future be located within the Perry corporate limits) and remitted by the Company to the City, a franchise fee in the amount equal to two percent (2%) of the gross receipts derived by the Company from the transmission or distribution of natural gas to customers commencing with gross receipts, less uncollectible accounts, received on or after July 1, 2005. The City may increase, decrease or eliminate the franchise fee. Any resolution revising or eliminating the franchise fee shall become effective and billings shall commence on an agreed upon date which is no less than 60 days following written notice to the Company. For gas transportation customers, the franchise fee shall be equal to two percent (2%) of any billings issued by the Company for natural gas transportation, delivery services and other tariff services provided by the Company for facilities located within the corporate limits of the City. The Company shall not collect nor remit to the City any franchise fees on natural gas sold by the Company or any other provider to any transport customer. The Company will remit franchise fee revenues to the City on or before the last business day of the month following each quarter. The quarters are January, February and March; April, May and June; July, August and September; October, November and December. The City shall provide to the company copies of annexation ordinances in a timely manner to ensure appropriate franchise fee collection from customers within the corporate limits of the City. The City may, by ordinance, exempt certain types of sales from being charged the franchise fee. The obligation to pay the fee imposed by this section is modified if: 
1. 
The City permits any other person to sell natural gas to City consumers and pay a franchise fee or its lawful equivalent at a lesser rate than provided in this section, in which case the Company shall pay at the lesser rate; or 

2. 
The City adds additional territory by annexation or consolidation and is unable to lawfully impose the franchise fee upon any person selling natural gas to consumers within the additional territory, in which case the franchise fee on the revenue from sales by Company in the additional territory shall be equal to that of the lowest fee being paid by any other person selling natural gas within the additional area. 


The further provisions of this section to the contrary notwithstanding, the Company shall be relieved of its obligation to pay to the City the franchise fee, effective as of the date specified below, with no liability therefor under each or any of the following conditions: 
1. The collection or payment of the franchise fee is ruled to be unlawful by the Supreme Court of Iowa, effective as of the date specified by that Court. 
2. 
The Iowa General Assembly enacts legislation which makes the collection or payment of the franchise fee unlawful, effective as of the date lawfully specified by the General Assembly. 

3. 
The Iowa Utilities Board, or its successor agency, denies the Company the right to collect the franchise fee from its customers provided such denial is affirmed by the Supreme Court of Iowa, effective as of the date of the agency order from which the appeal is taken. 


110.10 FRANCHISE EFFECTIVE. This chapter and the rights and privileges herein granted shall become effective and binding upon its approval and passage in accordance with Iowa law and the written acceptance by the Company. The Company shall, within 30 days after the City Council approval of the ordinance codified by this chapter file in the office of the Clerk of the City, its acceptance in writing of all terms and provisions of this chapter. Following Council approval, the ordinance shall be published in the Perry Chief, the official newspaper for the City of Perry, Iowa. The effective date of the ordinance shall be the date of the publication. In the event that MidAmerican Energy Company does not file its written acceptance of the ordinance within 30 days after its approval by the Council, the ordinance shall be void and of no effect. 
EDITOR’S NOTE 
Ordinance No. 834 adopting a natural gas franchise for the City was passed and adopted on April 4, 2005. 
[The next page is 591] 
CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA 
-588 ­
CHAPTER 111 
ELECTRIC FRANCHISE 

111.01 Franchise Granted 111.05 Nonexclusive 
111.02 Construction; Maintenance; Indemnification 111.06 Continuous Service 
111.03 Meters and Service Lines 111.07 Term of Franchise 
111.04 System Requirements 
111.01 FRANCHISE GRANTED. There is hereby granted to Interstate Power & Light Company, hereinafter referred to as the “Company,” its successors and assigns, the right and franchise to acquire, construct, erect, maintain and operate in the City, works and plants for the manufacture and generation of electricity and a distribution system for electric light, heat and power and the right to erect and maintain the necessary poles, lines, wires, conduits and other appliances for the transmission of electric current along, under and upon the streets, avenues, alleys and public places in the City; also the right to erect and maintain upon the streets, avenues, alleys and public places, transmission lines through the City, to supply individuals, corporations, communities and municipalities both inside and outside of the City with electric light, heat and power for the period of twenty-five (25) years; also the right of eminent domain as provided in Section 364.2 of the Code of Iowa. 
111.02 CONSTRUCTION; MAINTENANCE; INDEMNIFICATION. 
The poles, wires and appliances shall be placed and maintained so as not to unnecessarily interfere with the travel on said streets, alleys and public places in the City or unnecessarily interfere with the proper use of the same, including ordinary drainage or with the sewers, underground pipe and other property of the City, and the Company, its successors and assigns shall hold the City free and harmless from all damages arising from the negligent acts or omissions of the Company in the erection or maintenance of said system. 
111.03 METERS AND SERVICE LINES. The Company, its successors and assigns shall furnish and install all meters at its own expense and shall provide the service wire to buildings as set forth in the Company’s tariff filed with the Iowa Utilities Board. 
111.04 SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS. The system authorized by this chapter shall be modern and up-to-date and shall be of sufficient capacity to supply all reasonable demands of the City and the inhabitants thereof and shall be kept in a modern and up-to-date condition. 
111.05 NONEXCLUSIVE. The franchise granted by this chapter shall not be exclusive. 
111.06 CONTINUOUS SERVICE. Service to be rendered by the Company under this chapter shall be continuous unless prevented from so doing by fire, acts of God, unavoidable accidents or casualties, or reasonable interruptions necessary to properly service the Company’s equipment, and in such event service shall be resumed as quickly as is reasonably possible. 
111.07 TERM OF FRANCHISE. The term of the franchise granted by this chapter and the rights granted thereunder shall continue for the period of twenty-five (25) years from and after its acceptance by the Company. 
EDITOR’S NOTE 
Ordinance No. 840 adopting an electric franchise for the City was passed and adopted on August 15, 2005. 
[The next page is 601] 
CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA 
-592 ­
CHAPTER 112 
CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE 
112.01 Definitions 	112.19 Public, Educational and Governmental Access 
112.02 Grant 	112.20 Franchise Fee 
112.03 Other Ordinances 	112.21 Rates and Charges 
112.04 Level Playing Field 	112.22 Renewal of Franchise 
112.05 Term 	112.23 Conditions of Sale 
112.06 Conditions of Occupancy 	112.24 Transfer of Franchise 
112.07 Restoration of Public Ways 	112.25 Books and Records 
112.08 Relocation at Request of the Franchising 	112.26 Insurance Requirements Authority 112.27 Indemnification 
112.09 Relocation for a Third Party 	112.28 Notice of Violation 
112.10 Trimming of Trees and Shrubbery 112.29 Grantee’s Right to Cure or Respond 
112.11 Safety Requirements 	112.30 Public Hearing 
112.12 Underground Construction 	112.31 Enforcement 
112.13 Access to Open Trenches 	112.32 Revocation 
112.14 Required Extensions of the Cable Service 112.33 Force Majeure 
112.15 Subscriber Charges for Extensions of Service 112.34 Actions of Parties 
112.16 Cable Service to Public Buildings 112.35 Entire Agreement 
112.17 Emergency Use 	112.36 Notice 
112.18 Reimbursement of Costs 
112.01 DEFINITIONS. The following words and phrases, when used herein, shall, for the purposes of this chapter, have the meanings ascribed to them in this section: 
1. 
“Basic cable” is the lowest priced tier of cable service that includes the retransmission of local broadcast television signals. 

2. 
“Cable Act” means Title VI of the Communications Act of 1934, as amended. 

3. 
“Cable services” means (i) the one-way transmission to subscribers of video programming or other programming service and (ii) subscriber interaction, if any, which is required for the selection or use of such video programming or any other programming service. 

4. 
“Cable system” means the Grantee’s facility, consisting of a set of closed transmission paths and associated signal generation, reception and control equipment that is designed to provide cable service which includes video programming and which is provided to multiple customers within the service area. 

5. 
“FCC” means Federal Communications Commission or successor governmental entity thereto. 

6. 	
“Franchising Authority” means the City of Perry. 

7. 
“Grantee” means MCC Iowa LLC, or the lawful successor, transferee or assignee thereof. 


8. 
“Gross revenue” means any revenues received by the Grantee from subscribers from the operation of the cable system to provide cable services in the service area, provided, however, that “gross revenues” shall not include any tax, fee or assessment of general applicability collected by the Grantee from subscribers for pass-through to a government entity, including the FCC User Fee. 

9. 
“Person” means an individual, partnership, association, joint stock company, trust, corporation or governmental entity. 

10. 
“Public way” means the surface of, and the space above and below any public street, highway, freeway, bridge, land path, alley, court, boulevard, sidewalk, parkway, way, lane, public way, drive, circle or other public right-of-way, including, but not limited to, public utility easements, dedicated utility strips or rights-of-way dedicated for compatible uses now or hereafter held by the Franchising Authority in the service area which shall entitle the Grantee to the use thereof for the purpose of installing, operating, repairing and maintaining the cable system. 

11. 
“Service area” means the present boundaries of the Franchising Authority and includes any additions thereto by annexation or other legal means, subject to the exceptions in Section 112.14. 

12. 
“Standard installation” is defined as 125 feet from the nearest tap to the subscriber’s terminal. 

13. 
“Subscriber” means a person who lawfully receives cable service of the cable system with the Grantee’s express permission. 


112.02 GRANT. The Franchising Authority hereby grants to the Grantee a nonexclusive franchise which authorizes the Grantee to construct and operate a cable system in, along, among, upon, across, above, over, under or in any manner connected with public ways within the service area and for that purpose to erect, install, construct, repair, replace, reconstruct, maintain or retain in, on, over, under, upon, across or along any public way such facilities and equipment as may be necessary or appurtenant to the cable system for the transmission and distribution of cable services, data services, information and other communications services or for any other lawful purposes. 
112.03 OTHER ORDINANCES. The Grantee agrees to comply with the terms of any lawfully adopted generally applicable local ordinance, to the extent that the provisions of the ordinance do not have the effect of limiting the benefits or expanding the obligations of the Grantee that are granted by this franchise. Neither party may unilaterally alter the materials rights and obligations set forth in this franchise. In the event of a conflict between any ordinance and this franchise, the franchise shall control. 
112.04 LEVEL PLAYING FIELD. The Franchising Authority shall not authorize or permit any person providing video programming services and/or cable services to enter into the Franchising Authority’s public ways in any part of the service area on terms or conditions more favorable or less burdensome to such person than those applied to the Grantee pursuant to this franchise. A franchising authority may require insurance or surety in excess of that required under this franchise in recognition of such operator being either a new entrant or because of the construction requirements specified in that operator’s agreement with the Franchising Authority. 
112.05 TERM. The franchise granted hereunder shall be for an initial term of fifteen (15) years commencing on the effective date of the franchise†, unless otherwise lawfully terminated in accordance with the terms of this chapter. 
112.06 CONDITIONS OF OCCUPANCY. The cable system installed by the Grantee pursuant to the terms hereof shall be located so as to cause a minimum of interference with the proper use of public ways and with the rights and reasonable convenience of property owners who own property that adjoins any such public ways. 
112.07 RESTORATION OF PUBLIC WAYS. If during the course of Grantee’s construction, operation or maintenance of the cable system there occurs a disturbance of any public way by the Grantee, the Grantee shall replace and restore such public way to a condition reasonably comparable to the condition of the public way existing immediately prior to such disturbance. 
112.08 RELOCATION AT REQUEST OF THE FRANCHISING AUTHORITY. Upon its receipt of reasonable advance written notice, to be not less than ten (10) business days, the Grantee shall protect, support, raise, lower, temporarily disconnect, relocate in or remove from the public way any property of the Grantee when lawfully required by the Franchising Authority by reason of traffic conditions, public safety, street abandonment, freeway and street construction, change or establishment of street grade, installation of sewers, drains, gas or water pipes or any other type of public structures or improvements which are not used to compete with the Grantee’s services. The Grantee shall in all cases have the right of abandonment of its property. 
† EDITOR’S NOTE: Ordinance No. 843 renewing a cable television franchise for the City was passed and adopted on September 20, 2005, and accepted by the Grantee March 20, 2006. 
CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA 
-603 ­
112.09 RELOCATION FOR A THIRD PARTY. The Grantee shall, on the request of any person holding a lawful permit issued by the Franchise Authority, protect, support, raise, lower, temporarily disconnect, relocate in or remove from the public way as necessary any property of the Grantee, provided: (i) the expense of such is paid by the person benefiting from the relocation, including, if required by the Grantee, making such payment in advance; and (ii) the Grantee is given reasonable advance written notice to prepare for such changes. For purposes of this subsection, “reasonable advance written notice” shall be no less than thirty (30) business days in the event of a temporary relocation, and no less than one hundred twenty (120) days for a permanent relocation. 
112.10 TRIMMING OF TREES AND SHRUBBERY. The Grantee shall have the authority to trim trees or other natural growth in order to access and maintain the cable system. 
112.11 SAFETY REQUIREMENTS. Construction, operation and maintenance of the cable system shall be performed in an orderly and workmanlike manner. All such work shall be performed in substantial accordance with generally applicable Federal, State and local regulations and the National Electric Safety Code. 
112.12 UNDERGROUND CONSTRUCTION. In those areas of the service area where all of the transmission or distribution facilities of the respective public utilities providing telephone communications and electric services are underground, the Grantee likewise shall construct, operate and maintain its cable system underground. Nothing contained in this section shall require the Grantee to construct, operate and maintain underground any ground-mounted appurtenances. 
112.13 ACCESS TO OPEN TRENCHES. The Franchise Authority agrees to include the Grantee in the platting process for any new subdivision. At a minimum, the Franchise Authority agrees to require as a condition of issuing a permit for open trenching to any utility or developer that (1) the utility or developer give the Grantee at least ten (10) days advance written notice of the availability of the open trench, and (2) that the utility or developer provide the Grantee with reasonable access to the open trench. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the Grantee shall not be required to utilize any open trench. 
112.14 REQUIRED EXTENSIONS OF THE CABLE SYSTEM. Grantee agrees to provide cable service to all residences in the service area subject to the density requirements specified in this section. Whenever the Grantee receives a request for cable service from a potential subscriber in a unserved area contiguous to Grantee’s existing distribution facilities where there are at least ten (10) residences within 1320 cable-bearing strand feet (one-quarter cable mile) from the portion of the Grantee’s trunk or distribution cable which is to be extended, it shall extend its cable system to such subscribers at no cost to said subscribers for cable system extension, other than the published standard/non­standard installation fees charged to all subscribers. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the Grantee shall have the right, but not the obligation, to extend the cable system into any portion of the service area where another operator is providing cable service, into any annexed area which is not contiguous to the present service area of the Grantee, or into any area which is financially or technically infeasible due to extraordinary circumstances, such as a runway or freeway crossing. 
112.15 SUBSCRIBER CHARGES FOR EXTENSIONS OF SERVICE. 
No subscriber shall be refused service arbitrarily. However, if an area does not meet the density requirements of Section 112.14, the Grantee shall only be required to extend the cable system to subscriber(s) in that area if the subscriber(s) are willing to share the capital costs of extending the cable system. Specifically, the Grantee shall contribute a capital amount equal to the construction cost per mile, multiplied by a fraction whose numerator equals the actual number of residences per 1320 cable-bearing strand feet from the Grantee’s trunk or distribution cable, and whose denominator equals 10. Subscribers who request service hereunder will bear the remaining cost to extend the cable system on a pro rata basis. The Grantee may require that payment of the capital contribution in aid of construction borne by such potential subscribers be paid in advance. Subscribers shall also be responsible for any standard/non-standard installation charges to extend the cable system from the tap to the residence. 
112.16 CABLE SERVICE TO PUBLIC BUILDINGS. The Grantee, upon request, shall provide without charge a standard installation and one outlet of basic cable to those administrative buildings owned or occupied by the Franchising Authority, fire station(s), police station(s) and K-12 public school(s), that are passed by its cable system. The cable service provided shall not be distributed beyond the originally installed outlet without authorization from the Grantee. The cable service provided shall not be used for commercial purposes and such outlets shall not be located in areas open to the public. The Franchising Authority shall take reasonable precautions to prevent any inappropriate use of the Grantee’s cable system or any loss or damage to the Grantee’s cable system. The Franchising Authority shall hold the Grantee harmless from any and all liability or claims arising out of the provision and use of cable service required by this section. The Grantee shall not be required to provide an outlet to such buildings where a non-standard installation is required, unless the Franchising Authority or building owner/occupant agrees to pay the incremental cost of any necessary cable system extension and/or non­standard installation. If additional outlets of basic cable are provided to such buildings, the building owner/occupant shall pay the usual installation and service fees associated therewith. 
112.17 EMERGENCY USE. If the Grantee provides an Emergency Alert System (EAS), such EAS shall be operated in accordance with FCC regulations. The Franchising Authority shall permit only appropriately trained and authorized persons to operate the EAS equipment and shall take reasonable precautions to prevent any use of the Grantee’s cable system in any manner that results in inappropriate use thereof, or any loss or damage to the cable system. Except to the extent expressly prohibited by law, the Franchising Authority shall hold the Grantee, its employees, officers and assigns harmless from any claims arising out of the use of the EAS, including, but not limited to, reasonable attorneys’ fees and costs. 
112.18 REIMBURSEMENT OF COSTS. If funds are available to any person using the public way for the purpose of defraying the cost of any of the foregoing, the Franchising Authority shall reimburse the Grantee in the same manner in which other persons affected by the requirement are reimbursed. If the funds are controlled by another governmental entity, the Franchising Authority shall make application for such funds on behalf of the Grantee. 
112.19 PUBLIC, EDUCATIONAL AND GOVERNMENTAL ACCESS. 
The Grantee shall continue to provide one (1) channel to the Franchising Authority or its non-profit designee for non-commercial public, educational and/or government access programming. This channel shall be designated as the “Access Channel” in this chapter. 
1. 
The Grantee shall continue to provide the Franchising Authority with the capability to allow live broadcast on the Access Channel in the service area from the Recreation Center located at 1800 Pattee Street and the Perry High School located at 1200 18th Street throughout the term of this agreement. In addition, the Grantee shall provide the capability to allow live broadcast on the Access Channel from the Perry Public Library located at 1101 Willis Ave. no later than April 30, 2006. 

2. 
The Franchising Authority or its designee shall exercise sole control over the operation and shall establish rules for the use of the Access Channel. 

3. 
The Grantee shall provide ongoing capital support for public, educational, and governmental access equipment and facilities in the amount of not to exceed fifty cents ($.50) per subscriber per month for the entire term of this Agreement payable in the same manner as the 


franchise fee payment pursuant to Section 112.20 hereof. The Grantee acknowledges that this amount shall not be considered gross revenues subject to the payment of franchise fees pursuant to Section 112.20 hereof. Furthermore, payments of this ongoing support shall not be deemed to be “franchise fees” within the meaning of Section 622 of the Cable Act and such payment shall not be deemed to be "payments-in­kind" or any involuntary payments chargeable against the compensation to be paid to the Grantor by the Grantee pursuant to Section 112.20 hereof. A Grantee shall be allowed to collect such fee as a pass through to cable subscribers. 
4. The Grantee shall provide the Franchising Authority with $3,000.00 for Access Channel capital needs no later than January 15, 2006, provided that the Grantor supplies documentation that Grantor has spent a minimum of eighty percent (80%) of its franchise fee revenues received from the Grantee from the previous year to support the Access Channel. 
The Grantee shall provide the Grantor with a second grant of $3,000.00 for Access Channel capital needs no later than January 15, 2009, provided that the Grantor supplies documentation that the Grantor has utilized a minimum of eighty percent (80%) of the franchise fees received from the Grantee to support the Access Channel. 
The Grantee shall provide the Grantor with a third grant of $3,000.00 for Government and Educational access capital needs no later than January 15, 2012, provided that the Grantor supplies documentation that the Grantor has utilized a minimum of eighty percent (80%) of the franchise fees received from the Grantee to support the Access Channel. 
The Grantee shall provide the Grantor with a fourth grant of $3,000.00 for Government and Educational access capital needs no later than January 15, 2015, provided that the Grantor supplies documentation that the Grantor has utilized a minimum of eighty percent (80%) of the franchise fees received from the Grantee to support the Access Channel. 
The City shall indemnify and hold the Grantee harmless from any claims by any Person that the Government and Educational Capital Support Grant violates applicable law. 
5. Additional Channels. Whenever the Access Channel as required by this section is in use more than fifty percent (50%) of prime time (as defined in Section 76.5(n) of the FCC Rules and Regulations) and more than fifty percent (50%) outside of prime time over a three month period, with at least fifty percent (50%) of the programming being original and not duplicated, and there is demand for use of additional channels for the 
CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA -607 ­
same purpose, the Grantee shall have six (6) months to make an additional channel available for the same purpose, provided, however, that the cable system has been rebuilt/upgraded to a capacity of seventy-seven (77) channels and that said Access Channel does not interfere with existing use of the channel capacity on the Cable System. In no event shall the Grantee be required to provide more the three (3) access channels on the cable system. 
6. In the event that the ongoing capital support is not required by the City for public, educational and/or governmental access facilities, then the Grantee and the Franchising Authority agree to negotiate in good faith the termination of Section 112.19(3 & 4). 
112.20 FRANCHISE FEE. 
1. The Grantee shall pay to the Franchise Authority a franchise fee of five percent (5%) of annual gross revenues (as defined in Section 
112.01 of this chapter). In accordance with the Cable Act, the twelve 
(12) month period applicable under the franchise for the computation of the franchise fee shall be a calendar year. The franchise fee payment shall be due quarterly and payable within 90 days after the close of the preceding quarter. Each payment shall be accompanied by a brief report prepared by a representative of the Grantee showing the basis for the computation. 
2. Limitation on Franchise Fee Actions. The period of limitation for recovery by the Franchising Authority of any franchise fee payable hereunder shall be three (3) years from the date on which payment by the Grantee is due to the Franchising Authority. 
112.21 RATES AND CHARGES. The Franchising Authority may regulate rates for the provision of basic cable and equipment as expressly permitted by Federal or State law. 
112.22 RENEWAL OF FRANCHISE. 
1. 
The Franchising Authority and the Grantee agree that any proceedings undertaken by the Franchising Authority that relate to the renewal of the Grantee’s franchise shall be governed by and comply with the renewal provisions of Federal law. 

2. 
In addition to the procedures set forth in the Cable Act, the Franchising Authority agrees to notify the Grantee of its assessments regarding the identity of future cable-related community needs and interests, as well as the past performance of the Grantee under the then current franchise term. The Franchising Authority further agrees that 


such assessments shall be provided to the Grantee promptly so that the Grantee has adequate time to submit a proposal pursuant to the Cable Act and complete renewal of the franchise prior to expiration of its term. 
3. 
Notwithstanding anything to the contrary set forth in this section, the Grantee and the Franchising Authority agree that at any time during the term of the then current franchise, while affording the public appropriate notice and opportunity to comment in accordance with the provisions of Federal law, the Franchising Authority and Grantee may agree to undertake and finalize informal negotiations regarding renewal of the then current franchise and the Franchising Authority may grant a renewal thereof. 

4. 
The Grantee and the Franchising Authority consider the terms set forth in this section to be consistent with the express provisions of the Cable Act. 


112.23 CONDITIONS OF SALE. If a renewal or extension of Grantee’s franchise is denied or the franchise is lawfully terminated, and the Franchising Authority either lawfully acquires ownership of the cable system or by its actions lawfully effects a transfer of ownership of the cable system to another party, any such acquisition or transfer shall be at the price determined pursuant to the provisions set forth in Section 627 of the Cable Act. The Grantee and the Franchising Authority agree that in the case of a final determination of a lawful revocation of the franchise, the Grantee shall be given at least twelve (12) months to effectuate a transfer of its cable system to a qualified third party. Furthermore, the Grantee shall be authorized to continue to operate pursuant to the terms of its prior franchise during this period. If, at the end of that time, the Grantee is unsuccessful in procuring a qualified transferee or assignee of its cable system which is reasonably acceptable to the Franchising Authority, the Grantee and Franchising Authority may avail themselves of any rights they may have pursuant to Federal or State law. It is further agreed that the Grantee’s continued operation of the cable system during the twelve-month period shall not be deemed to be a waiver, nor an extinguishment of, any rights of either the Franchising Authority or the Grantee. 
112.24 TRANSFER OF FRANCHISE. The Grantee’s right, title or interest in the franchise shall not be sold, transferred, assigned or otherwise encumbered, other than to an entity controlling, controlled by or under common control with the Grantee, without the prior written notice to the Franchising Authority. No such consent shall be required, however, for a transfer in trust, by mortgage, by other hypothecation, or by assignment of any rights, title or interest of the Grantee in the franchise or cable system in order to secure indebtedness. 
112.25 BOOKS AND RECORDS. The Grantee agrees that the Franchising Authority, upon thirty (30) days written notice to the Grantee and no more than once annually, may review such of its books and records at the Grantee’s business office, during normal business hours and on a nondisruptive basis, as is reasonably necessary to ensure compliance with the terms of this franchise. Such notice shall specifically reference the section of the franchise which is under review, so that the Grantee may organize the necessary books and records for easy access by the Franchising Authority. Alternatively, if the books and records are not easily accessible at the local office of the Grantee, the Grantee may, at its sole option, choose to pay the reasonable travel costs of the Franchising Authority’s representative to view the books and records at the appropriate location. The Grantee shall not be required to maintain any books and records for franchise compliance purposes longer than three (3) years. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary set forth herein, the Grantee shall not be required to disclose information which it reasonably deems to be proprietary or confidential in nature, nor disclose books and records of any affiliate which is not providing cable service in the service area. The Franchising Authority agrees to treat any information disclosed by the Grantee as confidential and only to disclose it to employees, representatives and agents thereof that have a need to know, or in order to enforce the provisions hereof. The Grantee shall not be required to provide subscriber information in violation of Section 631 of the Cable Act. 
112.26 INSURANCE REQUIREMENTS. The Grantee shall maintain in full force and effect, at its own cost and expense, during the term of the franchise, Commercial General Liability Insurance in the amount of $1,000,000 combined single limit for bodily injury and property damage. The Franchising Authority shall be designated as an additional insured. Such insurance shall be noncancellable except upon thirty (30) days’ prior written notice to the Franchising Authority. Upon written request, the Grantee shall provide a Certificate of Insurance showing evidence of the coverage required by this section. 
112.27 INDEMNIFICATION. The Grantee agrees to indemnify, save and hold harmless and defend the Franchising Authority, its officers, boards and employees, from and against any liability for damages and for any liability or claims resulting from property damage or bodily injury (including accidental death) which arise out of the Grantee’s construction, operation or maintenance of its cable system in the service area, provided that the Franchising Authority shall give the Grantee written notice of its obligation to indemnify the Franchising Authority within ten (10) days of receipt of a claim or action pursuant to this section. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the Grantee shall not indemnify the Franchising Authority for any damages, liability or claims resulting from the willful misconduct or negligence of the Franchising Authority. 
112.28 NOTICE OF VIOLATION. In the event that the Franchising Authority believes that the Grantee has not complied with the terms of the franchise, the Franchising Authority shall informally discuss the matter with Grantee. If these discussions do not lead to resolution of the problem, the Franchising Authority shall notify the Grantee in writing of the exact nature of the alleged noncompliance. 
112.29 GRANTEE’S RIGHT TO CURE OR RESPOND. The Grantee shall have thirty (30) days from receipt of the notice described in Section 
112.28 to: (i) respond to the Franchising Authority contesting the assertion of noncompliance; or (ii) to cure such default; or (iii) in the event that, by the nature of the default, such default cannot be cured within the thirty-day period, initiate reasonable steps to remedy such default and notify the Franchising Authority of the steps being taken and the projected date that they will be completed. 
112.30 PUBLIC HEARING. In the event that the Grantee fails to respond to the notice as described in Section 112.28 pursuant to the procedures set forth in Section 112.29, or in the event that the alleged default is not remedied within thirty (30) days or the date projected pursuant to Section 112.29(iii) above, if it intends to continue its investigation into the default, then the Franchising Authority shall schedule a public hearing. The Franchising Authority shall provide the Grantee at least ten (10) days’ prior written notice of such hearing, which specifies the time, place and purpose of such hearing and provide the Grantee the opportunity to be heard. 
112.31 ENFORCEMENT. Subject to applicable Federal and State law, in the event the Franchising Authority, after the hearing set forth in 112.30, determines that the Grantee is in default of any provision of the franchise, the Franchising Authority may: 
1. 
Seek specific performance of any provision which reasonably lends itself to such remedy, as an alternative to damages; or 

2. 
Commence an action at law for monetary damages or seek other equitable relief; or 

3. 
In the case of a substantial default of a material provision of the franchise, seek to revoke the franchise in accordance with Section 


112.32. 
112.32 REVOCATION. Should the Franchising Authority seek to revoke the franchise after following the procedures set forth in Sections 112.28 – 112.31, the Franchising Authority shall give written notice to the Grantee of its intent. The notice shall set forth the exact nature of the noncompliance. The Grantee shall have ninety (90) days from such notice to object in writing and to state its reasons for such objection. In the event the Franchising Authority has not received a satisfactory response from the Grantee, it may then seek termination of the franchise at a public meeting. The Franchising Authority shall cause to be served upon the Grantee, at least thirty (30) days prior to such public meeting, a written notice specifying the time and place of such meeting and stating its intent to revoke the franchise. At the designated hearing, Grantee shall be provided a fair opportunity for full participation, including the right to be represented by legal counsel, to introduce relevant evidence, to require the production of evidence, to compel the relevant testimony of the officials, agents, employees or consultants of the Franchising Authority to compel the testimony of other persons as permitted by law and to question witnesses. A complete verbatim record and transcript shall be made of such hearing. Following the hearing, the Franchising Authority shall determine whether or not the franchise shall be revoked. If the Franchising Authority determines that the franchise shall be revoked, the Franchising Authority shall promptly provide Grantee with its decision in writing. The Grantee may appeal such determination of the Franchising Authority to an appropriate court which shall have the power to review the decision of the Franchising Authority de novo. Grantee shall be entitled to such relief as the court finds appropriate. Such appeal must be taken within sixty (60) days of Grantee’s receipt of the determination of the Franchising Authority. The Franchising Authority may, at its sole discretion, take any lawful action which it deems appropriate to enforce the Franchising Authority’s rights under the franchise in lieu of revocation of the franchise. 
112.33 FORCE MAJEURE. The Grantee shall not be held in default under or in noncompliance with the provisions of the franchise or suffer any enforcement or penalty relating to noncompliance or default, where such noncompliance or alleged defaults occurred or were caused by circumstances reasonably beyond the ability of the Grantee to anticipate and control. This provision includes work delays caused by waiting for utility providers to service or monitor their utility poles to which Grantee’s cable system is attached, as well as unavailability of materials and/or qualified labor to perform the work necessary. Furthermore, the parties hereby agree that it is not the Franchising Authority’s intention to subject the Grantee to penalties, fines, forfeitures or revocation of the franchise for violations of the franchise where the violation was a good faith error that resulted in no or minimal negative impact on the subscriber within the service area, or where strict performance would result in practical difficulties and hardship to the Grantee which outweigh the benefit to be derived by the Franchising Authority and/or subscribers. 
112.34 ACTIONS OF PARTIES. In any action by the Franchising Authority or the Grantee that is mandated or permitted under the terms hereof, such party shall act in a reasonable, expeditious and timely manner. Furthermore, in any instance where approval or consent is required under the terms hereof, such approval or consent shall not be unreasonably withheld. 
112.35 ENTIRE AGREEMENT. This franchise constitutes the entire agreement between the Grantee and the Franchising Authority and supersedes all other prior understandings and agreements oral or written. Any amendments to this franchise shall be mutually agreed to in writing by the parties. 
112.36 NOTICE. Unless expressly otherwise agreed between the parties, every notice or response required by this franchise to be served upon the Franchising Authority or the Grantee shall be in writing, and shall be deemed to have been duly given to the required party when placed in a properly sealed and correctly addressed envelope: a) upon receipt when hand delivered with receipt/acknowledgment, b) upon receipt when sent certified, registered mail, or c) within five (5) business days after having been posted in the regular mail, or d) the next business day if sent by express mail or overnight air courier. 
The notices or responses to the Franchising Authority shall be addressed as follows: 
City of Perry 
908 Willis Street 
Perry, IA 50220 

The notice of responses to the Grantee shall be addressed as follows: 
Mediacom 2205 Ingersoll Avenue Des Moines, IA 50312-5289 Attn: Government Relations 
CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA 
-613 ­
With a copy to: 
MCC Iowa, LLC 100 Crystal Run Road Middletown, NY 10940 Attn: Legal Department 
The Franchising Authority and the Grantee may designate such other address or addresses from time to time by giving notice to the other in the manner provided for in this section. 
[The next page is 621] 
CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA 
-614 ­
CHAPTER 113 
CABLE TELEVISION RATES AND CHARGES 
113.01 Council Authority 113.03 Public Input 
113.02 Delegation of Authority 
113.01 COUNCIL AUTHORITY. The Council is authorized to engage in the regulation of rates for cable service of a cable system operated within the City, provided that such regulation shall only be conducted in a manner which is consistent with 47 U.S.C. §543 and FCC Report and Order in Docket 92-266, FCC 93-117, the terms of which, including all subsequent amendments, are incorporated herein by reference. 
113.02 DELEGATION OF AUTHORITY. The Council may, for purposes of administration of such rates regulation, delegate the authority granted above to any qualified and acting committee or commission created by the Mayor or the Council. 
113.03 PUBLIC INPUT. The Council, or its duly authorized delegate, shall, in all rate regulation proceedings, provide a reasonable opportunity for consideration of the views of interested parties. 
CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA 
-621 ­
°°°°°°°°°° 

CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA 
-622 ­
CHAPTER 114 
RIGHTS-OF-WAY 

114.01 Purpose and Rule of Interpretation 114.09 City Construction and Paving 
114.02 Franchise, License or Lease Required 114.10 Design Notice to City 
114.03 Fees Required 114.11 Above-Ground Cables, Wires, Conduits and Poles 
114.04 Limit on Term 114.12 Assignment 
114.05 Placement of Facilities 114.13 Forfeiture 
114.06 Indemnification and Bond 114.14 Application 
114.07 Regulation by the City 114.15 Home Rule 
114.08 Construction and Excavation by Holders 114.16 New Technologies 
114.01 PURPOSE AND RULE OF INTERPRETATION. The purpose of this chapter is to establish uniform rules and controls to ensure public safety and provide efficient delivery of services by the City and others wishing to utilize streets and other public property for the delivery of utility or other services, in order to protect public and private investment, ensure orderly use of public property and ensure the health, safety and welfare of the population, to provide for the regulation and administration of the public streets and other public property and secure the rights of the City to a return on its investment in public property. This chapter is to be interpreted in light of these findings for the benefit of the public and users of the streets and other public property. 
114.02 FRANCHISE, LICENSE OR LEASE REQUIRED. No person or other entity shall use the public right-of-way or other public property without first obtaining a franchise, license or lease from the City. The City shall not enter into or issue any franchise, license or lease that grants exclusive rights. An application for a license or lease shall be filed with the Clerk on a form provided by the City and shall include as a minimum the following information: the name, address and telephone number of the applicant; the name, address and telephone number of a person whom the City may notify or contact at any time concerning the license or lease; an engineering site plan showing the proposed location of the facilities including any manholes, the size, type and proposed depth of any conduit or other enclosures; and any additional information the City may require. All licenses or leases required by this section shall be granted by the Council. 
114.03 FEES REQUIRED. (REPEALED BY ORDINANCE NO. 819 – JUL. 04 SUPP.) 
114.04 LIMIT ON TERM. No franchise, license or lease for use of the public right-of-way or other public property shall be granted for a term of more than fifteen (15) years. 
114.05 PLACEMENT OF FACILITIES. The facilities, fixtures and equipment of the distribution, transmission or sale of any utility services, or services provided under license or lease or easement, shall be placed and maintained so as not to unnecessarily or unreasonably interfere with the travel on the streets, highways, avenues, alleys, bridges and public places in the City, nor shall such facilities, fixtures and equipment interfere with the proper use of the same, including, but not limited to, ordinary drainage, or the functioning of the sewers, underground pipe or other property of the City. In the event that facilities, fixtures and equipment of any person or other entity located within a public right-of-way must be relocated because of paving, road construction or road reconstruction, sewer construction or sewer reconstruction or the construction or reconstruction of public drainage systems or similar public works or the construction or reconstruction of the facilities of any City-owned utility, such relocation, at the written request of the City, shall be completed by the owner of such facilities at the owner’s cost. The City shall upon request of any person or other entity holding a franchise, license or lease, review any plans for the construction of facilities, fixtures and equipment within the public right­of-way and advise the person or other entity of any conflict such construction may have with planned or anticipated public improvements, but failure of the City to so advise such person or other entity will not relieve the owner of such facilities of its obligations under this chapter. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the City Administrator may require placement of equipment or facilities belonging to any holder of a franchise, license or lease be limited to locations designated by the City Administrator if such limitation is deemed by the City Administrator to be necessary to protect the integrity of use of present and future users of the public right-of-way or other public property. 
114.06 INDEMNIFICATION AND BOND. The holder of any franchise, license or lease shall indemnify and hold the City harmless at all times during the term of the franchise, license or lease from and against all claims for injury or damage to any person or property, including payments under worker’s compensation laws, caused by the construction, erection, operation or maintenance of its facilities, fixtures or equipment, or the negligence of its contractors or its employees. In case of any suit or action at law being commenced against the City, upon any claim for damage arising out of any loss, injury or damage claimed to have been caused by any installation, improvement, obstruction or excavation made or left in, under or upon such street, sidewalk, alley or public place by the holder of a franchise, license or lease, its agents, contractors or employees, upon being notified in writing by the City of such action or proceeding, the holder of said franchise, license or lease shall appear and make proper defense thereto at the expense of the holder of the franchise, license or lease; and if any judgment or decree shall in any such case be rendered against the City therein, the holder of said franchise, license or lease shall assume, pay and satisfy such judgment or decree, with the cost thereof. Immediately upon issuance of the franchise, license or lease, the holder of the franchise, license or lease shall purchase general liability insurance. The amount of insurance shall be a minimum of $1,000,000 with a maximum deductible of $5,000. The holder of the franchise, license or lease shall file with the Clerk a certificate of insurance which clearly discloses on its face coverage in conformity with these requirements. Upon request of the City, the holder of the franchise, license or lease shall submit a certified copy of the policy. 
114.07 REGULATION BY THE CITY. The City reserves the right to make reasonable general regulations for the use of streets and other public property which unless otherwise specifically provided shall apply to any holder of a franchise, license or lease. 
114.08 CONSTRUCTION AND EXCAVATION BY HOLDERS. A written permit will be obtained from the Clerk whenever it becomes necessary for the holder of any franchise, license or lease to excavate in streets or public grounds of the City. Such permits shall state a particular part or point of the street where the excavation is to be made and the length of time in which such permit shall authorize the work to be done. An exception to a requirement for a permit shall be made in cases of emergency involving public safety, in which case a permit will be obtained at the earliest opportunity after the work has started. In making excavations in the streets, the holder of any franchise, license or lease shall proceed with such work as to cause the least possible inconvenience to the public. The holder of any franchise, license or lease shall properly protect, according to safety standards generally accepted at the time of placement as may be determined from time to time by the Public Works Director, all excavations and obstructions by proper placement of shoring, surface plates, barricades, warning lights and such other or additional devices as circumstances may warrant. If in the opinion of the Public Works Director such excavation or obstruction is not properly and safely protected, the Public Works Director shall notify such holder of a franchise, license or lease, who shall immediately comply with such reasonable instructions. Immediately after use, any trenches for excavations which the holder of a franchise, license or lease has opened shall be filled. However, no trench or excavation in the streets shall be filled or covered without giving the City the right to inspect the same. All backfilling in streets will be according to City specifications. Temporary street surfacing will be placed in such excavations as soon as the same has been backfilled. Pavements, sidewalks, curbs and gutters or other portions of streets and public places opened, disturbed or damaged shall be promptly restored and replaced with like materials at the expense of the holder of a franchise, license or lease and left in as good condition as before the opening, disturbance or damage occurred. In the event like replacement materials are not available, the holder of the franchise, license or lease shall notify the Public Works Director, who must approve the use of any alternate materials. In the event that the holder of a franchise, license or lease fails to comply with the provisions of this section, after having been given reasonable notice, the City may do such work as may be needed to properly repair such pavements, sidewalks, curbs and gutters or other portions of streets and public places and the cost thereof shall be repaid to the City by the holder of the franchise, license or lease. In cases where a cut or disturbance is made in a section of street paving or sidewalks, but causes greater disturbance than to just the area cut, rather than replace only the area cut, the holder of a franchise, license or lease shall replace that area as may be ordered by the Public Works Director, which in no event shall exceed the panel or panels disturbed. 
114.09 CITY CONSTRUCTION AND PAVING. Whenever the City shall pave or repave any street or shall change the grade line of any street or public place or shall construct or reconstruct any conduit, water main service or water connection, sewer or other City-owned public works or City-owned utility, it shall be the duty of the holder of any franchise, license or lease, when so ordered by the City, to relocate its service lines and other property in the streets or other public places at its own expense so as to conform to the established grade or line of such street or public place and so as not to interfere with the public improvements so constructed or reconstructed. In the case of other public improvements, including but not limited to urban renewal projects, the City may require the holder of a franchise, license or lease to relocate its poles, service lines and appurtenances in the streets at the owner’s expense. The City may at its discretion assign personnel for inspection of excavation and related work being performed by the holder of a franchise, license or lease. Should the holder of the franchise, license or lease fail or refuse to do and perform the things provided in this section, the City may, after reasonable notice, perform the work and charge the expense thereof to the holder of the franchise, license or lease and the holder of the franchise, license or lease shall promptly pay said charges. 
114.10 DESIGN NOTICE TO CITY. The holder of a franchise, license or lease shall promptly, upon request, furnish the Public Works Director a detailed map or maps of its distribution system both within the City limits and the area within two miles surrounding the City unless that area is within another City. The holder of a franchise, license or lease shall thereafter update the map or maps at least annually or upon request, showing all subsequent additions or deletions to the distribution system. Prior to any excavation by the City or its agents, a representative must contact the holder of any franchise, license or lease regarding current information on the location of underground lines or facilities in the area concerned. The obligation to contact the holder of a franchise, license or lease under this section shall be satisfied if contact is made with the corporation organized pursuant Chapter 480 of Code of Iowa or an entity with a similar function utilized by both the City and the Company, currently the Iowa One Call System. 
114.11 ABOVE-GROUND CABLES, WIRES, CONDUITS AND POLES. All cables, wires, and conduits shall be placed underground except where above-ground connection to buildings or other locations above ground is reasonably necessary. Such above-ground connection shall be by means of poles located, as far as reasonably practical, within alleys. No such poles shall be installed or erected until the Public Works Director has approved the proposed location, construction and pole heights. 
114.12 ASSIGNMENT. No sale or assignment of any franchise, license or lease of the use of the public right-of-way or other public property shall be effective until it is approved by the Council and until the holder thereof has filed in the office of the Clerk written notice of the proposed sale, transfer, disposition or assignment, such notice to clearly summarize the proposed procedure and the terms and conditions thereof. Such approval by the City shall not be unreasonably withheld. The proposed vendee, assignee or lessee shall similarly file an instrument, duly executed, reciting such proposal, accepting the terms of the franchise, license or lease and agreeing to perform all of the conditions thereof. 
114.13 FORFEITURE. The violation of any material portion of a franchise, license or lease by the holder thereof or its successors or assigns or its failure promptly to perform any of the provisions of this chapter shall be cause for forfeiture of said franchise, license or lease and the termination of all rights thereunder. Such forfeiture shall be accomplished by ordinance of the City after written notice to the holder thereof and a continuation of the violation, failure or default specified on the notice for at least thirty (30) days from the date the notice was served. 
114.14 APPLICATION. This chapter shall apply to all franchises, licenses or leases and easements granted by the City, including all existing franchises, licenses or leases and easements. 
114.15 HOME RULE. This chapter is intended to be and shall be construed as consistent with the reservation of local authority contained in the 25th Amendment to the Iowa Constitution granting cities Home Rule powers. To such end, any limitation on the power of the City contained herein is to be strictly construed and the City reserves to itself the right to exercise all power and authority to regulate and control its local affairs and all ordinances and regulations of the City shall be enforceable against the holder of any franchise, license or lease. 
114.16 NEW TECHNOLOGIES. Should, within the term of any franchise, license or lease, developments within the field for which the grant was made offer to the holder thereof the opportunity to effectively, efficiently and economically serve its customers through use of a substance or material other than those for which the grant was originally made, then the holder of the franchise, license or lease may petition the Council, which, with such requirements or limitation as it deems necessary to protect public health, safety and welfare, may allow the use of such substances under the terms and conditions of the franchise, license or lease. 
[The next page is 681] 
CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA 
-628 ­
CHAPTER 115 
CEMETERY 

115.01 Purpose 	115.07 Payment for Operating Expenses 
115.02 Definition 	115.08 Investment of Perpetual Care Fund 
115.03 Rules 	115.09 Penalties for Failure to Pay Annual Charge 
115.04 Sale of Lots 	115.10 Execution of Deeds of Conveyance 
115.05 Annual Charge on Lots Previously Sold for 	115.11 Transfers or Assignments Which Perpetual Care Has Not Been Provided 115.12 Records to be Kept by Clerk 
115.06 Perpetual Care May Be Provided on Lots Previously Sold 
115.01 PURPOSE. For the purpose of regulating the City cemetery, for the care and supervising of the same, a department of the City government shall be known as the Cemetery Department. 
115.02 DEFINITION. The term “cemetery” means the Violet Hill Cemetery. 
115.03 RULES. The following rules and regulations for the sale of lots and care and maintenance of the cemetery are hereby adopted and established: 
1. 
Sale of Lots. Lots shall be sold by the City Clerk or Deputy Clerk at the established price set by the Council. No lot shall be used for any purpose until purchase price is paid in cash. 

2. 
Deeds Recorded. Every cemetery deed shall be recorded by the Clerk in a book kept for that purpose in the Clerk’s office. 

3. 
Plat. The Clerk shall have in the Clerk’s office a plat of the cemetery, each lot being described and the purchase price named thereon. 

4. 
Lots Sold. Upon issuance of a deed to a cemetery lot, the Clerk shall mark upon the plat on the proper lot “Sold to (naming the purchaser, and giving the date).” At the issuance of the deed the Clerk shall retain the purchaser’s contract of sale marked, “Deed issued, (giving date).” 

5. 
Sale Void. The contracts of sale shall recite that they will be void after ten (10) days, and if at the expiration of this time no deed has been issued, the Clerk may sell the lot to another purchaser. 

6. 
Burial Information Form. A burial information form must be filled out and presented to the Clerk the same day as burial. 

7. 
Plantings and Grading. In order to protect the rights of all and secure the best general results, the Council requires that all grading, 


planting of trees, shrubbery, flowers and other like permanent improvements be done only in accordance with the direction of the Clerk. 
8. 
Decorations. From March 15 to November 15, decorations must be contained in a vase, on the stone or on an ornamental lawn hook. Ornamental lawn hooks may be a maximum of four (4) feet tall and ornaments on the hook must be at least eighteen (18) inches off the ground. Exceptions: Decorations are allowed ten (10) days before and shall be removed seven (7) days following Memorial Day; decorations are allowed five (5) days before and shall be removed five (5) days following Mothers Day and Fathers Day. Decorations placed on graves after November 15 may remain at least until March 1. Depending on weather conditions, decorations placed after November 15 will be removed during or after the time period from March 1 through March 15. Whenever reasonably possible, the City will provide a public service announcement at least forty-eight (48) hours prior to removing decorations. The announcement will be provided to the radio station, the local TV station and the local newspaper. There is no restriction on organization emblems currently placed beside the headstones of deceased members for the Odd Fellow, Rebekahs, the American Legion or the Perry Fire Department. Flags placed on the emblems will be allowed consistent with Memorial Day regulations stated above. 

9. 
Work To Be Approved. Lot owners may have planting or other work done on their lots at their expense on application to the Clerk. No workers other than employees of the cemetery shall be admitted to the cemetery except with the consent of the Cemetery Supervisor. 

10. 
Fences. No coping or fence or any kind of enclosure shall be permitted. 

11. 
Interment Limited. All interments in lots shall be restricted to the family of the lot owner except by consent of lot owner. 

12. 
Disinterment. No disinterment shall be allowed without the permission of the lot owner or legal representative and certificate as by law provided. 

13. 
Burial Request. Prior to scheduled burial services, requests may be made no less than twenty-four (24) hours in advance. 

14. 
Sunday Interment Prohibited. No bodies shall be interred in the cemetery on any Sunday. 

15. 
Foundations. As a guarantee of good work, and as a protection to all lot holders, and for the general welfare of the cemetery, the Cemetery 


CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA -682 ­
Department reserves the right to regulate all work done in the cemetery, under the following conditions: 
A. All work on foundations or memorial work shall be done within the working hours of 7:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, except holidays. All work must be done only with the Clerk’s knowledge. All work must be approved by the Clerk. All unsatisfactory work will be required to be replaced. 
B. The lot holder’s order, on a blank furnished by the Cemetery Department, authorizing the work to be done, must be deposited with the Clerk and full payment for said work ordered done made to the Clerk before excavation is commenced. Said payment shall be made at the rate of fifty-five cents ($.55) per cubic foot. 
C. Foundations for all monumental and super-structural work must comply with all specifications on file in the Clerk’s office. Variances may be made by the Clerk. 
D. The bottom base of all monumental work must be squared sufficiently to allow it to rest on the foundation in its proper position, as no wedging or underpinning will be allowed. 
E. Orders for memorial work of any kind will not be honored on lots not paid for. 
F. No person shall erect, have erected, or attempt to erect or build any foundation or base for monumental or super-structural work in the cemetery, except as provided herein. 
G. Pre-cast tops on all foundations are required with a minimum of 4-inch flange on all four (4) sides of the monument. 
16. 
Vaults. No vaults shall be permitted to be built unless the designs for the same are exceptionally good, and the construction is solid and thorough, and the designs are submitted to and approved by the Cemetery Committee. 

17. 
Material Storage. Material for stone or marble work will not be allowed to remain in the cemetery longer than shall be strictly necessary and all unused material must be removed as soon as the work is completed. In case of neglect, such removal shall be made by the City and at the expense of the lot owner and contractor. No material of any kind shall be received at the cemetery on Saturdays, Sundays or holidays. 

18. 
Roads and Walks. It is the duty and right of the Cemetery Department from time to time to lay out and alter roads, driveways, 


CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA -683 ­
walks and alleys, and to make such rules and regulations as they may deem proper. 
19. 
Enclosures. Stone or other enclosures around graves are prohibited and the mounds over graves shall be regulated by the Cemetery Department. No above ground vaults or mausoleums shall be built or erected. 

20. 
Use of Vehicles. No person shall operate an automobile or other motor vehicle faster than ten (10) miles per hour within the limits of the cemetery. Driving on the grass walks and alleys is prohibited. 

21. 
Children. Children are not allowed in the cemetery except when accompanied by an adult. Their admittance otherwise shall be at the discretion of the Cemetery Supervisor. 

22. 
Pets. All persons are prohibited from bringing pets to the cemetery. 

23. 
Enforcement. The Cemetery Supervisor is directed to enforce these rules and regulations and exclude from the cemetery any persons violating the same, and report the names of all persons violating the rules and regulations to the Police Department. 

24. 
Uniform Grade. No curbing or raising of roads or graves shall be permitted except under such uniform specifications as are adopted and approved by the Council. All monuments, grave stones and grave markers shall be on uniform lines; no corner posts shall extend above the ground more than one-half inch. 

25. 
Cemetery Hours. All persons are prohibited from entering the cemetery after the hours of nine o’clock (9:00) p.m. and before daylight except when engaged in the burial of bodies or attending funerals. 

26. 
Additional Rules. The Council may from time to time adopt additional rules and regulations for the operation of the cemetery by resolution. Any such additional rules and regulations so adopted shall be posted in a conspicuous place at the cemetery or City Hall and shall be in full force and effect thereafter. 


115.04 SALE OF LOTS. The sale of any lot or fraction thereof shall be for the value thereof as now or hereafter fixed by the Council plus an amount necessary to the perpetual upkeep or maintenance thereof. Upon the receipt of any money for the sale of any such lot, the money received shall be divided so that the cost of the lots sold shall be placed in the General Cemetery Fund and the amount received for perpetual upkeep shall be placed in the Perpetual Care Fund. 
115.05 ANNUAL CHARGE ON LOTS PREVIOUSLY SOLD FOR WHICH PERPETUAL CARE HAS NOT BEEN PROVIDED. As to any lots or portions thereof heretofore sold and the perpetual care thereof has not been paid, an annual charge shall be made in an amount as prescribed from time to time by the Council, which annual charge shall be deposited in the General Cemetery Fund. 
115.06 PERPETUAL CARE MAY BE PROVIDED ON LOTS PREVIOUSLY SOLD. The owner or owners of any lots heretofore sold may deposit with the City such an amount that may from time to time be prescribed by the Council for the perpetual care of said lots, which moneys when so deposited shall be placed in the Perpetual Care Fund. 
115.07 PAYMENT FOR OPERATING EXPENSES. From the General Cemetery Fund there shall be paid the cost and expense of the general maintenance and operation of the cemetery. 
115.08 INVESTMENT OF PERPETUAL CARE FUND. The Perpetual Care Fund shall be invested in accordance with the statutes of the State, and the income from any investment made shall be deposited as received in the General Cemetery Fund. 
115.09 PENALTIES FOR FAILURE TO PAY ANNUAL CHARGE. A failure of the owner of any lot or fraction thereof to pay the annual charge of any property heretofore conveyed by deed shall subject the owner or owners to such penalties as are now in force or otherwise as may be prescribed by the Council from time to time. 
115.10 EXECUTION OF DEEDS OF CONVEYANCE. Deeds of conveyance to cemetery lots shall be executed by the Clerk in the name of and accounting by and to the authority of the City. All deeds shall convey only a right of interment and shall be subject to the provisions of this chapter and all lawful regulations hereafter adopted. 
115.11 TRANSFERS OR ASSIGNMENTS. No transfer or assignment of any plot, lot or grave, or any interest therein, shall be valid until such assignment or transfer shall have been recorded upon the books of the cemetery in the office of the Clerk. 
115.12 RECORDS TO BE KEPT BY CLERK. The Clerk shall keep a permanent record showing the ownership of each and every lot sold, and a record showing the lots upon which a perpetual upkeep has been made, and showing the record of payments for annual upkeep as herein provided. 
[The next page is 701] 
CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA 
-686 ­
CHAPTER 120 

LIQUOR LICENSES AND WINE AND BEER PERMITS 
120.01 License or Permit Required 120.04 Action by Council 
120.02 General Prohibition 120.05 Prohibited Sales and Acts 
120.03 Investigation 120.06 Location in Relation to Churches and Schools 
120.07 Amusement Devices 
120.01 LICENSE OR PERMIT REQUIRED. No person shall manufacture for sale, import, sell, or offer or keep for sale, alcoholic liquor, wine, or beer without first securing a liquor control license, wine permit or beer permit in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 123 of the Code of Iowa. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.22, 123.122 & 123.171) 
120.02 GENERAL PROHIBITION. It is unlawful to manufacture for sale, sell, offer or keep for sale, possess or transport alcoholic liquor, wine or beer except upon the terms, conditions, limitations and restrictions enumerated in Chapter 123 of the Code of Iowa, and a license or permit may be suspended or revoked or a civil penalty may be imposed for a violation thereof. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.2, 123.39 & 123.50) 
120.03 INVESTIGATION. Upon receipt of an application for a liquor license, wine or beer permit, the Clerk may forward it to the Police Chief, who shall then conduct an investigation and submit a written report as to the truth of the facts averred in the application. The Fire Chief may also inspect the premises to determine if they conform to the requirements of the City. The Council shall not approve an application for a license or permit for any premises which does not conform to the applicable law and ordinances, resolutions and regulations of the City. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.30) 
120.04 ACTION BY COUNCIL. The Council shall either approve or disapprove the issuance of the liquor control license or retail wine or beer permit and shall endorse its approval or disapproval on the application, and thereafter the application, necessary fee and bond, if required, shall be forwarded to the Alcoholic Beverages Division of the State Department of Commerce for such further action as is provided by law. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.32 [2]) 
120.05 PROHIBITED SALES AND ACTS. A person or club holding a liquor license or retail wine or beer permit and the person’s or club’s agents or employees shall not do any of the following: 
1. Sell, dispense or give to any intoxicated person, or one simulating intoxication, any alcoholic liquor, wine or beer. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49 [1]) 
2. Sell or dispense any alcoholic beverage, wine or beer on the premises covered by the license or permit, or permit its consumption thereon between the hours of two o’clock (2:00) a.m. and six o’clock 
(6:00) a.m. on a weekday, and between the hours of two o’clock (2:00) 
a.m. on Sunday and six o’clock (6:00) a.m. on the following Monday; however, a holder of a license or permit granted the privilege of selling alcoholic liquor, beer or wine on Sunday may sell or dispense alcoholic liquor, beer or wine between the hours of eight o’clock (8:00) a.m. on Sunday and two o’clock (2:00) a.m. of the following Monday, and further provided that a holder of any class of liquor control license or the holder of a class “B” beer permit may sell or dispense alcoholic liquor, wine or beer for consumption on the premises between the hours of eight o’clock (8:00) a.m. on Sunday and two o’clock (2:00) a.m. on Monday when that Monday is New Year’s Day and beer for consumption off the premises between the hours of eight o’clock (8:00) a.m. on Sunday and two o’clock (2:00) a.m. on the following Monday when that Sunday is the day before New Year’s Day. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49 [2b and 2k] & 123.150) 
3. Sell alcoholic beverages, wine or beer to any person on credit, except with a bona fide credit card. This provision does not apply to sales by a club to its members, to sales by a hotel or motel to bona fide registered guests or to retail sales by the managing entity of a convention center, civic center or events center. (Ord. 826 – Oct. 04 Supp.) 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49 [2c]) 
4. Employ a person under eighteen (18) years of age in the sale or serving of alcoholic liquor, wine or beer for consumption on the premises where sold. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49 [2f]) 
5. In the case of a retail beer or wine permittee, knowingly allow the mixing or adding of alcohol or any alcoholic beverage to beer, wine or any other beverage in or about the permittee’s place of business. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49 [2i]) 
6. Knowingly permit any gambling, except in accordance with Iowa law, or knowingly permit any solicitation for immoral purposes, or immoral or disorderly conduct on the premises covered by the license or permit. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49 [2a]) 
CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA -702 ­
7. Knowingly permit or engage in any criminal activity on the premises covered by the license or permit. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49 [2j]) 
8. Keep on premises covered by a liquor control license any alcoholic liquor in any container except the original package purchased from the Alcoholic Beverages Division of the State Department of Commerce and except mixed drinks or cocktails mixed on the premises for immediate consumption. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49 [2d]) 
9. Reuse for packaging alcoholic liquor or wine any container or receptacle used originally for packaging alcoholic liquor or wine; or adulterate, by the addition of any substance, the contents or remaining contents of an original package of an alcoholic liquor or wine; or knowingly possess any original package which has been reused or adulterated. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49 [2e]) 
10. Allow any person other than the licensee, permittee or employees of the licensee or permittee to use or keep on the licensed premises any alcoholic liquor in any bottle or other container which is designed for the transporting of such beverages, except as allowed by State law. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49 [2g]) 
120.06 LOCATION IN RELATION TO CHURCHES AND SCHOOLS. 
No permit or license application shall be approved by the Council for any premises which is located upon a lot which is less than five hundred (500) feet (from lot line to lot line) from any church or school unless such premises is operated so that at least one-half of the gross income of such establishment is derived from sales other than alcohol. This restriction does not affect the right of present permit or license holders or their successors or purchasers from renewing permits or licenses in their present locations. For the purpose of this section, “school” means any public or non-public school. A public school is any school directly supported in whole or in part by taxation. A nonpublic school is any school approved by the Department of Education as provided in Section 257.24 of the Code of Iowa. 
120.07 AMUSEMENT DEVICES. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 99B.10C) 
1. As used in this section an “electronic or mechanical amusement device” means a device that awards a prize redeemable for merchandise on the premises where the device is located and which is required to be registered with the Iowa Department of Inspection and Appeals. 
2. 
It is unlawful for any person under the age of twenty-one (21) to participate in the operation of an electrical or mechanical amusement device. 

3. 
It is unlawful for any person owning or leasing an electrical or mechanical amusement device to knowingly allow a person under the age of 21 to participate in the operation of an electrical or mechanical amusement device. 

4. 
It is unlawful for any person to knowingly participate in the operation of an electrical or mechanical amusement device with a person under the age of 21. 


(Ord. 827 – Oct. 04 Supp.) 
CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA 
-704 ­
CHAPTER 121 
CIGARETTE PERMITS 

121.01 Definitions 121.06 Refunds 
121.02 Permit Required 121.07 Persons Under Legal Age 
121.03 Application 121.08 Self-service Sales Prohibited 
121.04 Fees 121.09 Permit Revocation 
121.05 Issuance and Expiration 
121.01 DEFINITIONS. For use in this chapter the following terms are defined: 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 453A.1) 
1. 
“Carton” means a box or container of any kind in which ten or more packages or packs of cigarettes or tobacco products are offered for sale, sold or otherwise distributed to consumers. 

2. 
“Cigarette” means any roll for smoking made wholly or in part of tobacco, or any substitute for tobacco, irrespective of size or shape and irrespective of tobacco or any substitute for tobacco being flavored, adulterated or mixed with any other ingredient, where such roll has a wrapper or cover made of paper or any other material. However, this definition is not to be construed to include cigars. 

3. 
“Package” or “pack” means a container of any kind in which cigarettes or tobacco products are offered for sale, sold or otherwise distributed to consumers. 

4. 
“Place of business” means any place where cigarettes are sold, stored or kept for the purpose of sale or consumption by a retailer. 

5. 
“Retailer” means every person who sells, distributes or offers for sale for consumption, or possesses for the purpose of sale for consumption, cigarettes, irrespective of the quantity or amount or the number of sales. 

6. 
“Self-service display” means any manner of product display, placement or storage from which a person purchasing the product may take possession of the product, prior to purchase, without assistance from the retailer or employee of the retailer, in removing the product from a restricted access location. 

7. 
“Tobacco products” means the following: cigars; little cigars; cheroots; stogies; periques; granulated, plug cut, crimp cut, ready rubbed and other smoking tobacco; snuff; snuff flour; cavendish; plug and twist tobacco; fine-cut and other chewing tobaccos; shorts or refuse scraps, 


clippings, cuttings and sweepings of tobacco; and other kinds and forms of tobacco prepared in such manner as to be suitable for chewing or smoking in a pipe or otherwise, or for both chewing and smoking, but does not mean cigarettes. 
121.02 PERMIT REQUIRED. It is unlawful for any person, other than a holder of a retail permit, to sell cigarettes at retail and no retailer shall distribute, sell or solicit the sale of any cigarettes within the City without a valid permit for each place of business. The permit shall be displayed publicly in the place of business so that it can be seen easily by the public. No permit shall be issued to a minor. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 453A.13) 
121.03 APPLICATION. A completed application on forms provided by the State Department of Revenue and Finance and accompanied by the required fee shall be filed with the Clerk. Renewal applications shall be filed at least five 
(5) days prior to the last regular meeting of the Council in June. If a renewal application is not timely filed, and a special Council meeting is called to act on the application, the costs of such special meeting shall be paid by the applicant. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 453A.13) 
121.04 FEES. The fee for a retail cigarette permit shall be as follows: 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 453A.13) 
FOR PERMITS GRANTED DURING:  FEE:  
July, August or September October, November or December January, February or March April, May or June  $ 75.00 $ 56.25 $ 37.50 $ 18.75  

121.05 ISSUANCE AND EXPIRATION. Upon proper application and payment of the required fee, a permit shall be issued. Each permit issued shall describe clearly the place of business for which it is issued and shall be nonassignable. All permits expire on June 30 of each year. The Clerk shall submit a duplicate of any application for a permit, and any permit issued, to the Iowa Department of Public Health within thirty (30) days of issuance. 
121.06 REFUNDS. A retailer may surrender an unrevoked permit and receive a refund from the City, except during April, May or June, in accordance with the schedule of refunds as provided in Section 453A.13 of the Code of Iowa. 
(Code of Iowa, 453A.13) 
121.07 PERSONS UNDER LEGAL AGE. No person shall sell, give or otherwise supply any tobacco, tobacco products or cigarettes to any person under eighteen (18) years of age. The provision of this section includes prohibiting a minor from purchasing cigarettes or tobacco products from a vending machine. If a retailer or employee of a retailer violates the provisions of this section, the Council shall, after written notice and hearing, and in addition to the other penalties fixed for such violation, assess the following: 
1. 
For a first violation, the retailer shall be assessed a civil penalty in the amount of three hundred dollars ($300.00). Failure to pay the civil penalty as ordered under this subsection shall result in automatic suspension of the permit for a period of fourteen (14) days. 

2. 
For a second violation within a period of two (2) years, the retailer’s permit shall be suspended for a period of thirty (30) days. 

3. 
For a third violation within a period of three (3) years, the retailer’s permit shall be suspended for a period of sixty (60) days. 

4. 
For a fourth violation within a period of three (3) years, the retailer’s permit shall be revoked. 


The Clerk shall give ten (10) days’ written notice to the retailer by mailing a copy of the notice to the place of business as it appears on the application for a permit. The notice shall state the reason for the contemplated action and the time and place at which the retailer may appear and be heard. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 453A.2, 453A.22 and 453A.36[6]) 
121.08 SELF-SERVICE SALES PROHIBITED. Beginning January 1, 1999, except for the sale of cigarettes through a cigarette vending machine as provided in Section 453A.36 (6) of the Code of Iowa, a retailer shall not sell or offer for sale cigarettes or tobacco products, in a quantity of less than a carton, through the use of a self-service display. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 453A.36A) 
121.09 PERMIT REVOCATION. Following a written notice and an opportunity for a hearing, as provided by the Code of Iowa, the Council may also revoke a permit issued pursuant to this chapter for a violation of Division I of Chapter 453A of the Code of Iowa or any rule adopted thereunder. If a permit is revoked, a new permit shall not be issued to the permit holder for any place of business, or to any other person for the place of business at which the violation occurred, until one year has expired from the date of revocation, unless good cause to the contrary is shown to the Council. The Clerk shall 
CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA 
-707 ­
report the revocation or suspension of a retail permit to the Iowa Department of Public Health within thirty (30) days of the revocation or suspension. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 453A.22) 
CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA 
-708 ­
CHAPTER 122 
PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS AND TRANSIENT 
MERCHANTS 

122.01 Purpose 122.11 Time Restriction 
122.02 Definitions 122.12 Revocation of License 
122.03 License Required 122.13 Notice 
122.04 Application for License 122.14 Hearing 
122.05 License Fees 122.15 Record and Determination 
122.06 Bond Required 122.16 Appeal 
122.07 License Issued 122.17 Effect of Revocation 
122.08 License Denied 122.18 License Exemptions 
122.09 Display of License 122.19 Charitable and Nonprofit Organizations 
122.10 License Not Transferable 122.20 Penalty 
122.01 PURPOSE. The purpose of this chapter is to protect residents of the City against fraud, unfair competition and intrusion into the privacy of their homes by licensing and regulating peddlers, solicitors and transient merchants. 
122.02 DEFINITIONS. For use in this chapter the following terms are defined: 
1. 
“Peddler” means any person carrying goods or merchandise who sells or offers for sale for immediate delivery such goods or merchandise from house to house or upon the public street. 

2. 
“Solicitor” means any person who solicits or attempts to solicit from house to house or upon the public street any contribution or donation or any order for goods, services, subscriptions or merchandise to be delivered at a future date. 

3. 
“Transient merchant” means any person who engages in a temporary or itinerant merchandising business and in the course of such business hires, leases or occupies any building or structure whatsoever, or who operates out of a vehicle which is parked anywhere within the City limits. Temporary association with a local merchant, dealer, trader or auctioneer, or conduct of such transient business in connection with, as a part of, or in the name of any local merchant, dealer, trader or auctioneer does not exempt any person from being considered a transient merchant. 


122.03 LICENSE REQUIRED. Any person engaging in peddling, soliciting or in the business of a transient merchant in the City without first obtaining a license as herein provided is in violation of this chapter. 
122.04 APPLICATION FOR LICENSE. An application in writing shall be filed with the City Clerk or Finance Officer for a license under this chapter. Such application shall set forth the applicant’s name, social security number, permanent and local address and business address if any. The application shall also set forth the applicant’s employer, if any, and the employer’s address, the nature of the applicant’s business, the last three places of such business, a list of any vehicles used in the business and the license plate number of any such vehicles and the length of time sought to be covered by the license. This application shall be accompanied by a ten dollar nonrefundable application fee. Each applicant shall undergo a background check by the Perry Police Department. The Police Department shall respond to the City Clerk or Finance Officer within ten days of submittal of the application by the City Clerk or Finance Officer. 
122.05 LICENSE FEES. The following license fees shall be paid to the City Clerk or Finance Officer prior to the issuance of any license. Solicitors (for each person actually soliciting—principal or agent), peddlers or transient merchants. 
1. 
For one day $100.00 

2. 
For one week $200.00 

3. 
For one month $500.00 

4. 
For one month to six months $750.00 

5. 
For one year or major part thereof $900.00 


122.06 BOND REQUIRED. Before a license under this chapter is issued to a transient merchant, an applicant shall provide to the City Clerk or Finance Officer evidence that the applicant has filed a bond with the Secretary of State in accordance with Chapter 9C of the Code of Iowa. 
122.07 LICENSE ISSUED. If the City Clerk or Finance Officer finds the application is completed in conformance with the requirements of this chapter, the facts stated therein are found to be correct and the license fee is paid, a license shall be issued immediately. 
122.08 LICENSE DENIED. The license shall be denied if the City Clerk or Finance Officer finds any of the following: 
1. 
Applicant has been convicted of a felony, misdemeanor or other crime involving force, violence, moral turpitude, deceit, fraud or the violation of any law relating to the act of soliciting; 

2. 
Applicant falsified information on the application; 




3. Applicant has been denied a license or had a license revoked under this chapter within the last year, unless the applicant can show that the reasons for denial no longer exist. Upon denial, the reason for denial shall be noted on the application. The applicant shall be notified of denial by mail to the applicant at the address set out on the application. 
122.09 DISPLAY OF LICENSE. Each solicitor or peddler shall keep such license in possession at all times while doing business in the City and shall, upon the request of prospective customers, exhibit the license as evidence of compliance with all requirements of this chapter. Each transient merchant shall display publicly such merchant’s license in the merchant’s place of business. 
122.10 LICENSE NOT TRANSFERABLE. Licenses issued under the provisions of this chapter are not transferable in any situation and are to be applicable only to the person filing the application. 
122.11 TIME RESTRICTION. All peddler’s and solicitor’s licenses shall provide that said licenses are in force and effect only between the hours of 9:00 
a.m. and 6:00 p.m., Monday through Saturday, excluding national holidays. 
122.12 REVOCATION OF LICENSE. After notice and hearing, the City Clerk or Finance Officer may revoke any license issued under this chapter for the following reasons: 
1. 
Fraudulent Statements. The licensee has made fraudulent statements in the application for the license or in the conduct of the business. 

2. 
Violation of Law. The licensee has violated this chapter or has otherwise conducted the business in an unlawful manner. 

3. 
Endangered Public Welfare, Health or Safety. The licensee has conducted the business in such manner as to endanger the public welfare, safety, order or morals. 


122.13 NOTICE. The City Clerk shall send a notice to the licensee at the licensee’s local address, not less than ten days before the date set for a hearing on the possible revocation of a license. Such notice shall contain particulars of the complaints against the licensee, the ordinance provisions or State statutes allegedly violated, and the date, time and place for hearing on the matter. 
122.14 HEARING. The City Clerk shall conduct a hearing at which both the licensee and any complainants shall be present to determine the truth of the facts alleged in the complaint and notice. Should the licensee, or authorized representative, fail to appear without good cause, the City Clerk may proceed to a determination of the complaint. 
122.15 RECORD AND DETERMINATION. The City Clerk shall make and record findings of fact and conclusions of law, and shall revoke a license only when upon review of the entire record the City Clerk finds clear and convincing evidence of substantial violation of this chapter or State law. 
122.16 APPEAL. If the City Clerk revokes or refuses to issue a license, the City Clerk shall make as a part of the record the reasons therefor. The licensee, or the applicant, shall have a right to a hearing before the Council at its next regular meeting. The Council may reverse, modify or affirm the decision of the City Clerk by a majority vote of the Council members present and the City Clerk shall carry out the decision of the Council. 
122.17 EFFECT OF REVOCATION. Revocation of any license shall bar the licensee from being eligible for any license under this chapter for a period of one year from the date of the revocation. 
122.18 LICENSE EXEMPTIONS. The following are excluded from the application of this chapter. 
1. 
Newspapers. Persons delivering, collecting for or selling subscriptions to newspapers. 

2. 
Club Members. Members of civic and service clubs, Boy Scout, Girl Scout, 4-H Clubs, Future Farmers of America and similar organizations and youth groups from Perry, Rippey, Dawson, Bouton or Minburn. 

3. 
Local Residents and Farmers. Local residents and farmers who offer for sale their own produce on private property. 

4. 
Students. Students representing the Perry, East Green, ADM or Woodward Granger School Districts conducting projects sponsored by organizations recognized by the school. 

5. 
Route Sales. Route delivery persons who only incidentally solicit additional business or make special sales. 

6. 
Resale or Institutional Use. Persons customarily calling on businesses or institutions for the purposes of selling products for resale or institutional use. 

7. 
City Sponsored. City sponsored and/or community events held on City property. 


122.19 CHARITABLE AND NONPROFIT ORGANIZATIONS. 
Authorized representatives of charitable or nonprofit organizations operating under the provisions of Chapter 504A of the Code of Iowa desiring to solicit money or to distribute literature in the City are required to submit in writing to the City Clerk the name and purpose of the cause for which such activities are sought, the name and social security number of each representative of the organization, names and addresses of the officers and directors of the organization, a list of any vehicles used and the license plate number of any such vehicles, the period during which such activities are to be carried on, and whether any commissions, fees or wages are to be charged by the solicitor and the amount thereof. If the City Clerk finds that the organization is a bona fide charity or nonprofit organization the Clerk shall issue, free of charge, a license containing the above information to the applicant. In the event the Clerk denies the exemption, the authorized representatives of the organization may appeal the decision to the Council, as provided in Section 122.16 of this chapter. 
122.20 PENALTY. Anyone violating the provisions of this chapter shall, upon lack of licensing proof, be subject to a Municipal Infraction fine not exceeding one hundred and twenty-five dollars ($125.00) for the first offense. Each sale or solicitation of a sale made without a license or bond in violation of this chapter shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ch. 122 – Ord. 812 – Mar. 04 Supp.) 
CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA 
-713 ­
°°°°°°°°°° 

CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA 
-714 ­
CHAPTER 123 
HOUSE MOVERS 

123.01 House Mover Defined 123.07 Permit Issued 
123.02 Permit Required 123.08 Public Safety 
123.03 Application 123.09 Time Limit 
123.04 Bond Required 123.10 Removal by City 
123.05 Insurance Required 123.11 Protect Pavement 
123.06 Permit Fee 123.12 Overhead Wires 
123.01 HOUSE MOVER DEFINED. A “house mover” means any person who undertakes to move a building or similar structure upon, over or across public streets or property when the building or structure is of such size that it requires the use of skids, jacks, dollies or any other specialized moving equipment. 
123.02 PERMIT REQUIRED. It is unlawful for any person to engage in the activity of house mover as herein defined without a valid permit from the City for each house, building or similar structure to be moved. Buildings of less than one hundred (100) square feet are exempt from the provisions of this chapter. 
123.03 APPLICATION. Application for a house mover’s permit shall be made in writing to the Building Official. The application shall include: 
1. 
Name and Address. The applicant’s full name and address and if a corporation the names and addresses of its principal officers. 

2. 
Building Location. An accurate description of the present location and future site of the building or similar structure to be moved. 

3. 
Routing Plan. A routing plan approved by the Police Chief, street superintendent, and public utility officials. The route approved shall be the shortest route compatible with the greatest public convenience and safety. 


123.04 BOND REQUIRED. The applicant shall post with the Building Official a penal bond in the minimum sum of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) issued by a surety company authorized to issue such bonds in the State. The bond shall guarantee the permittee’s payment for any damage done to the City or to public property, and payment of all costs incurred by the City in the course of moving the building or structure. 
123.05 INSURANCE REQUIRED. Each applicant shall also file a certificate of insurance indicating that the applicant is carrying public liability insurance in effect for the duration of the permit covering the applicant and all agents and employees for the following minimum amounts: 
1. 
Bodily Injury -$50,000 per person; $100,000 per accident. 

2. 
Property Damage -$50,000 per accident. 


123.06 PERMIT FEE. No fee is required at the time of filing the application with the Building Official. A separate permit shall be required for each house, building or similar structure to be moved. 
123.07 PERMIT ISSUED. Upon approval of the application and filing of bond and insurance certificate, the Building Official shall issue a permit. 
123.08 PUBLIC SAFETY. At all times when a building or similar structure is in motion upon any street, alley, sidewalk or public property, the permittee shall maintain flagmen at the closest intersections or other possible channels of traffic to the sides, behind and ahead of the building or structure. At all times when the building or structure is at rest upon any street, alley, sidewalk or public property the permittee shall maintain adequate warning signs or lights at the intersections or channels of traffic to the sides, behind and ahead of the building or structure. 
123.09 TIME LIMIT. No house mover shall permit or allow a building or similar structure to remain upon any street or other public way for a period of more than twelve (12) hours without having first secured the written approval of the City. 
123.10 REMOVAL BY CITY. In the event any building or similar structure is found to be in violation of Section 123.09 the City is authorized to remove such building or structure and assess the costs thereof against the permit holder and the surety on the permit holder’s bond. 
123.11 PROTECT PAVEMENT. It is unlawful to move any house or building of any kind over any pavement, unless the wheels or rollers upon which the house or building is moved are at least one (1) inch in width for each one thousand (1,000) pounds of weight of such building. If there is any question as to the weight of a house or building, the estimate of the City as to such weight shall be final. 
123.12 OVERHEAD WIRES. The holder of any permit to move a building shall see that all telephone, cable television and electric wires and poles are removed when necessary and replaced in good order, and shall be liable for the costs of the same. 
CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA 
-716 ­
°°°°°°°°°° 

CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA 
-717 ­
CHAPTER 124 
JUNKYARDS AND JUNK DEALERS 

124.01 Definitions 124.06 General Operating Requirements 
124.02 License Required 124.07 Inspections 
124.03 License Fee 124.08 License Renewal 
124.04 License Terms 124.09 License Suspension or Revocation 
124.05 Screening Requirements 124.10 Appeals 
124.01 DEFINITIONS. Except where otherwise indicated by the context, the following definitions apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this chapter: 
1. 
“Business premises” or “premises” means the area of a junkyard as described in the junk dealer’s license issued by the City. 

2. 
“Inoperable” means incapable of being put into use or operation. 

3. 
“Inoperable vehicle” means any motor vehicle, recreational vehicle, boat, trailer or semi-trailer which lacks (a) current registration or 


(b) one or more wheels (exclusive of the spare) or an engine, transmission, differential, drive shaft, axle or any other component part thereof, the absence of which renders the vehicle inoperable by its own power or unfit for legal use on the highways. 
4. 
“Junk” means old or scrap copper; brass; rope; rags; batteries; paper; trash; rubber; debris; waste; or junked, dismantled or wrecked automobiles or parts of automobiles; or iron, steel or other old or scrap ferrous or nonferrous material; old bottles or other glass; bones; tinware, plastic or discarded household goods, or hardware; and other waste or discarded material that might be prepared to be used again in some form; but “junk” does not include materials or objects accumulated by a person as by-products, waste, or scraps from the operation of the person’s own business or materials or objects held and used by a manufacturer as an integral part of its own manufacturing processes. 

5. 
“Junk dealer” means any person who buys, sells, transfers, delivers or stores junk, including all persons who carry on such business at a junk shop or junkyard or as a peddler and any person who by advertisement, sign or otherwise, holds himself or herself out as a junk dealer, or dealer in the articles described in subsection 124.01(4) of this chapter, including a person engaged in the activity known as “auto salvage,” but “junk dealer” does not include businesses engaged in the towing, repairing or storing of wrecked motor vehicles where sales of 


such wrecked motor vehicles are only incidental to the collection of repair and storage charges. 
6. “Junkyard” means a yard, lot or place, covered or uncovered, outdoors or in an enclosed building, containing junk as defined above, upon which occur one or more acts of buying, keeping, dismantling, processing, selling or offering for sale any such junk, in whole units or by parts, for a business or commercial purpose, whether or not the proceeds from such act or acts are to be used for charity, or any place where more than one inoperable motor vehicle or used parts and materials thereof, when taken together, equal the bulk of one motor vehicle, are stored or deposited and the term includes garbage dumps, sanitary fills and automobile graveyards. 
124.02 LICENSE REQUIRED. It is unlawful for any person to act as a junk dealer in the City, whether personally, by agents or employees, singly or in connection with some other business or enterprise, without having a license issued by the City. The provisions of this chapter apply to junkyards currently in operation within the City. No new applications for junk dealers’ licenses shall be accepted. 
124.03 LICENSE FEE. The annual fee for a junk dealer’s license is fifty dollars ($50.00), to be paid to the Clerk. All licenses are effective from the date of issuance to and including the thirtieth day of June next succeeding the date of issuance. The license fee set forth above shall be prorated on a quarterly basis from the date of issuance to the time of expiration. If a renewal application for license is denied, the license fee shall be refunded to the applicant. 
124.04 LICENSE TERMS. 
1. 
The licensee shall post the license in a conspicuous place on the licensed premises. 

2. 
No junk dealer’s license shall be transferable, and a separate license is required for each business premises. 


124.05 SCREENING REQUIREMENTS. A junkyard, as defined in this chapter, must be surrounded by a solid opaque fence or wall, of uniform design and color, and not less than six (6) feet high, which substantially screens the area in which junk is stored or deposited. The fence must be kept in good repair and shall not be used for advertising displays or signs. Suitable gates, likewise opaque, are required, which shall be closed and locked after business hours or when the junkyard is unattended. A portion of any gate, not to exceed ten (10) feet in length, may be constructed of a non-opaque material to permit observation of the fenced premises. No junk shall be permitted to be stored or deposited outside of the fence, nor may junk be stacked higher than the fence within thirty (30) feet of the fence. The Compliance Officer shall inspect the fences and gates of all junkyards on an annual basis. 
124.06 GENERAL OPERATING REQUIREMENTS. The following general operating requirements shall apply to all junk dealers in the City: 
1. 
The junkyard and all things kept therein shall be maintained in a sanitary condition. 

2. 
No water shall be allowed to stand in any place on the premises in such manner as to afford a breeding place for mosquitoes. 

3. 
No garbage or other waste liable to give off a foul odor or attract vermin shall be kept on the premises, nor shall any refuse of any kind be kept on the premises, unless such refuse is junk as defined herein and is in use in the licensed business. 

4. 
No junk shall be allowed to rest upon or protrude over any public street, walkway or curb or become scattered or blown off the business premises. 

5. 
Junk shall be stored and arranged so as to permit easy access to all such junk for fire fighting purposes. 

6. 
No combustible material of any kind not necessary to the licensed business shall be kept on the premises, nor shall the premises be allowed to become a fire hazard. 

7. 
Gasoline, oil and batteries shall be removed from any scrapped engines or vehicles on the premises. 

8. 
No noisy processing of junk or other noisy activity shall be carried on in connection with the licensed business on a Sunday, any legal holiday, or at any time between the hours of six o’clock (6:00) p.m. and seven o’clock (7:00) a.m. 

9. 
No automobile or part thereof shall be burned for wrecking or salvage purposes in or on premises occupied as a junkyard unless the same is burned in a manner that has been approved by the Compliance Officer and all motor vehicle gasoline and fuel tanks shall be separated and removed from motor vehicles intended for salvage purposes prior to cutting, stacking or burning such vehicles. 

10. 
Each junk dealer shall keep complete, accurate and legible records of all purchases, in the English language. The records shall be kept in a permanent register that shall be kept on the premises. The records shall be available for inspection by any sheriff, deputy sheriff, 


police officer, Compliance Officer or authorized agent of the City for a period of at least six (6) months. The records shall include: 
A. The name and residence of the person from whom the junk was received or purchased. 
B. Reasonably accurate inventory and description of each article. 
C. The value or amount paid for each article. 
11. 
No junk dealer shall purchase or receive any personal property from any minor without first receiving the consent, in writing, of the parent or guardian. Such written consent shall be included in the permanent records as described in Section 124.06(10). 

12. 
Upon written order of the Police Chief or the designated representative, each junk dealer shall segregate specific items or categories of items and hold such items until authorized to dispose of the items by the Police Department. The holding period shall not exceed forty-five (45) days. 

13. 
No junk dealer shall conceal, secrete, or destroy for the purpose of concealing, any article purchased or received by the dealer for the purposes of preventing identification thereof by any officer or any person claiming the same. No junk dealer shall sell, melt up, break up or otherwise dispose of any article the dealer has reason to believe has been stolen or which is adversely claimed by any person or which the dealer has been notified not to sell or otherwise dispose of by any law enforcement officer, without first obtaining a permit in writing from the Police Chief. 


124.07 INSPECTIONS. The Compliance Officer and Police Chief, during the period a junk dealer’s license is in effect, may inspect all premises licensed hereunder at such intervals as they shall deem reasonable to determine whether or not the premises are being operated and maintained in compliance with all applicable regulations, ordinances and laws. No person shall prevent, hinder or obstruct or attempt to prevent, hinder or obstruct the inspector or peace officer in the performance of their duties set forth in this chapter. 
124.08 LICENSE RENEWAL. 
1. Licenses may be renewed in the same manner and under the same conditions as originally issued. Applications for renewal of junk dealers’ licenses shall be submitted to the Clerk at least thirty (30) days prior to the expiration of the licenses then in effect. Applications for 
CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA 
-721 ­
renewal of junk dealers’ licenses shall be processed in accordance with the following: 
A. Upon receipt of a completed application for renewal of license, the Clerk shall forward one copy to each of the following City officials: Compliance Officer and Police Chief. 
B. Upon receipt of said copy, the Compliance Officer shall cause an inspection to be made of the premises described in the application where the activities of the junk dealer are proposed to be conducted to determine whether or not said premises meets the requirements of all City and State fire regulations and whether or not any conditions exist thereon that would constitute a fire hazard or public nuisance. 
C. Upon receipt of a copy of said renewal application, the Compliance Officer shall cause an inspection to be made of the premises described in the application to determine whether or not the activities of the junk dealer are permitted by and are proposed to be conducted in compliance with all zoning ordinances then in effect and whether or not said premises meets all other requirements of this chapter. 
D. After each inspection of the premises, the Compliance Officer shall submit an inspection report to the Clerk indicating whether or not the premises inspected is approved. If the premises is disapproved, the inspector shall set forth in the report the reasons for the disapproval. If the premises is disapproved and the unlawful conditions reported can be corrected, the inspector shall so state in the report and grant the applicant a reasonable but specific time to correct the condition. Final action on the renewal application shall then be postponed until receipt of a supplementary report from the inspector after the specified date. 
2. When renewal of a license is denied, the junk dealer previously licensed under the provisions of this chapter shall have a period of six 
(6) months immediately after such denial in which to conclude the business and dispose of the junk, during which time the junk dealer shall be required to comply with all the terms and conditions of the ordinances of the City, except the licensing requirements of this chapter. If litigation is pending contesting the denial or revocation of a license, the Clerk may grant an extension of time during which the junk dealer may operate, pending the final outcome of such litigation. 
CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA 
-722 ­
124.09 LICENSE SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION. The Clerk may suspend or revoke any license issued hereunder for any of the following reasons: 
1. 
The licensee, any agent or employee has been convicted of a violation of any of the provisions of this chapter. 

2. 
The Compliance Officer or Police Chief has found that the licensee has failed to comply with one or more of the provisions of this chapter or the licensed premises fail to comply with one or more of the provisions of this chapter or of some other regulation, ordinance or statute, and the licensee has failed to correct such condition within the reasonable time specified by the inspector in accordance with the report the inspector has submitted under Section 124.08 of this chapter. 


124.10 APPEALS. Any applicant who has been denied a license renewal under this chapter or any licensee under this chapter whose license has been suspended or revoked may appeal to the Council by filing with the Clerk, within seven (7) days after the aggrieved party receives notice of the adverse administrative decision, a written notice of appeal setting forth the grounds upon which the appeal is based. The Council shall, within fifteen (15) days after the filing of said notice of appeal, fix a time and place of hearing on the appeal. The hearing shall be commenced within thirty (30) days of the filing of the appeal. If the Council finds from the evidence presented at the hearing that the appellant has been denied a license without just cause, or that the appellant’s license has been suspended or revoked without just cause, it may reverse or modify the administrative decision. 
[The next page is 735] 
CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA 
-723 ­
CHAPTER 125 
FIREWORKS PERMITS 

125.01 FIREWORKS PERMIT. The Council may, upon application in writing, grant a permit for the display of fireworks by a City agency, fair association, amusement park or other organization or group of individuals approved by the Council when such fireworks display will be handled by a competent operator. No permit shall be granted hereunder unless the operator or sponsoring organization has filed with the City evidence of insurance in the following amounts: 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 727.2) 
Personal Injury: ................................$ 250,000.00 per person 
Property Damage:.............................$ 50,000.00 per person 
Total Exposure: ................................$ 1,000,000.00 

CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA 
-735 ­
°°°°°°°°°° 

CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA 
-736 ­
CHAPTER 126 
COIN-OPERATED AMUSEMENT DEVICES 

126.01 Purpose 126.04 Proprietor’s License Fee 
126.02 Definitions 126.05 Revocation of License 
126.03 License Required 
126.01 PURPOSE. The purpose of this chapter is to license and regulate coin-operated amusement devices. 
126.02 DEFINITIONS. For use in this chapter the following terms are defined: 
1. 
“Coin-operated amusement devices” means any amusement machine or device operated by means of the insertion of a coin, token, or similar object for the purpose of amusement or skill and for the playing of which a fee is charged. The term does not include vending machines in which amusement features are not incorporated, nor does the term include any coin-operated mechanical musical device. 

2. 
“Proprietor” means any person who, as the owner, lessee or proprietor, has control over any establishment, place or premises, in or at which a coin-operated amusement device is placed or kept for use or play or on exhibit for the purpose of use or play. 


126.03 LICENSE REQUIRED. No person shall engage in the business of proprietor of coin-operated amusement devices as the terms are herein defined without first having obtained the proper license therefor. All fees required by this chapter shall be paid to the Clerk who shall give the applicant a written receipt. 
126.04 PROPRIETOR’S LICENSE FEE. The license fee for each proprietor is ten dollars ($10.00) per year for each device used or played, or exhibited for use or play. All proprietor’s license fees shall be payable annually in advance on a calendar year basis. Adjustment may be made for the first license fee on a proportionate basis, but the minimum fee for a partial year shall not be less than five dollars ($5.00). In no case shall any portion of any license fee be repaid to the licensee. 
126.05 REVOCATION OF LICENSE. The Council shall have the right to revoke any license issued hereunder for the violation of any of the provisions of this chapter. 
°°°°°°°°°° 

CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA 
-738 ­
CHAPTER 127 
PUBLIC SALE OF FOOD, BEVERAGES AND 
NON-FOOD ITEMS ON CITY PROPERTY 

127.01 Purpose 127.04 Vendor Fees 
127.02 Vendor 127.05 Nuisance 
127.03 Vendor Application 127.06 Exception 
127.01 PURPOSE. The purpose of this chapter is to provide rules, regulations and restrictions concerning the sale of any consumable food, beverage or non-food item upon any publicly-owned City property including but not limited to streets, sidewalks, parks, rights-of-way, parking lots and other public grounds owned by the City. The provisions of this chapter are enacted for the protection of the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the City. 
127.02 VENDOR. No person shall provide or sell any consumable food, beverage or non-food item upon any publicly-owned City property to the public in the City unless the person first obtains a vendor’s permit from the City. An exception to this requirement is provided in Section 127.06. 
127.03 VENDOR APPLICATION. The vendor shall submit an application for each day the vendor intends to operate and for each location if the vendor intends to operate at more than one location per day. All food vendors shall comply with the Iowa Department of Health rules and regulations governing the sale of food for consumption on the premises. 
127.04 VENDOR FEES. The fee for a vendor’s permit is twenty-five dollars ($25.00). A new permit is required for each day and for each location a vendor will operate from. 
127.05 NUISANCE. The sale of any consumable food, beverage or non-food item upon any publicly-owned City property without a permit or in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter is hereby declared to be a nuisance. Any member of the Police Department is empowered to cause any vendor in violation of this chapter to be immediately removed without notice. 
127.06 EXCEPTION. It is not a violation of this chapter and no vendor permit is required for a person to sell any consumable food, beverage or non­food item under the following conditions: 1) the person is a vendor at an event located on City-owned public property, 2) the sponsor of the event has had prior approval of the Council or the City Administrator, 3) the sponsor of the event has authorized and approved said vendor including the assessment of any fee established by the sponsor, and 4) the vendor complies with the Iowa Department of Health rules and regulations governing the sale of food for consumption on the premises. 
(Ch. 127 – Ord. 767 – Jul. 01 Supp.) 
[The next page is 761] 
CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA 
-740 ­
CHAPTER 135 
STREET USE AND MAINTENANCE 

135.01 Removal of Warning Devices 135.09 Excavations 
135.02 Obstructing or Defacing 135.10 Driveway Entrances, Driveways and Driveway 
135.03 Placing Debris On Extensions 
135.04 Playing In 135.11 Building Material in Streets 
135.05 Traveling on Barricaded Street or Alley 135.12 Maintenance of Parking or Terrace 
135.06 Use for Business Purposes 135.13 Failure to Maintain Parking or Terrace 
135.07 Washing Vehicles 135.14 Dumping of Snow 
135.08 Burning Prohibited 135.15 Driveway Culverts 
135.01 REMOVAL OF WARNING DEVICES. It is unlawful for a person to willfully remove, throw down, destroy or carry away from any street or alley any lamp, obstruction, guard or other article or things, or extinguish any lamp or other light, erected or placed thereupon for the purpose of guarding or enclosing unsafe or dangerous places in said street or alley without the consent of the person in control thereof. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.1) 
135.02 OBSTRUCTING OR DEFACING. It is unlawful for any person to obstruct, deface, or injure any street or alley in any manner. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.1) 
135.03 PLACING DEBRIS ON. It is unlawful for any person to throw or deposit on any street or alley any glass, glass bottle, nails, tacks, wire, cans, trash, garbage, rubbish, litter, offal, leaves, grass, yard waste or any other debris, or any other substance likely to injure any person, animal or vehicle, or which, if washed into the storm sewer could clog the storm sewer. The Police Department and Public Works Department will monitor and enforce this regulation. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.369) 
135.04 PLAYING IN. It is unlawful for any person to coast, sled or play games on streets or alleys, except in the areas blocked off by the City for such purposes. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[2]) 
135.05 TRAVELING ON BARRICADED STREET OR ALLEY. It is unlawful for any person to travel or operate any vehicle on any street or alley temporarily closed by barricades, lights, signs, or flares placed thereon by the authority or permission of any City official, police officer or member of the fire department. 
135.06 USE FOR BUSINESS PURPOSES. It is unlawful to park, store or place, temporarily or permanently, any machinery or junk or any other goods, wares, and merchandise of any kind upon any street or alley for the purpose of storage, exhibition, sale or offering same for sale, without permission of the City Administrator. Permission will be granted or withheld based on recommendations provided by the Police Chief and the Public Works Director. 
(Ord. 778 – Jul. 02 Supp.) 
135.07 WASHING VEHICLES. It is unlawful for any person to use any public sidewalk, street or alley for the purpose of washing or cleaning any automobile, truck equipment, or any vehicle of any kind when such work is done for hire or as a business. This does not prevent any person from washing or cleaning his or her own vehicle or equipment when it is lawfully parked in the street or alley. 

135.08 BURNING PROHIBITED. No person shall burn any trash, leaves, rubbish or other combustible material in any curb and gutter or on any paved or surfaced street or alley. 
135.09 EXCAVATIONS. No person shall dig, excavate or in any manner disturb any street, parking or alley except in accordance with the following: 
1. Permit Required. No excavation shall be commenced without first obtaining a permit therefor. A written application for such permit shall be filed with the City and shall contain the following: 
A. The location and extent of the proposed work; 
B. The manner and method of doing the same and the time during which the work will be in progress; 
C. An indemnity agreement whereby the applicant agrees to indemnify the City against any loss for damage or injury occasioned by reason of the work being done by the applicant and for which the application is made. 
The application shall be made on a form to be provided by the City. 
2. Issuance of Permits. The Clerk may, upon proper application, issue a permit, specifying therein such regulations and restrictions as may be deemed necessary to insure the safety and convenience of the public and further specifying and requiring the restoration of the street surfaces damaged by such work in the most satisfactory manner and in that manner which will meet the specifications for the restoration of said street surfaces as may be specified by the City Engineer and filed in the office of the Clerk. 
CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA 
-762 ­
3. 
Charges for Cuts in Pavement Surfaces. Before issuing a permit for cutting into or through any paved or surfaced street or alley, the Clerk shall require the person making application for such permit to make a cash payment to the Clerk in sufficient amount to reimburse the City for all costs and expenses for work done or to be done by the City in connection with such permit and the increased maintenance cost of the pavement surfaces or street surfaces due to such work. The payments required shall be based on a schedule of charges adopted by resolution of the Council. 

4. 
Permits Granted to Plumbers and Utility Companies. No permit for cuts in pavement surfaces or street surfaces shall be granted to any person unless such person is a bonded plumber within the City, except that such permits may be granted to public utility companies in the City after the applicant has made satisfactory arrangements with the Clerk for full and complete compliance with the terms and requirements of this Code of Ordinances and any such agreement made by said utility company with the Clerk shall be affirmed in writing by the manager or proper executive of said utility company. 

5. 
Right of City to Do Work. The City Engineer may reserve the right for the City, through its proper department, to perform all, or such portions of the work of cutting into or through, or excavating along or under pavement surfaces, including the backfilling of trenches and pavement surface repairs as the City Engineer may deem necessary to protect the City from undue injury and excessive repair to such pavement surface. 

6. 
Liability of Permit Holder. The permit holder shall be liable for all damage or injury to any property, person or persons caused by reason of said pavement or street surface cut or excavation and for any of the acts for which said permit holder may hold a permit until the permit holder has notified the Clerk in writing, upon a form to be provided by the Clerk, of the completion of the work, and for a period of twenty-four 


(24) hours thereafter. If during the said twenty-four (24) hour period the City, through its proper authorities, shall notify the permit holder in writing of any act or omission which jeopardizes the interests of the City, or the public using said street, then said liability shall continue until the license holder has complied with the requirements of the City. 
7. Notification. At least forty-eight (48) hours prior to the commencement of the excavation, excluding Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays, the person performing the excavation shall contact the Statewide Notification Center and provide the center with the information required under Section 480.4 of the Code of Iowa. 
CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA -763 ­
8. Permit Exemption. Local utility companies performing their own work are exempt from the permit application requirement of this section. They shall, however, comply with all other pertinent provisions and shall post with the City a yearly bond in the amount of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) to guarantee such compliance. 
135.10 DRIVEWAY ENTRANCES, DRIVEWAYS AND DRIVEWAY EXTENSIONS. 
1. 
Driveway Entrance. “Driveway entrance” shall mean that portion of street right-of-way between the curb line and the lot line providing access to private property. It is unlawful for any person to construct a driveway entrance across any parking or street area unless said driveway entrance is of hard surface construction. “Hard surface construction” shall be defined as concrete, asphalt or pavers. Driveway entrances that do not conform to this section but are in existence as of the date of the ordinance codified by this section (February 4, 2002) shall be treated as a nonconforming use under Municipal Code Section 165.06(42) and Municipal Code Sections 165.07 – 165.13. 

2. 
Driveways. “Driveway” shall mean a continuation of a driveway entrance located on private property for the purpose of parking or enclosure of vehicles. Driveway surfaces shall consist of concrete, asphalt, pavers or rock. 

3. 
Driveway Extension. “Driveway extension” shall mean an addition to a driveway, contiguous to the driveway, no wider than ten 


(10) feet, and for the purpose of parking one additional vehicle. A driveway extension surface shall consist of concrete, asphalt, pavers or rock. 
(Ord. 771 – Feb. 02 Supp.) 
135.11 BUILDING MATERIAL IN STREETS. No person shall place or deposit any building material in any street without a written permit from the Mayor, subject to revocation by the Council, to use part of the street in front of or adjacent to the lot whereon such building is being erected for depositing therein the material for such building, but all material shall be placed in such a manner as not to obstruct the gutters of the street. The person occupying a portion of the street shall at all times enclose or guard the same in such manner as to protect persons and animals from injury thereby and with red lights placed and burning through the entire night. 
135.12 MAINTENANCE OF PARKING OR TERRACE. It shall be the responsibility of the abutting property owner to maintain all property outside the lot and property lines and inside the curb lines upon the public streets, except that the abutting property owner shall not be required to remove diseased trees or dead wood on the publicly owned property or right-of-way. Maintenance includes timely mowing, trimming trees and shrubs and picking up litter. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[2c]) 
135.13 FAILURE TO MAINTAIN PARKING OR TERRACE. If the abutting property owner does not perform an action required under the above section within a reasonable time, the City may perform the required action and assess the cost against the abutting property for collection in the same manner as a property tax. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[2e]) 
135.14 DUMPING OF SNOW. It is unlawful for any person to throw, push, or place or cause to be thrown, pushed or placed, any ice or snow from private property, sidewalks, or driveways onto the traveled way of a street or alley so as to obstruct gutters, or impede the passage of vehicles upon the street or alley or to create a hazardous condition therein; except where, in the cleaning of large commercial drives in the business district it is absolutely necessary to move the snow onto the street or alley temporarily, such accumulation shall be removed promptly by the property owner or agent. Arrangements for the prompt removal of such accumulations shall be made prior to moving the snow. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12 [2]) 
135.15 DRIVEWAY CULVERTS. The property owner shall, at the owner’s expense, install any culvert deemed necessary under any driveway or any other access to the owner’s property, and before installing a culvert, permission must first be obtained from the City. In the event repairs are needed at any time with respect to culverts, it shall be the responsibility of the property owner to make such repairs, and, in the event the owner fails to do so, the City shall have the right to make the repairs. If the property owner fails to reimburse the City for the cost of said repairs, the cost shall be certified to the County Treasurer and specially assessed against the property as by law provided. 
CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA 
-765 ­
°°°°°°°°°° 

CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA 
-766 ­
CHAPTER 136 

SIDEWALK REGULATIONS 

136.01 Purpose 136.12 Awnings 
136.02 Definitions 136.13 Encroaching Steps 
136.03 Removal of Snow, Ice and Accumulations 136.14 Openings and Enclosures 
136.04 Responsibility for Maintenance 136.15 Fires or Fuel on Sidewalks 
136.05 City May Order Repairs 136.16 Defacing 
136.06 Sidewalk Construction Ordered 136.17 Debris on Sidewalks 
136.07 Permit Required 136.18 Merchandise Display 
136.08 Sidewalk Standards 136.19 Sales Stands 
136.09 Barricades and Warning Lights 136.20 Water Spouts 
136.10 Failure to Repair or Barricade 136.21 Motorcycles 
136.11 Interference with Sidewalk Improvements 
136.01 PURPOSE. The purpose of this chapter is to enhance safe passage by citizens on sidewalks, to place the responsibility for the maintenance, repair, replacement or reconstruction of sidewalks upon the abutting property owner and to minimize the liability of the City. 
136.02 DEFINITIONS. For use in this chapter the following terms are defined: 
1. 
“Broom finish” means a sidewalk finish that is made by sweeping the sidewalk when it is hardening. 

2. 
“Established grade” means that grade established by the City for the particular area in which a sidewalk is to be constructed. 

3. 
“One-course construction” means that the full thickness of the concrete is placed at one time, using the same mixture throughout. 

4. 
“Owner” means the person owning the fee title to property abutting any sidewalk and includes any contract purchaser for purposes of notification required herein. For all other purposes, “owner” includes the lessee, if any. 

5. 
“Portland cement” means any type of cement except bituminous cement. 

6. 
“Sidewalk” means all permanent public walks in business, residential or suburban areas. 

7. 
“Sidewalk improvements” means the construction, reconstruction, repair, replacement or removal, of a public sidewalk and/or the excavating, filling or depositing of material in the public right-of-way in connection therewith. 


CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA 
-767 ­
8. “Wood float finish” means a sidewalk finish that is made by smoothing the surface of the sidewalk with a wooden trowel. 
136.03 REMOVAL OF SNOW, ICE AND ACCUMULATIONS. It is the responsibility of the abutting property owners to remove snow, ice and accumulations promptly from sidewalks. If a property owner in the residential district does not remove snow, ice or accumulations within forty-eight (48) hours from when snow, ice or accumulation ceases to fall on the sidewalks, the City may do so and assess the costs against the property owners for collection in the same manner as a property tax. If a property owner in the business district does not remove snow, ice or accumulations within twelve (12) hours from when snow, ice or accumulation ceases to fall on the sidewalks, the City may do so and assess the costs against the property owners for collection in the same manner as property tax. (Ord. 810 – Feb. 04 Supp.) 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[2b & e]) 
136.04 RESPONSIBILITY FOR MAINTENANCE. It is the responsibility of the abutting property owners to maintain in a safe and hazard-free condition any sidewalk outside the lot and property lines and inside the curb lines or traveled portion of the public street. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12 [2c]) 
136.05 CITY MAY ORDER REPAIRS. If the abutting property owner does not maintain sidewalks as required, the Council may serve notice on such owner, by certified mail, requiring the owner to repair, replace or reconstruct sidewalks within a reasonable time and if such action is not completed within the time stated in the notice, the Council may require the work to be done and assess the costs against the abutting property for collection in the same manner as a property tax. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[2d & e]) 
136.06 SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION ORDERED. The Council may order the construction of permanent sidewalks upon any street or court in the City and may specially assess the cost of such improvement to abutting property owners in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 384 of the Code of Iowa. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.38) 
136.07 PERMIT REQUIRED. No person shall remove, reconstruct or install a sidewalk unless such person has obtained a permit from the City and has agreed in writing that said removal, reconstruction or installation will comply with all ordinances and requirements of the City for such work. In an effort to encourage and promote the repair, replacement or installation of sidewalks by the abutting property owner, the City will waive all applicable permit fees for any voluntary sidewalk improvements. 
136.08 SIDEWALK STANDARDS. Sidewalks repaired, replaced or constructed under the provisions of this chapter shall be of the following construction and meet the following standards: 
1. 
Cement. Portland cement shall be the only cement used in the construction and repair of sidewalks. 

2. 
Construction. Sidewalks shall be of one-course construction. 

3. 
Sidewalk Base. Concrete may be placed directly on compact and well-drained soil. Where soil is not well drained, a three (3) inch sub-base of compact, clean, coarse gravel or sand shall be laid. The adequacy of the soil drainage is to be determined by the City. 

4. 
Sidewalk Bed. The sidewalk bed shall be so graded that the constructed sidewalk will be at established grade. 

5. 
Length, Width and Depth. Length, width and depth requirements are as follows: 

A. Residential sidewalks shall be at least four (4) feet wide and four (4) inches thick, and each section shall be no more than six (6) feet in length. 
B. Business District sidewalks shall extend from the property line to the curb. Each section shall be four (4) inches thick and no more than six (6) feet in length. 
C. Driveway areas shall be not less than six (6) inches in thickness. 

6. 
Location. Residential sidewalks shall be located with the inner edge (edge nearest the abutting private property) one foot from the property line, unless the Council establishes a different distance due to special circumstances. 

7. 
Grade. Curb tops shall be on level with the centerline of the street which shall be the established grade. 

8. 
Elevations. The street edge of a sidewalk shall be at an elevation even with the curb at the curb or not less than one-half (½) inch above the curb for each foot between the curb and the sidewalk. 

9. 
Slope. All sidewalks shall slope one-quarter (¼) inch per foot toward the curb. 

10. 
Finish. All sidewalks shall be finished with a “broom” or “wood float” finish. 


11. Ramps for Persons with Disabilities. There shall be not less than two (2) curb cuts or ramps per lineal block which shall be located on or near the crosswalks at intersections. Each curb cut or ramp shall be at least thirty (30) inches wide, shall be sloped at not greater than one inch of rise per twelve (12) inches lineal distance, except that a slope no greater than one inch of rise per eight (8) inches lineal distance may be used where necessary, shall have a nonskid surface, and shall otherwise be so constructed as to allow reasonable access to the crosswalk for persons with disabilities using the sidewalk. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 216C.9) 
136.09 BARRICADES AND WARNING LIGHTS. Whenever any material of any kind is deposited on any street, avenue, highway, passageway or alley when sidewalk improvements are being made or when any sidewalk is in a dangerous condition, it shall be the duty of all persons having an interest therein, either as the contractor or the owner, agent, or lessee of the property in front of or along which such material may be deposited, or such dangerous condition exists, to put in conspicuous places at each end of such sidewalk and at each end of any pile of material deposited in the street, a sufficient number of approved warning lights or flares, and to keep them lighted during the entire night and to erect sufficient barricades both at night and in the daytime to secure the same. The party or parties using the street for any of the purposes specified in this chapter shall be liable for all injuries or damage to persons or property arising from any wrongful act or negligence of the party or parties, or their agents or employees or for any misuse of the privileges conferred by this chapter or of any failure to comply with provisions hereof. 
136.10 FAILURE TO REPAIR OR BARRICADE. It is the duty of the owner of the property abutting the sidewalk, or the owner’s contractor or agent, to notify the City immediately in the event of failure or inability to make necessary sidewalk improvements or to install or erect necessary barricades as required by this chapter. 
136.11 INTERFERENCE WITH SIDEWALK IMPROVEMENTS. No person shall knowingly or willfully drive any vehicle upon any portion of any sidewalk or approach thereto while in the process of being improved or upon any portion of any completed sidewalk or approach thereto, or shall remove or destroy any part or all of any sidewalk or approach thereto, or shall remove, destroy, mar or deface any sidewalk at any time or destroy, mar, remove or deface any notice provided by this chapter. 
136.12 AWNINGS. It is unlawful for a person to erect or maintain any awning over any sidewalk unless all parts of the awning are elevated at least eight (8) feet above the surface of the sidewalk and the roof or covering is made of duck, canvas or other suitable material supported by iron frames or brackets securely fastened to the building, without any posts or other device that will obstruct the sidewalk or hinder or interfere with the free passage of pedestrians. 
136.13 ENCROACHING STEPS. It is unlawful for a person to erect or maintain any stairs or steps to any building upon any part of any sidewalk without permission by resolution of the Council. 
136.14 OPENINGS AND ENCLOSURES. It is unlawful for a person to: 
1. 
Stairs and Railings. Construct or build a stairway or passageway to any cellar or basement by occupying any part of the sidewalk, or to enclose any portion of a sidewalk with a railing without permission by resolution of the Council. 

2. 
Openings. Keep open any cellar door, grating or cover to any vault on any sidewalk except while in actual use with adequate guards to protect the public. 

3. 
Protect Openings. Neglect to properly protect or barricade all openings on or within six (6) feet of any sidewalk. 


136.15 FIRES OR FUELS ON SIDEWALKS. It is unlawful for a person to make a fire of any kind on any sidewalk or to place or allow any fuel to remain upon any sidewalk. 
136.16 DEFACING. It is unlawful for a person to scatter or place any paste, paint or writing on any sidewalk. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.1) 
136.17 DEBRIS ON SIDEWALKS. It is unlawful for a person to throw or deposit on any sidewalk any glass, nails, glass bottle, tacks, wire, cans, trash, garbage, rubbish, litter, offal, or any other debris, or any substance likely to injure any person, animal or vehicle. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12 [2]) 
136.18 MERCHANDISE DISPLAY. It is unlawful for a person to place upon or above any sidewalk, any goods or merchandise for sale or for display in such a manner as to interfere with the free and uninterrupted passage of pedestrians on the sidewalk; in no case shall more than three (3) feet of the sidewalk next to the building be occupied for such purposes. 
136.19 SALES STANDS. It is unlawful for a person to erect or keep any vending machine or stand for the sale of fruit, vegetables or other substances or commodities on any sidewalk without first obtaining a written permit from the Council. 
136.20 WATER SPOUTS. It is unlawful to cause or permit any water spout, trough, gutter or balcony extending from any building, owned or leased, to discharge or conduct water upon the surface of any sidewalk, but all such water shall be conducted under the sidewalk in accordance with City plans and specifications and under the direction of the Mayor or Council. 
136.21 MOTORCYCLES. No person shall ride any motorcycle on any sidewalk. 
CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA 
-772 ­
CHAPTER 137 
VACATION AND DISPOSAL OF STREETS 

137.01 Power to Vacate 137.04 Findings Required 
137.02 Planning and Zoning Commission 137.05 Disposal of Vacated Streets or Alleys 
137.03 Notice of Vacation Hearing 137.06 Disposal by Gift Limited 
137.01 POWER TO VACATE. When, in the judgment of the Council, it would be in the best interest of the City to vacate a street, alley, portion thereof or any public grounds, the Council may do so by ordinance in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12 [2a]) 
137.02 PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION. Any proposal to vacate a street, alley, portion thereof or any public grounds shall be referred by the Council to the Planning and Zoning Commission for its study and recommendation prior to further consideration by the Council. The Commission shall submit a written report including recommendations to the Council within thirty (30) days after the date the proposed vacation is referred to the Commission. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1) 
137.03 NOTICE OF VACATION HEARING. The Council shall cause to be published a notice of public hearing of the time at which the proposal to vacate shall be considered. 
137.04 FINDINGS REQUIRED. No street, alley, portion thereof or any public grounds shall be vacated unless the Council finds that: 
1. 
Public Use. The street, alley, portion thereof or any public ground proposed to be vacated is not needed for the use of the public, and therefore, its maintenance at public expense is no longer justified. 

2. 
Abutting Property. The proposed vacation will not deny owners of property abutting on the street or alley reasonable access to their property. 


137.05 DISPOSAL OF VACATED STREETS OR ALLEYS. When in the judgment of the Council it would be in the best interest of the City to dispose of a vacated street or alley, portion thereof or public ground, the Council may do so in accordance with the provisions of Section 364.7, Code of Iowa. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.7) 
CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA -773 ­
137.06 DISPOSAL BY GIFT LIMITED. The City may not dispose of real property by gift except to a governmental body for a public purpose. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.7[3]) 
EDITOR’S NOTE  
The following ordinances, not codified herein and specifically saved from repeal, have been adopted vacating certain streets, alleys and/or public grounds and remain in full force and effect.  
ORDINANCE NO.  ADOPTED  ORDINANCE NO.  ADOPTED  
389  July 10, 1962  813  April 5, 2004  
400  May 14, 1963  818  June 1, 2004  
404  August 13, 1963  828  November 1, 2004  
416  February 9, 1965  829  November 15, 2004  
417  February 9, 1965  830  November 15, 2004  
421  June 22, 1965  831  February 7, 2005  
432  January 10, 1967  838  July 18, 2005  
456  December 28, 1970  852  September 9, 2006  
457  June 21, 1971  860  July 2, 2007  
466  December 4, 1972  877  December 15, 2008  
470  May 21, 1973  
473  August 3, 1973  
485  June 9, 1975  
495  June 20, 1977  
515  June 29, 1981  
519  January 18, 1982  
532  May 16, 1983  
610  June 17, 1991  
691  January 2, 1996  
714  July 9, 1997  
718  September 8, 1997  
719  October 20, 1997  
739  November 15, 1999  
740  December 6, 1999  
741  December 6, 1999  
742  December 6, 1999  
755  May 15, 2000  
786  October 7, 2002  
800  November 3, 2003  
801  November 3, 2003  

CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA 
-774 ­
CHAPTER 138 
STREET GRADES 
138.01 Established Grades 138.02 Record Maintained 
138.01 ESTABLISHED GRADES. The grades of all streets, alleys and sidewalks, which have been heretofore established by ordinance are hereby confirmed, ratified and established as official grades. 
138.02 RECORD MAINTAINED. The Clerk shall maintain a record of all established grades and furnish information concerning such grades upon request. 
EDITOR’S NOTE  
The following ordinances not codified herein, and specifically saved from repeal, have been adopted establishing street and/or sidewalk grades and remain in full force and effect.  
ORDINANCE NO.  ADOPTED  ORDINANCE NO.  ADOPTED  
385  -­ 
452  -­ 
482  -­ 
511  July 21, 1980  
514  March 16, 1981  
533  June 20, 1983  














CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA 
-775 ­
°°°°°°°°°° 

CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA 
-776 ­
CHAPTER 139 
NAMING OF STREETS 

139.01 Naming New Streets 139.04 Official Street Name Map 
139.02 Changing Name of Street 139.05 Revision of Street Name Map 
139.03 Recording Street Names 
139.01 NAMING NEW STREETS. New streets shall be assigned names in accordance with the following: 
1. 
Extension of Existing Street. Streets added to the City that are natural extensions of existing streets shall be assigned the name of the existing street. 

2. 
Resolution. All street names, except streets named as a part of a subdivision or platting procedure, shall be named by resolution. 

3. 
Planning and Zoning Commission. Proposed street names shall be referred to the Planning and Zoning Commission for review and recommendation. 


139.02 CHANGING NAME OF STREET. The Council may, by resolution, change the name of a street. 
139.03 RECORDING STREET NAMES. Following official action naming or changing the name of a street, the Clerk shall file a copy thereof with the County Recorder, County Auditor and County Assessor. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 354.26) 
139.04 OFFICIAL STREET NAME MAP. Streets within the City are named as shown on the Official Street Name Map which is hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this chapter. The Official Street Name Map shall be identified by the signature of the Mayor, and bearing the seal of the City under the following words: “This is to certify that this is the Official Street Name Map referred to in Section 139.04 of the Code of Ordinances of Perry, Iowa.” 
139.05 REVISION OF STREET NAME MAP. If in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, changes are made in street names, such changes shall be entered on the Official Street Name Map promptly after the change has been approved by the Council with an entry on the Official Street Name Map as follows: “On (date), by official action of the City Council, the following changes were made in the Official Street Name Map: (brief description),” which entry shall be signed by the Mayor and attested by the Clerk. 
CHAPTER 140 
CONTROLLED ACCESS FACILITIES 
140.01 Exercise of Police Power 140.05 Unlawful Use of Controlled Access Facility 
140.02 Definition 140.06 Speed Limits 
140.03 Right of Access Limited 140.07 Parking Restricted 
140.04 Access Controls Imposed 
140.01 EXERCISE OF POLICE POWER. This chapter shall be deemed an exercise of the police power of the City under Chapter 306A, Code of Iowa, for the preservation of the public peace, health, safety and for the promotion of the general welfare. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 306A.1) 
140.02 DEFINITION. The term “controlled access facility” means a highway or street especially designed for through traffic, and over, from or to which owners or occupants of abutting land or other persons have no right or easement or only a controlled right or easement of access, light, air or view by reason of the fact that their property abuts upon such controlled access facility or for any other reason. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 306A.2) 
140.03 RIGHT OF ACCESS LIMITED. No person has any right of ingress or egress to or from abutting lands onto or across any controlled access facility, except at such designated points at which access is permitted. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 306A.4) 
140.04 ACCESS CONTROLS IMPOSED. There are hereby fixed and established controlled access facilities within the City, described as follows: 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 306A.3) 
1. Project No. U-557. On the Primary Road System extension improvement, Project No. U-557, Primary Road No. Iowa 144, within the City, described as follows: 
From Willis Avenue (Sta. 500 + 28) northerly along First Avenue to the north corporation line (Sta. 26 + 48.4) 
regulating access to and from abutting properties along said highway all in accordance with the plans for such improvement identified as Project No. U-557, on file in the office of the Clerk. 
2. Project No. FN-12W. On the Primary Road System extension improvement, Project No. FN-12W, Primary Road No. 141, within the City, described as follows: 
From Sta. 0 + 00 to Sta. 76 + 57 = Sta. 0 + 00 and from Sta. 0 + 00 to Sta. 42 + 40 
regulating access to and from abutting properties along said highway all in accordance with the plans for such improvement identified as Project No. FN-12W, on file in the office of the Clerk. 
3. Project No. F-141-6(2)—20-25 and U-144-1(1)—40-25. On the Primary Road System extension improvement, Project No. F-141-6(2)— 20-25 and U-144-1(1)—40-25, Primary Road No. 144 and relocated Iowa 141, within the City, described as follows: 
Iowa 144 from Sta. 65 + 75 to Sta. 99 + 65 and from Relocated Iowa 141 from Sta. 1434 + 00 to Sta. 1439 + 00 from Sta. 1451 + 00 to Sta. 1462 + 00, from Sta. 1479 + 50 to Sta. 1519 + 50, 
regulating access to and from abutting properties along said highway all in accordance with the plans for such improvement identified as Project No. F-141-6(2)—20-25 and U-144-1(1)—40-25, on file in the office of the Clerk. 
140.05 UNLAWFUL USE OF CONTROLLED ACCESS FACILITY. It is unlawful for any person to: 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 306A.3 and 321.366) 
1. 
Cross Dividing Line. Drive a vehicle over, upon or across any curb, central dividing section, or other separation or dividing line on such controlled access facilities. 

2. 
Turns. Make a left turn or a semicircular or U-turn except through an opening provided for that purpose in the dividing curb section, separation or line. 

3. 
Use of Lanes. Drive any vehicle except in the proper lane provided for that purpose and in the proper direction and to the right of the central dividing curb, separation, section or line. 

4. 
Enter Facility. Drive any vehicle into the controlled access facility from a local service road except through an opening provided for that purpose in the dividing curb or dividing section or dividing line which separates such service road from the controlled access facility property. 


CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA 
-779 ­
140.06 SPEED LIMITS. The maximum speed limits on said projects are hereby established as follows: 
1. Project No. U-557. Speed limits on Project No. U-557 are as follows: 
A. 35 mph from Station 500 + 28 (Willis Avenue) to Station 539 + 72 (Park Street). 
B. 35 mph from Station 0 + 00 to Station 3 + 50. 
C. 45 mph from Station 3 + 50 to Station 26 + 48.4 (NCL). 
2. Highway 141. Speed limits on Highway 141 are as follows: 
A. 55 mph from 1,361 feet east of 16th Street to 115 feet west of Tenth Street. 
B. 50 mph from 115 feet west of Tenth Street to Highway 
144. 
140.07 PARKING RESTRICTED. The parking of vehicles on or along controlled access facilities is restricted as follows: 
1. 
Minor Street Approaches. Parking shall be prohibited on all minor street approaches for a distance of thirty-five (35) feet in advance of the stop sign. 

2. 
Minor Street Exits. Parking shall be prohibited on the exit side of a minor street for a distance of thirty-five (35) feet. 

3. 
Diagonal Parking on Minor Street. Where diagonal parking is permitted, on the minor street approach, parking shall be restricted so that a fifty-five (55) foot stop sign distance is maintained. 

4. 
Project No. U-557. Parking of any nature is prohibited on Project No. U-557 from Sta. 500+28 to Sta. 539+72 = Sta. 0+00, from Sta. 0+00 to Sta. 26+48.4, except that at the completion of 10-foot portland cement concrete parking lanes on each side outside of the center 45 feet from Willis Avenue to Warford Street and from Lucinda Street to Pattee Street a single line of parallel parking will be permitted on each side of First Street outside of the center 45 feet from Willis Avenue to Warford Street and from Lucinda Street to Pattee Street with the following restrictions at the intersections: At un-signalized intersections, parking is prohibited on the primary road extension for a distance of 55 feet in advance of the near crosswalk and a distance of 22 feet beyond the far crosswalk. At signalized intersections, parking is prohibited for a distance of 10 feet in advance of the near crosswalk and a distance of 5 feet beyond the far 


crosswalk. Distance of parking restrictions is measured along the edge of the through lane. 
5. 
Project No. FN-12W. Parking of any nature is prohibited on Project No. FN-12W from the west corporation line to First Street, and from East Fourth Street to the east corporation line. A single line of parallel parking on each side is permitted from First Street to East Fourth Street. 

6. 
Project No. U-144-1(1)—40-25 and F-141-6(2)—20-25. Parking of any nature is prohibited on Project Nos. U-144-1(1)—40-25 and F­141-6(2)—20-25 on First Street from a point 740 feet south of South Street (Sta. 65 + 75) to Willis Avenue (Sta. 99 + 65). Parking on Relocated Iowa 141 is prohibited within the corporate limits. 


[The next page is 789] 
CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA 
-781 ­
CHAPTER 145 

DANGEROUS BUILDINGS 
145.01 Enforcement Officer 145.09 Grading of Premises After Demolition 
145.02 Definitions 145.10 Extermination Procedure Before Demolition 
145.03 Procedure to Remedy 145.11 Bids for Demolition—Bid Opening— 
145.04 Time for Compliance Award of Contract 
145.05 Removal of Posted Notice 145.12 Stay of Demolition—Bond 
145.06 Service by Public Utilities 145.13 Emergency Procedures 
145.07 Demolition 145.14 Assessment of Costs 
145.08 Access for Demolition—Penalties 
145.01 ENFORCEMENT OFFICER. The Building Official or his designee is responsible for the enforcement of this chapter. 
145.02 DEFINITIONS. The following words when used in this chapter shall have the meanings: 
1. “Dangerous or dilapidated structure” means: (a) any building, shed, fence or other man-made structure which is dangerous to the public health because of its condition. A dangerous condition shall include but not be limited to one which may cause or aid in the spread of disease; or which may cause injury to the health of the occupants of it or neighboring structures; (b) any building, shed, fence or other man-made structure which, because of faulty construction, age, lack of proper repair or any other cause, constitutes or creates a fire hazard; (c) any building, shed, fence or other man-made structure which, by reason of faulty construction or any other cause, is liable to cause injury or damage by its collapsing or by the collapse or fall of all or any part of such structure; 
(d) any building, shed, fence or other man-made structure which, because of its condition or because of lack of operable doors or windows which can be securely locked, is available to or frequented by persons who are not lawful occupants of such structure. 
2. 
“Imminently dangerous structure” is any building, shed, fence or other man-made structure which, is in danger of imminent collapse of all or any part of such structure and is thereby an imminent danger to the health and safety of the general public or adjacent property. 

3. 
“Owner” means the contract purchaser if there is one of record, otherwise the record title holder. 

4. 
“Commercial structure” means any structure not used exclusively as a dwelling unit. 


CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA 
-789 ­
145.03 PROCEDURE TO REMEDY. Whenever the Inspecting Official determines that any structure is a dangerous or dilapidated structure, the inspecting official shall: 
1. 
Cause to be posted in a conspicuous place on the structure a notice which shall substantially as follows: “Danger -Unsafe or Unfit Structure.” Such notice shall remain posted until the required repairs, removal or demolition is completed. Such notice shall not be removed except by the Inspecting Official or by the Inspecting Official’s written permission and no persons shall enter a building except for the purpose of making the required repairs, removal or demolition. 

2. 
Cause to be served upon the owner thereof and the occupants, if any, a written notice shall contain: 


A. The street address and a legal description sufficient for identification of the premises upon which the structure is located. 
B. A statement that the Inspecting Official has found the structure to be a dangerous or dilapidated structure with a description of the conditions found to render the structure dangerous under the provisions of Section 145.02. 
C. That the structure must be vacated by all occupants within a specified time, which shall be reasonable under the circumstances. 
D. A statement of the corrective action to be taken as determined by the Inspecting Official including a time for commencing and completing such corrective action. All repair or modification or demolition work ordered shall be commenced within a reasonable time not to exceed thirty (30) days from the date of the notice and to be completed within a reasonable time not to exceed six (6) months from the date of notice. Corrective action may include repair, removal or demolition, as determined by the Inspecting Official. 
E. A statement that if the required repair, modification or demolition work is not commenced within the time specified, the City will cause the structure to be demolished and will assess all costs thereof in accordance with State law. A statement that the Inspecting Official will report the failure of the owner to repair, modify or demolish the structure to the City Council; that the City Council will conduct a public hearing on the report and may order the City building official to proceed with demolition of the structure and thereafter assess all the costs of the demolition against the property and to the owner; that the owner may file written objections with the City Clerk or appear at the public hearing and be heard orally in relation to the matter; and the date, time and place of the public hearing before the City Council. 
F. A statement of the right to appeal the notice in writing to the Building Official within fifteen (15) days of the date of notice. However, a notice to demolish a structure shall not be subject to an appeal when said notice is given subsequent to a notice to repair or modify and such repairs or modifications have not been completed. 
G. A copy of the ordinance codified by this chapter will be given along with the notification that a structure is dangerous or dilapidated. 
3. 
Such notice may be in the form of an ordinance or by certified mail to the property owner as shown by the records of the County Auditor and to the occupants, if any, and shall state the time within which action is required. However, in an emergency, the City may perform any action which may be required under this section without prior notice and assess the costs as provided by law, after notice to the property owner and hearing. 

4. 
The Inspecting Official shall file a copy of such written notice to the County Recorder. 


145.04 TIME FOR COMPLIANCE. Any structure which shall have been posted with a notice that it is unsafe or unfit shall immediately be made as safe, secure and free from dangers to others as is possible pending repair or demolition. When the corrective action required is repair or modification, the owner of the premises shall, within thirty days of the date of notice, file a sworn statement of intention, with plans and financial reports as may be requested by the Inspecting Official to assure such intention, to repair, or modify the structure as required for compliance within the provisions of this title. The owner shall within sixty days of the date of notice, commence actual repairs or modifications as required and as stated in the sworn statement of intention. The owner shall, within a reasonable time determined by the Inspecting Official but not to exceed six months from the date of notice, complete such repairs or modifications as stated and required. When the corrective action required is the demolition of the structure, the owner of the premises shall, within fifteen days of the date of notice commence said demolition; and shall, within reasonable time determined by the Inspecting Official but not to exceed sixty days from the date of notice, complete such demolition as stated and required. The City Council may grant one extension of time to comply with an order to repair or modify or demolish a structure when the owner affirmatively shows the financial ability to perform the work; and the work, through no fault of the owner, cannot be completed within the time provided. Such extension shall be for a reasonable period of time not to exceed ninety days for repairs or modifications and not to exceed sixty days for demolition. 
145.05 REMOVAL OF POSTED NOTICE. No person shall deface, cover, obliterate or remove the notice posted pursuant to Section 145.03 from any structure which has been so posted by the Inspecting Official as unsafe or unfit, except as provided in this section. No such structure shall again be occupied or used until such posted notice is removed by the Inspecting Official. The Inspecting Official shall remove such posted notice when the defect or defects which caused the posted notice have been eliminated or when the demolition or removal of the structure is commenced. 
145.06 SERVICE BY PUBLIC UTILITIES. After the date for the vacation of the structure, it is unlawful for any public utilities corporation or company to furnish gas or electrical service to any structure which has been posted with notice by the Inspecting Official as unsafe or unfit, when the Inspecting Official in his discretion has notified the public utilities corporation or company in writing of his action in posting the structure as of the date and services shall be discontinued. The utility service shall not be restored to a posted structure until notice in writing is received from the Inspecting Official authorizing the restoration of such service by the utilities corporation or company. The Inspecting Official may authorize restoration of service to be used in connection with the renovation, repair or remodeling of the structure to comply with the provisions of this title. The Inspecting Official shall give such written authorization for the restoration of service when the posted notice is removed pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. 
145.07 DEMOLITION. When the owner falls to commence or complete the required repairs, removal or demolition within the specified time period, the Inspecting Official shall report the owner’s failure to the City Council. 
1. 
The City Council shall then hold a hearing and may, by resolution authorize the Inspecting Official to demolish the structure or take such other action it deems appropriate, including the granting of a stay pursuant to Section 145.04. 

2. 
Upon passage of such resolution the Inspecting Official shall file a certified copy of such resolution with the County Recorder. 


145.08 ACCESS FOR DEMOLITION—PENALTIES. The owner of the structure who has received the report of the intent of the Inspecting Official to demolish shall give entry and free access to the agent and Inspecting Official for the purpose of demolition. Any owner who refuses, impedes, interferes with or hinders or obstructs entry by such agent pursuant to a notice of intention to demolish shall be subject to the municipal infraction penalties of this code in Section 4.03 of the City of Perry Code of Ordinances, 2001. 
145.09 GRADING OF PREMISES AFTER DEMOLITION. Whenever the premises is demolished, whether carried out by the owner or by the Inspecting Official, such demolition shall include the filing of the excavation on which the demolished premises was located in such manner as to eliminate all potential danger to the public health, safety, or welfare arising from such excavation. 
145.10 EXTERMINATION PROCEDURE BEFORE DEMOLITION. 
All demolition shall be preceded by an inspection of the premises by the Inspecting Official to determine whether or not extermination procedures are necessary. If the premises are found to be infested, appropriate rat, pests and insects extermination to prevent the spread of rats, pests and insects to adjoining or other areas shall be instituted before, during and after demolition. 
145.11 BIDS FOR DEMOLITION—BID OPENING—AWARD OF CONTRACT. The Inspecting Official shall commence demolition as follows: 
1. 
When the estimated cost of demolition, in the opinion of the appropriate authority, is five thousand dollars or more, the work shall be done under contract and the Inspecting Official shall seek sealed bids as near in form and manner as those used in contracts for street improvements. If no bids are received, the Inspecting Official may negotiate a contract with a qualified contractor. Bids, if any, shall be opened in the office of the Building Official. 

2. 
When the estimated cost of demolition, in the opinion of the Inspecting Official, is less than five thousand dollars, the work shall be done under contract and the Inspecting Official shall seek sealed bids in a manner he deems appropriate or shall negotiate a contract with a qualified contractor. Bids, if any, shall be opened in the office of the Building Official. 

3. 
A contract for demolition pursuant to subsection 1 of this section shall be awarded by resolution of the City Council. 

4. 
A contract for demolition pursuant to subsection 2 of this section shall be awarded by the City Administrator. 


145.12 STAY OF DEMOLITION—BOND. The owner, or any interested person may request a delay in the demolition of a structure at the time of the hearing on resolution authorizing demolition. Such request shall be made in writing. The City Council may grant such request properly before it when in its opinion it is practical, economical and structurally possible to rehabilitate the structure to comply with this code. 
1. No stay granted shall be effective, however, unless and until such person signs a written agreement with the City wherein the person agrees: 
A. To make all of the necessary repairs to bring the structure to current code standards within a time not to exceed ninety days of the date the stay is granted; 
B. To grant the City the right to award a contract and to enter in and upon such premises for the purposes of demolishing same upon the failure of the person to make such necessary repairs within the agreed upon time period; and 
C. Agrees to pay the City a per diem, in an agreed upon amount, which shall serve as reimbursement to the City of administrative and monitoring expenses for each day such person requests a delay in City demolition beyond the period of time established for the repair of the structure under the agreement; and such person files with the City a corporate surety performance bond, a cashier’s or certified check drawn on a Perry bank or credit union or a letter of credit from such an institution in the estimated cost of demolition, as determined by the Inspecting Official, and in an amount sufficient to assure payment of the per diem reimbursement to the City. In no event shall the portion of the bond attributable to the cost of demolition be less than one thousand dollars, nor shall the portion of the bond attributable to the per diem reimbursement be less than one thousand dollars. The bond shall be conditioned upon the person performing the repairs within the agreed upon time period, together with written extensions thereto, and conditioned upon payment of the per diem reimbursement as same shall become due. Upon such person’s failure to make all of the repairs in a manner acceptable to the City within the agreed upon time period, together with written extensions thereto, the Inspecting Official may proceed to demolish the structure without further notice. 
2. The proceeds of the bond given pursuant to Section 145.12, if any, shall be applied by the City Finance Officer first against any unpaid per diem reimbursement and then against the assessment for demolition. 
145.13 EMERGENCY PROCEDURES. Whenever the Inspecting Official determines that any structure in the City is an imminently dangerous structure, he shall notify the owner of said structure by any reasonable means, including telephonic means, and allow the owner a reasonable period of time, as determined by the Inspecting Official, in which to make the structure safe or to commence and complete demolition of the structure. Upon the failure or refusal of the owner to make the structure safe or to commence or complete demolition within the time period provided, the Inspecting Official shall proceed at once to make safe the structure or to demolish the structure. In the event the work is performed by the City, the costs of the same shall be assessed against the property. 
145.14 ASSESSMENT OF COSTS. Upon completion of demolition the Inspecting Official shall report to the City Council the actual cost of demolition, grading, extermination, serving of notices, plus twenty percent of the total of said amounts to compensate for the cost of supervision and administration by the City. The City Council may then proceed to assess said costs against the property pursuant to the provisions of Section 364.12 of the Code of the State of Iowa. 
(Ch. 145 – Ord. 846 – May 06 Supp.) 
CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA 
-795 ­[The next page is 799] 
CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA 
-796 ­
CHAPTER 146 
MANUFACTURED AND MOBILE HOMES 

146.01 Definitions 	146.05 Limitation on Length of Stay 
146.02 Location of Mobile Homes 	146.06 Special Permits 
146.03 Permanent Occupancy 	146.07 Emergency and Temporary Parking 
146.04 Permanent Additions or Attachments 	146.08 Restriction of Location for Manufactured and Mobile Homes 
146.01 DEFINITIONS. For use in this chapter the following terms are defined: 
1. “Manufactured home” (modular home) means a factory built structure, which is manufactured or constructed under the authority of 42 
U.S.C. Sec. 5403 and is to be used as a place for human habitation, but which is not constructed or equipped with a permanent hitch or other device allowing it to be moved other than for the purpose of moving to a permanent site, and which does not have permanently attached to its body or frame any wheels or axles. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 414.28) 
2. “Mobile home” or “house trailer” means any vehicle without motive power used or so manufactured or constructed as to permit its being used as a conveyance upon the public streets and highways and so designed, constructed or reconstructed as will permit the vehicle to be used as a place for human habitation by one or more persons; but also includes any such vehicle with motive power not registered as a motor vehicle in Iowa. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 435.1[1]) 
3. “Mobile home park” or “trailer camp” means any site, lot, field or tract of land upon which two (2) or more occupied mobile homes are harbored, either free of charge or for revenue purposes, and includes any building, structure, tent, vehicle or enclosure used or intended for use as part of the equipment of such mobile home park. The term “mobile home park” shall not be construed to include mobile homes, buildings, tents or other structures temporarily maintained by any individual, educational institution or company on such entity’s own premises and used exclusively to house said entity’s own labor or students. The mobile home park shall meet the requirements of any zoning regulations that are in effect. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 435.1[2]) 
CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA 
-799 ­
146.02 LOCATION OF MOBILE HOMES. It is unlawful for any person to park or place any mobile home on the streets, alleys or highways, any public place, or on any private land within the City, except as is provided by State law and this chapter. This section does not apply to: 
1. 
Mobile Home Parks. Mobile homes parked or placed within mobile home parks. 

2. 
Dealer’s Stock. Mobile homes parked upon private property as part of a dealer’s or a manufacturer’s stock not used as a place for human habitation. 

3. 
Manufactured Homes. Manufactured homes, or mobile homes meeting the manufacturing requirements of the State Building Code and which are converted to real property in accordance with Section 435.26 of the Code of Iowa, providing that the location of such manufactured home or mobile home meets all other requirements imposed by this Code of Ordinances. 


146.03 PERMANENT OCCUPANCY. Mobile homes shall not be used as a permanent dwelling place or for indefinite periods of time, provided that any mobile home connected with the City’s sewer and water system may be permitted, on premises other than a mobile home park, on a permanent basis, if the mobile home meets with all the requirements of the building, plumbing, health, sanitary, electrical and zoning ordinances of the City. 
146.04 PERMANENT ADDITIONS OR ATTACHMENTS. No permanent additions or attachments of any kind shall be built onto or become a part of any mobile home, nor shall any mobile home be attached to the ground by means of posts, piers or foundations. However, if sixty percent (60%) of the residents within a three hundred (300) foot radius agree and consent to the installation of permanent additions or attachments by filing such agreement and consent in writing with the Clerk, then the Council may issue a special permit for the installation of such a mobile home. 
146.05 LIMITATION ON LENGTH OF STAY. Thirty (30) days is the maximum period of time any person may occupy a mobile home in any twelve­month period within the City, except as provided in Section 146.02 of this chapter, and except upon showing proof that a housing shortage exists in the community, in which case an additional thirty-day period may be granted. The limitations imposed in this section shall not apply to the operator of the mobile home park or employees. 
146.06 SPECIAL PERMITS. The Council, after reviewing the application of a mobile home owner, may issue special permits allowing the location of mobile homes outside mobile home parks for a period of time not exceeding three (3) months. Not more than one (1) mobile home shall be permitted to locate on the same premises outside of mobile home parks. 
146.07 EMERGENCY AND TEMPORARY PARKING. Emergency or temporary parking of mobile homes upon the streets, alleys or highways or any other public or private place for a period not in excess of twenty (20) hours shall not constitute a violation of Section 146.02, but such parking shall be subject to any prohibitions or regulations contained in other ordinances of the City. 
146.08 RESTRICTION OF LOCATION FOR MANUFACTURED AND MOBILE HOMES. The construction and/or location of manufactured homes are only restricted outside the areas of the City known as Mobile Home Parks or Manufactured Home Communities. (Ord. 844 – May 06 Supp.) 
CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA 
-801 ­[The next page is 811] 
CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA 
-802 ­
CHAPTER 147 
WATER WELL PROTECTION 

147.01 Purpose 147.04 Separation Distances Table 
147.02 Establishment of Separation Distances 147.05 Mandatory Connection to Public Water System 
147.03 Definitions and Use of Private Wells 
147.01 PURPOSE. The purpose of this chapter is to establish separation distances from wells from all structures and uses, to protect the public, and to preserve the health and welfare of the community by protecting water purity. 
147.02 ESTABLISHMENT OF SEPARATION DISTANCES. The distances for separating uses and construction around all wells within the City, including old wells as well as new wells, have been established by State requirements relative to possible pollutants and their distances from wells, and the Council has found that the said State requirements shall be adopted as the minimum acceptable requirements for separation distances from wells, and no construction or use shall be allowed within said minimum distances to City wells as set forth herein. 
147.03 DEFINITIONS. For use in this chapter, the following terms are defined. Use of the word “building” includes the word “structure.” 
1. 
“Animal enclosure” means a lot, yard, corral or similar structure in which the concentration of livestock or poultry is such that a vegetative cover is not maintained. 

2. 
“Animal pasturage” means a fenced area where vegetative cover is maintained and in which the animals are enclosed. 

3. 
“Animal waste” means animal waste consisting of excreta, leachings, feed losses, litter, wash water or other associated waste. 

4. 
“Animal waste stockpiles” means stacking, composting or containment of animal wastes. 

5. 
“Animal waste storage basin or lagoon” means fully or partially excavated or diked earthen structure including earthen side slopes or floor. 

6. 
“Animal waste storage tank” means a completely fabricated structure, with or without a cover, either formed in place or transported to the site, used for containing animal waste. 

7. 
“Cistern” means a covered tank in which rain water from roof drains is stored. 


8. 
“Deep well” means a well located and constructed in such a manner that there is a continuous layer of low permeability soil or rock at least five feet thick located at a depth of at least 25 feet below the normal ground surface and above the aquifer from which the water is to be drawn. 

9. 
“Low permeability” means an unconsolidated soil layer of well sorted fine grain-sized sediments that under normal hydrostatic pressures would not be significantly permeable. Low permeability soils may include homogeneous clays below the zone of weathering, mudstone, claystone and some glacial till. 

10. 
“Privy” means a structure used for the deposition of human body wastes. 

11. 
“Sanitary sewer pipe” means a sewer pipe complying with the standards of sewer construction of the Department of Natural Resources. 

12. 
“Septic tank” means a watertight tank which receives sewage. 

13. 
“Shallow well” means a well located and constructed in such a manner that there is not a continuous five-foot layer of low permeability soil or rock between the aquifer from which the water supply is drawn and a point 25 feet below the normal ground surface. 

14. 
“Water main pipe” means a water main complying with the Department of Natural Resources standards for water main construction. 


147.04 SEPARATION DISTANCES TABLE. No building or use shall be allowed within the separation distances from City wells as set out in Table A at the end of this chapter. A building permit is required for all construction within 1,000 feet of municipal wells. No building permit shall be issued which is in violation of the separation distances from municipal wells if in violation of this chapter or a source of contamination for said well. Any use or construction in violation of this chapter is a nuisance as defined in Chapter 50 of this Code of Ordinances and prohibited pursuant to Section 50.04; and the notice requirements regarding abatement of nuisances and prohibited conditions and all provisions of this Code of Ordinances in regard to abatement, costs of collection, hearings and penalties for maintaining a nuisance or prohibited condition as set forth herein are applicable. Specifically, and in addition to any other remedies allowed by ordinance or at law, the City shall recover any costs for water treatment which are created by any source of contamination which is identified, where said source is in violation of this chapter. 
147.05 MANDATORY CONNECTION TO PUBLIC WATER SYSTEM AND USE OF PRIVATE WELLS. 
1. 
Connections to the Public Water System. Except as otherwise provided herein, all residences and business establishments within the City using water for human habitation or occupancy shall connect to the public water system. Water is used for human habitation or occupancy if it is used in the plumbing system of a residence or a business occupied by humans. 

2. 
Exceptions. A residence or business establishment within the City using water for human habitation or occupancy may obtain its water from a private well as follows: 


A. Existing Wells. A well in existence on the effective date of the ordinance codified by this section may continue to obtain water from a private well as follows: 
(1) 
For irrigation of grass and landscape planting upon the property for so long as desired; 

(2) 
For human habitation or occupancy until the date established at Section 147.05(2) herein. 


B. New Wells. A well may be drilled only upon property that does not have access to the City water system within 200 feet of the property, and use of the well for human habitation or occupancy may continue until the date established at Section 147.05(2) herein. 
(1) 
Permit. No person shall install or maintain a private well after the date of enactment of the ordinance codified by this section, or own or use a private well within the City after such date, unless the person has registered such well and obtained a permit for same from the City. The registration and permit process shall be completed on forms provided by the City. 

(2) 
Contaminated Area, Notwithstanding anything to the contrary which permits a private well to remain in existence within the City, neither shall a new private well be drilled nor shall repairs to an existing private well be made after the date of enactment of the ordinance codified by this section, if the well is located within a contaminated area. 


CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA 
-813 ­
(3) 
Variance. The City Council, upon recommendation of the Superintendent of the City Water System or the Superintendent’s designated assistant or agent, may consider a variance or exception to this section on application to the City. 

(4) 
Termination of Use of Existing Wells. The use of any private well not permitted to continue under this section shall cease and the well shall be plugged in accordance with rules of the Iowa Department of Natural Resources on July 1, 2005, or 90 days after the date the public water system is extended to within 200 feet of the affected property, whichever is later. 

(5) 
Definitions. For use in this section the following terms are defined: 

a. 
“Private well” means any groundwater well, except a monitoring well used as a part of a remediation system, used both for drinking water and for non-drinking water purposes, including a groundwater well which is not properly plugged in accordance with rules of the Iowa Department of Natural Resources. 

b. 
“Contaminated area: means a point within an area that has groundwater contamination or that in accordance with design models of the Iowa Department of Natural Resources may become contaminated due to percolation of groundwater contamination in the vicinity of the well site. 

c. 
“Human habitation or occupancy” means use of water in the plumbing system of a residence or business used or occupied by humans. 




(Ord. 817 – Jun. 04 Supp.) 
CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA 
-814 ­
TABLE A 
Distances (Feet) 
CHAPTER 147 WATER WELL PROTECTION 

Source of Contamination  5  10  25  50  75  100  200  400  1000  
WASTEWATER STRUCTURES  POINT DISCHARGE TO GROUND SURFACE  Well house floor drains  A  
Water treatment plant wastes  A  
Sanitary and industrial discharge  A  
SEWERS AND DRAINS  Well house floor drains to surface  ENC A  WM A  A  SP  A  ---------------Unknown------­ 
Well house floor drains to sewers  A  WM  A  SP  A  --Unknown-­ 
Water plant wastes  A  WM  A  SP  A  --Unknown-­ 
Sanitary and storm sewers, drains  A  WM  A  SP  A  --Unknown-­ 
Sewer force mains  A  WM  WM  A  SP  
LAND DISPOSAL OF WASTES  Land application of solid waste  D  S  
Irrigation of wastewater  D  S  
Concrete vaults and septic tanks  D  S  
Mechanical wastewater treatment plants  D  S  
Cesspools and earth pit privies  D  S  
Soil absorption fields  D  S  
Lagoons  D  S  
CHEMICALS CHEMICAL AND MINERAL STORAGE  Chemical application to ground surface  D  S  
Above ground  D  S  
On or under ground  D  S  
ANIMALS  ANIMAL WASTES  Animal pasturage  A  
Animal enclosure  D  S  
Land application of solids  D  S  
Land application of liquid or slurry  D  S  
Storage tank  D  S  
Solids stockpile  D  S  
Storage basin or lagoon  D  S  
MISCELLANEOUS  Earthen silage storage trench or pit  D  S  
Basements, pits, sumps  A  
Flowing streams or other surface water bodies  A  
Cisterns  D  S  
Cemeteries  A  
Private wells  D  S  
Solid waste disposal sites  A  

KEY  
D  Deep Well  
S  Shallow Well  
A  All Wells  
WM  Pipe of Water Main Specifications  
SP  Pipe of Sewer Pipe Specifications  
ENCWM  Encased in 4 inches of Concrete  

CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA 
-815 ­[The next page is 831] 
CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA 
-816 ­
CHAPTER 150 
BUILDING NUMBERING 

150.01 Definitions 150.03 Building Numbering Map 
150.02 Owner Requirements 
150.01 DEFINITIONS. For use in this chapter, the following terms are defined: 
1. 
“Owner” means the owner of the principal building. 

2. 
“Principal building” means the main building on any lot or subdivision thereof. 


150.02 OWNER REQUIREMENTS. Every owner shall comply with the following numbering requirements: 
1. Obtain Building Number. The owner shall obtain the assigned number to the principal building from the Clerk. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3d]) 
2. Display Building Number. The owner shall place or cause to be installed and maintained on the principal building the assigned number in a conspicuous place to the street in figures not less than two and one-half (2½) inches in height and of a contrasting color with their background. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3d]) 
3. Failure to Comply. If an owner refuses to number a building as herein provided, or fails to do so for a period of thirty (30) days after being notified in writing by the City to do so, the City may proceed to place the assigned number on the principal building and assess the costs against the property for collection in the same manner as a property tax. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3h]) 
150.03 BUILDING NUMBERING MAP. The Clerk shall be responsible for preparing and maintaining a building numbering map. 
CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA 
-831 ­
°°°°°°°°°° 

CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA 
-832 ­
CHAPTER 151 
TREES 

151.01 Definition 151.06 Inspection and Removal 
151.02 Planting Restrictions 151.07 Felling of Trees on Streets 
151.03 Duty to Trim Trees 151.08 Insurance 
151.04 Trimming Trees to be Supervised 151.09 Abuse or Mutilation of Trees on Public Property 
151.05 Disease Control 
151.01 DEFINITION. For use in this chapter, “parking” means that part of the street, avenue or highway in the City not covered by sidewalk and lying between the lot line and the curb line; or, on unpaved streets, that part of the street, avenue or highway lying between the lot line and that portion of the street usually traveled by vehicular traffic. 
151.02 PLANTING RESTRICTIONS. No tree shall be planted in any parking or street except in accordance with the following: 
1. Alignment. All trees planted in any street shall be planted in the parking midway between the outer line of the sidewalk and the curb. In the event a curb line is not established, trees shall be planted on a line ten 
(10) feet from the property line. 
2. 
Spacing. Trees shall not be planted on any parking which is less than nine (9) feet in width, or contains less than eighty-one (81) square feet of exposed soil surface per tree. Trees shall not be planted closer than twenty (20) feet from street intersections (property lines extended) and ten (10) feet from driveways. If it is at all possible trees should be planted inside the property lines and not between the sidewalk and the curb. 

3. 
Prohibited Trees. No person shall plant in any street any fruit-bearing tree or any tree of the kinds commonly known as cottonwood, poplar, box elder, Chinese elm, evergreen, willow or black walnut. 


151.03 DUTY TO TRIM TREES. The owner or agent of the abutting property shall keep the trees on, or overhanging the street, trimmed so as to allow free passage of pedestrians and vehicular travel, and so they will not obstruct or shade the street lights, the vision of traffic signs or the view of any street intersection. All branches will be at least thirteen (13) feet above the surface of the street and nine (9) feet above the sidewalks. If the abutting property owner fails to trim the trees, the City may serve notice on the abutting property owner requiring that such action be taken within twenty (20) days. If such action is not taken within that time, the City may perform the required action and assess the costs against the abutting property for collection in the same manner as a property tax. Said property owner may request a hearing before the Council by a written request within twenty (20) days after service of notice. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[2c, d & e]) 
151.04 TRIMMING TREES TO BE SUPERVISED. Except as allowed in Section 151.03, it is unlawful for any person to trim or cut any tree in a street or public place unless the work is done under the supervision of the City. 
151.05 DISEASE CONTROL. Any dead, diseased or damaged tree or shrub which may harbor serious insect or disease pests or disease injurious to other trees is hereby declared to be a nuisance. 
151.06 INSPECTION AND REMOVAL. The Council shall inspect or cause to be inspected any trees or shrubs in the City reported or suspected to be dead, diseased or damaged, and such trees and shrubs shall be subject to the following: 
1. 
City Property. If it is determined that any such condition exists on any public property, including the strip between the curb and the lot line of private property, the Council may cause such condition to be corrected by treatment or removal. The Council may also order the removal of any trees on the streets of the City which interfere with the making of improvements or with travel thereon. 

2. 
Private Property. If it is determined with reasonable certainty that any such condition exists on private property and that danger to other trees or to adjoining property or passing motorists or pedestrians is imminent, the Council shall notify by certified mail the owner, occupant or person in charge of such property to correct such condition by treatment or removal within fourteen (14) days of said notification. If such owner, occupant or person in charge of said property fails to comply within fourteen (14) days of receipt of notice, the Council may cause the condition to be corrected and the cost assessed against the property. 


(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3b & h]) 
151.07 FELLING OF TREES ON STREETS. The City shall be notified prior to the time that any tree or shrub is to be trimmed, if said tree or shrub or any portion thereof will fall on a street, sidewalk or alley. The following safety measures shall be required during such felling: 
1. Warning Device. The person to whom the permit is issued shall be responsible for placing such signs, flags, flares and barricades as are needed to warn persons of the danger of using the street, sidewalk or alley. 
2. 
Traffic Control. No tree shall be felled onto any street without having persons stationed in the streets to stop traffic from both directions at the time the tree is being dropped, unless the street has been duly barricaded. 

3. 
Cleanup. Trees or branches which are felled or trimmed on public property must be removed immediately unless an extension of time is granted by the City in writing. 


151.08 INSURANCE. Before any tree over fourteen (14) inches in diameter or any branches over ten (10) inches in diameter is felled onto public property, the applicant must deposit with the Clerk a certificate of liability insurance in the amount of $50,000.00 per person, $100,000.00 per accident for bodily injury liability and $25,000.00 aggregate for property damage liability. 
151.09 ABUSE OR MUTILATION OF TREES ON PUBLIC PROPERTY. 
No person shall willfully damage, cut, carve, transplant or remove any tree or shrub on public property; attach any rope, wire, nails or other contrivance to any such tree; cause or permit any wire charged with electricity to come in contact with any tree or shrub unless protected by approved methods; attach any electrical insulation to any public tree or shrub; allow any gaseous, liquid or solid substance which is harmful to a tree or shrub to come in contact with it; or set fire or permit any fire to burn when such fire or heat thereof will injure any portion of any public tree or shrub, without first obtaining a written permit to do so from the City. 
CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA 
-835 ­[The next page is 851] 
CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA 
-836 ­
CHAPTER 155 
UNIFORM CONSTRUCTION CODES 
155.01 Title 155.09 Accessibility for Persons with Disabilities 
155.02 Scope 155.10 Thermal and Lighting Efficiency Standards 
155.03 Limitations 155.11 Violations Under Prior Code 
155.04 Uniform Building Code 155.12 No Wholesale Adoption of the State Building Code 
155.05 Uniform Electrical Code 155.13 Municipal Infraction 
155.06 Uniform Mechanical Code 155.14 Powers and Duties of Building Official 
155.07 Uniform Plumbing Code 155.15 Contractor Registration and Insurance 
155.08 Factory Built Structures Requirements 
155.01 TITLE. This chapter shall be known and may be referred to as the Perry Uniform Construction Codes. Section 155.04 shall be known and may be referred to as the Perry Uniform Building Code. Section 155.05 shall be known and may be referred to as the Perry Uniform Electrical Code. Section 
155.06 shall be known and may be referred to as the Perry Uniform Mechanical Code. Section 155.07 shall be known and may be referred to as the Perry Uniform Plumbing Code. The above section titles shall supersede the applicable title sections respectively of Sections 155.04 through 155.07. 
155.02 SCOPE. No building or structure shall be used, erected, constructed, repaired, altered, moved or demolished unless it fully complies with the standards of this chapter. Notwithstanding the foregoing, buildings and structures in existence at the time of adoption of this chapter may have their existing use or occupancy continued, if such use or occupancy complies with the predecessor ordinance then in effect, provided however that such continued use is not dangerous to health, life and safety. 
155.03 LIMITATIONS. This chapter shall apply to all structures on property within the corporate boundaries of the City. This chapter may not apply in whole or in part to some structures in certain situations according to applicable Federal, State or local law that may restrict or prohibit the regulation of certain construction activities. In this event, these situations will be addressed on a case-by-case basis. These limitations are in addition to those expressed in applicable scope sections respectively of Sections 155.04 through 
155.07. 
155.04 UNIFORM BUILDING CODE. The Uniform Building Code, 1994 Edition, as published by the International Conference of Building Officials, 5360 South Workman Mill Road, Whittier, California, 90601-2298, and as adopted by the State of Iowa, is hereby adopted by reference.
(Ord. 833 – Mar. 05 Supp.) 
155.05 UNIFORM ELECTRICAL CODE. Chapters 1 through 9 of the National Electrical Code, 1999 Edition, as published by the National Fire Protection Association, Batterymarch Park, Quincy, Massachusetts, 02269, is hereby adopted by reference. 
155.06 UNIFORM MECHANICAL CODE. Chapters 1 though 16, and Appendixes A, B, C and D of the Uniform Mechanical Code, 1997 Edition, as published by the International Conference of Building Officials, 5360 South Workman Mill Road, Whittier, California, 90601-2298, is hereby adopted by reference. Division III, Section 661-16.300 (103A) of the Iowa State Building Code Administrative Rules dated March 3, 1999, is hereby adopted by reference. 
155.07 UNIFORM PLUMBING CODE. Chapters 1 through 14, and Appendixes A through J of the Uniform Plumbing Code, 1999 Edition, as published by the International Association of Plumbing and Mechanical Officials, 20001 South Walnut Drive, Walnut, California, 91789-2825, is hereby adopted by reference. Division IV of the Iowa State Building Code Administrative Rules dated March 3, 1999, Chapters 1 through 13, is hereby adopted by reference. 
155.08 FACTORY BUILT STRUCTURES. Division VI, Sections 661­
16.600 (103A) through 661-16.629 (103A) of the Iowa State Building Code Administrative Rules dated March 3, 1999, is hereby adopted by reference as standards and regulation for factory built structures. 
155.09 ACCESSIBILITY FOR PERSONS WITH DISABILITIES. 
Division VII, Sections 661-16.700(103A) through 661-16.706(103A) of the Iowa State Building Code Administrative Rules dated March 3, 1999, is hereby adopted by reference as standards and regulations for the accessibility of persons with disabilities in public buildings. 
155.10 THERMAL AND LIGHTING EFFICIENCY STANDARDS. 
Division VIII, Section 661-16.800 (103A) of the Iowa State Building Code Administrative Rules dated March 3, 1999, is hereby adopted by reference as standards and regulations for thermal and lighting efficiency. 
155.11 VIOLATIONS UNDER PRIOR CODE. Any building or structure in violation of predecessor Perry Construction Codes remains in violation unless the successor construction codes eliminate the violation by a change of standards or rules. 
CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA 
-852 ­
155.12 NO WHOLESALE ADOPTION OF THE STATE BUILDING CODE. Although the Perry Uniform Construction Code contains several sections of the Iowa State Building Code Administrative Rules dated March 3, 1999, there is no intention of wholesale adopting of the State Building Code within the meaning of Section 103A.12 of the Code of Iowa. 
155.13 MUNICIPAL INFRACTION. Any person, whether acting alone or in concert with any others, who violates this chapter shall be guilty of a municipal infraction and shall be penalized as set forth in Chapter 4 of this Code of Ordinances. 
155.14 POWERS AND DUTIES OF BUILDING OFFICIAL. The Building Official for the City is responsible for the enforcement of this chapter. 
1. 
General Powers. The Building Official is hereby authorized and directed to enforce all the provisions of this code. For such purposes, the Building Official shall have the powers of a law enforcement officer. 

2. 
Designees. In accordance with prescribed procedures and with the approval of the appointing authority, the Building Official may appoint such number of technical officers and inspectors and other employees as shall be authorized from time to time. The Building Official may designate such inspectors or employees as may be necessary to carry out the functions of the code enforcement agency. 

3. 
Right of Entry. When it is necessary to make an inspection to enforce the provisions of this code, or when the Building Official or designee has reasonable cause to believe that there exists in a building or upon a premises a condition which is contrary to or in violation of this code which makes the building or premises unsafe, dangerous or hazardous, the Building Official may enter the building or premises at reasonable times to inspect or to perform the duties imposed by this code, provided that if such building or premises is occupied that credentials be presented to the occupant and entry requested. If such building or premises is unoccupied, the Building Official shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other person having charge or control of the building or premises and request entry. If entry is refused, the Building Official shall have recourse to the remedies provided by law to secure entry. 

4. 
Stop Orders. Whenever any work is being done contrary to the provisions of this code, or other pertinent laws or ordinances implemented through the enforcement of this code, the Building Official or designee may order the work stopped by notice in writing served on any persons engaged in the doing or causing such work to be done, and 


any such persons shall forthwith stop such work to be done, and any such persons shall forthwith stop such work until authorized by the Building Official to proceed with the work. 
5. Liability. The Building Official or designee charged with the enforcement of this code, acting in good faith and without malice in the discharge of the duties required by this code or other pertinent law or ordinance, shall not thereby be rendered personally liable for damages that may accrue to persons or property as a result of an act or by reason of an act or omission in the discharge of such duties. A suit brought against the Building Official or designee because of such act or omission performed by the Building Official or designee in the enforcement of any provision of such codes or other pertinent laws or ordinances implemented through the enforcement of this code or enforced by the code enforcement agency shall be defended by this jurisdiction until final termination of such proceedings, and any judgment resulting therefrom shall be assumed by this jurisdiction. This code shall not be construed to relieve from or lessen the responsibility of any person owning, operating or controlling any building or structure for any damage to persons or property caused by defects, nor shall the code enforcement agency or its parent jurisdiction be held as assuming any such liability by reason of the inspection authorized by this code or any permits or certificates issued under this code. 
155.15 CONTRACTOR REGISTRATION AND INSURANCE REQUIREMENTS. Contractors are required to register with the City on forms provided by the Building Official. There is a one-time fee for registration set by resolution of the Council. Contractors are defined as individuals or entities whose primary source of income is derived through the trades of building construction, remodel and/or demolition contractors. All contractors shall have and maintain commercial general liability insurance in an amount required by their insurance carrier. Contractors shall annually provide to the City a certificate of applicable insurance. (Ord. 837 – May 06 Supp.) 
[The next page is 871] 
CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA 
-854 ­
CHAPTER 156 
RENTAL CODE 
156.01 Purpose 156.06 Order to Correct, Repair and Comply 
156.02 Scope 156.07 Failure to Correct, Repair and Comply 
156.03 Definitions 156.08 Emergency Orders 
156.04 Inspections 156.09 Violation 
156.05 Minimum Standards for Rental Units 
156.01 PURPOSE. The purpose of this chapter is to protect and promote the health, safety and welfare of those persons renting residential property as well as the general public. This will be accomplished by establishing reasonable minimum requirements for rental property within the City limits. 
156.02 SCOPE. The provisions of this chapter apply to all residential rental property within the City limits, used or intended to be used for human occupancy. 
156.03 DEFINITIONS. The following definitions apply to the interpretation and enforcement of this chapter: 
1. 
“Acceptable” or “approved” means substantial compliance with the provisions of this chapter. 

2. 
“Accessory structure” means a detached structure which is not used or intended to be used for living or sleeping by human occupants. 

3. 
“Basement” means a story having a part but not more than one-half (½) of its height below grade, which may or may not be considered habitable space. 

4. 
“Cellar” means a story having more than one-half (½) of its height below grade. Cellar means a space below the first or main floor used or intended to be used for storage or a location for heating equipment and is not considered habitable space. 

5. 
“Dwelling” means any building, structure or mobile home, except temporary housing, which is wholly or partly used or intended to be used for living or sleeping by human occupants and includes any appurtenances attached thereto. 

6. 
“Dwelling unit” means any building or portion thereof which is designed or used exclusively for residential purposes, but not including a tent, cabin, trailer or mobile home. 

7. 
“Egress” means an arrangement of exit routes to provide a means of exit from buildings and/or premises. 


8. 
“Extermination” means the control and elimination of insects, rodents or other pests by eliminating their harboring places; by removing or making inaccessible materials that may serve as their food; by poisoning, spraying, fumigating, trapping or by any other recognized and legal pest elimination method approved by the Compliance Officer. 

9. 
“Garbage” means the animal or vegetable waste resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food and also means combustible waste material. Garbage also includes paper, rags, cartons, boxes, wood, excelsior, rubber, ether and other combustible materials. 

10. 
“Habitable room” means a room or enclosed floor space within a dwelling unit used or intended to be used for living, sleeping, cooking or eating purposes, excluding bathrooms, toilet rooms, pantries, laundries, foyers, communicating corridors, closets, storage spaces, stairways and cellars. 

11. 
“Infestation” means the presence within or around a dwelling of any insects, rodents or other pests in such quantities as would be considered unsanitary. 

12. 
“Kitchen” means a habitable room used or intended to be used for cooking or the preparation of meals. 

13. 
“Kitchen sink” means a basin for washing utensils used for cooking, eating and drinking, located in a kitchen and connected to both hot and cold water lines and properly connected to a drainage system. 

14. 
“Lavatory” means a hand washing basin which is connected to both hot and cold water lines and properly connected to a drainage system which is separate and distinct from a kitchen sink. 

15. 
“Mobile home” means any vehicle without motive power used or so manufactured or constructed as to permit its being used as a conveyance upon the public streets and highways and so designed, constructed or reconstructed as will permit the vehicle to be used as a place for human habitation by one or more persons. 

16. 
“Occupant” means any person, including owner or operator, living in, sleeping in, and/or cooking in or having actual possession of a dwelling unit. 


CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA 
-872 ­
17. 
“Owner” means any person who has custody and/or control of any dwelling or dwelling unit by virtue of a contractual interest in or legal or equitable title to the dwelling or dwelling unit. Owner also means any person who has custody and/or control of any dwelling or dwelling unit as a guardian. 

18. 
“Placard” means a display document showing that the unit for which it is issued has been determined to be unfit for human habitation. 

19. 
“Plumbing” means and includes any and all of the following supplied facilities and equipment: water pipes; garbage disposal units; waste pipes; toilets; sinks; lavatories; bathtubs; shower baths; water heating devices; catch basins; drains; vents and any other similar supplied fixtures, together with all connections to water and sewer lines. 

20. 
“Privacy” means the existence of conditions which will permit a person or persons to carry out an activity commenced without interruption or interference by unwanted persons. 

21. 
“Temporary housing” means any tent, trailer, motor home or other structure used for human shelter which is designed to be transportable and which is not attached to the ground, to other structures or to any utility system on the same premises for more than thirty (30) days. 

22. 
“Toilet” means a water closet with a bowl and trap made in one piece, which is of such shape and form and which holds a sufficient quantity of water so that no fecal matter will collect on the surface of the bowl and which is equipped with a flushing rim or flushing rims. 


156.04 INSPECTIONS. The Compliance Officer is authorized to administer and enforce the provisions of this chapter and to make inspections to determine the condition of all residential rental properties within the City. This will enable the Compliance Officer to perform the duty of safeguarding the health, safety and welfare of said occupants and the general public. 
156.05 MINIMUM STANDARDS FOR RENTAL UNITS. 
1. 
Every dwelling unit shall have a kitchen room or kitchenette equipped with a working and functioning kitchen sink, containing space capable of properly accommodating a refrigerator and a stove or range with proper access terminals to utilities necessary to operate a refrigerator and a stove or range, and shall include adequate space for the storage and preparation of food. 

2. 
Every dwelling unit shall contain the following working and functioning facilities: 


A. Toilet. 
B. Bathtub or shower. 
C. Lavatory basin within or adjacent to the room containing the toilet. 
3. 
Every dwelling unit shall be served by a properly working and functioning water heater. Said water heater shall be capable of heating water to a temperature of 100 degrees Fahrenheit so as to permit an adequate amount of water to be drawn at every kitchen sink, lavatory basin and bathtub or shower in the dwelling unit. 

4. 
Every kitchen sink, toilet, lavatory basin and bathtub or shower shall be properly connected to the City water and sewer systems. 

5. 
Every dwelling unit shall have access directly to the outside or to a public corridor. 

6. 
Every dwelling unit shall have at least one (1) operable window or exterior door approved for emergency egress or rescue, in addition to the main outside access door. Said windows or exterior door shall be operable from the inside to provide a full, clear opening without the use of separate tools. 

7. 
Every dwelling unit shall have heating facilities which are properly installed and are capable of safely and adequately heating all habitable rooms, bathrooms and toilet rooms located therein, to a temperature of at least 68 degrees Fahrenheit. 

8. 
Every habitable room shall contain at least two (2) separate floor or wall type electrical double convenience outlets which shall be situated a distance apart equivalent to at least twenty-five percent (25%) of the perimeter of the room. Every such outlet and fixture shall be properly and safely installed. Every habitable room, toilet room, laundry room, furnace room, basement and cellar shall contain at least one (1) supplied ceiling or wall type electric light fixture or switch outlet. Every such outlet and fixture shall be properly and safely installed. Temporary wiring or extension cords shall not be used as permanent wiring. 

9. 
In the case of a mobile home, the home shall be securely anchored by a tie-down device which distributes and transfers the load posed by the unit to appropriate ground anchors so as to resist wind overturning and sliding. 

10. 
Each rental dwelling unit shall have a 2½-pound type “ABC” fire extinguisher or have access to a fire extinguisher within seventy-five 


(75) feet of any unit, which is approved by the Compliance Officer. Fire extinguishers shall be properly hung in an area of easy access. 
CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA -874 ­
11. 
All dwelling units shall be provided with properly working smoke detectors as approved by the Compliance Officer. The detector shall be mounted on the ceiling or wall at a point centrally located in the corridor or area giving access to rooms used for sleeping purposes. Smoke detectors installed in areas where sleeping rooms are on an upper level shall be located above the stairway. All detectors shall be located according to the manufacturer’s directions. Care shall be exercised to ensure that the installation will not interfere with the operating characteristics of the detector. When actuated, the detector shall provide an alarm for the dwelling unit. 

12. 
Every foundation, roof, floor, wall, ceiling, stair, step, elevator, handrail, guardrail, porch, sidewalk and appurtenances thereto shall be maintained in safe and sound condition and shall be capable of supporting the loads that normal use may cause to be placed thereon. Every door, door hinge, door latch and door lock shall be maintained in good and functional condition and every door, when closed, shall fit reasonably well within its frame. Every window, existing storm window, window screen, window latch, window lock and other aperture covering, including its hardware, shall be maintained in good and functional condition and shall fit reasonably well within its frame. Every interior partition, wall, floor, ceiling and other interior surface shall be maintained so as to permit it to be kept in clean and sanitary condition and where appropriate shall be capable of affording privacy. 

13. 
All eaves, downspouts and other roof drainage equipment on the premises shall be maintained in a good state of repair and installed so as to direct rainwater away from the structure. 

14. 
Every chimney and every supplied smoke pipe shall be adequately supported, reasonably clean and maintained in a reasonably good state of repair. 

15. 
Every means of egress shall be maintained in good condition and shall be free of obstruction at all times. 

16. 
The electrical system of every dwelling or accessory structure shall not by reason of overloading, dilapidation, lack of insulation, improper fusing or for any other cause expose the occupants to hazards of electrical shock or fire, and every electrical outlet, switch and fixture shall be maintained in good and safe working condition. The owner or operator shall supply properly sized fuses or equivalent at the beginning of each tenant’s occupancy. 

17. 
Every supplied plumbing fixture and water and waste pipe shall be maintained in good and sanitary working condition. 


CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA -875 ­
18. 
Whenever infestation is caused by the failure of the owner to maintain a dwelling in a reasonably rodent-proof or reasonably insect-proof condition, extermination shall be the responsibility of the owner. 

19. 
No owner shall permit occupancy of the vacant dwelling unit unless it is clean, sanitary and fit for human occupancy. 

20. 
Every owner of a dwelling shall supply adequate facilities for the disposal of garbage which are weather-tight, watertight, rodent proof and insect proof. 


156.06 ORDER TO CORRECT, REPAIR AND COMPLY. 
1. 
Whenever the Compliance Officer determines that the premises has one (1) or more violations of this chapter, the Compliance Officer shall give the owner or operator written notice explaining each and every violation. Such notice may require corrections, repairs and/or compliance with standards to be completed by the owner or the tenant or both. 

2. 
The owner and/or in some cases the tenant has seven (7) days to repair, correct and comply with the requirements of this chapter. 

3. 
Failure to comply with the notice to repair, correct and comply will result in a civil infraction with citation issued. Such failure will also result in an order to vacate the premises if deemed necessary by the Compliance Officer. 


156.07 FAILURE TO CORRECT, REPAIR AND COMPLY. Whenever an owner or tenant fails to comply with the Compliance Officer’s notice to correct, repair and comply, the Compliance Officer shall, if deemed necessary, order the premises vacated. This denial order shall be personally served upon the owner and tenant or mailed to them by certified mail, restricted delivery, with return receipt requested. The denial or revocation order shall be effective seven (7) days after receipt of the notice by the owner and tenant. 
156.08 EMERGENCY ORDERS. Whenever the Compliance Officer, in the enforcement of this chapter, finds in or about a dwelling conditions that pose an immediate and serious threat to the health, welfare or safety of the occupants or the general public, the Compliance Officer shall give to the owner and occupants of the premises a written order to vacate. This order shall be served personally upon the owner and tenant or by certified mail, restricted delivery, with return receipt requested to the owner and tenant. This notice shall explain each and every violation of this chapter that exists. The Compliance Officer shall post upon the dwelling a placard designating the dwelling has been determined unfit for human habitation. No dwelling which has been placarded shall be again used for human habitation until written approval is secured from the Compliance Officer and such placard has been removed by the Compliance Officer. The Compliance Officer shall remove such placard whenever the violation upon which the placarding act was based has been eliminated. 
156.09 VIOLATION. Any violation of or failure to comply with the provisions of this chapter shall be a violation of this Code of Ordinances. Each violation of or failure to comply with the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed a separate offense. 
CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA 
-877 ­[The next page is 885] 
CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA 
-878 ­
CHAPTER 157 
COMMUNICATION TOWERS AND ANTENNAS 
157.01 Purpose and General Policy 	157.08 Application Process 
157.02 Definitions 	157.09 Noise and Emission Standards 
157.03 Local Regulation and Compliance with the 	157.10 Placement of Facilities and Related Lease Fees Telecommunications Act of 1996 157.11 Abandonment 
157.04 Lease Required 	157.12 Termination 
157.05 Fee Required 	157.13 Home Rule 
157.06 Limit on Term 	157.14 New Technologies 
157.07 Priorities and Placement Requirements 
157.01 PURPOSE AND GENERAL POLICY. The Council finds that in order to ensure public safety and provide efficient delivery of services by the City and others wishing to utilize wireless communication technologies, in order to protect public and private investments, ensure the health, safety and welfare of the population, to provide for the regulation and administration of the orderly location of antenna arrays and towers and to secure the rights of the City to a return on its investment on public property, it is necessary for the City to establish uniform rules and policies. This chapter is to be interpreted in light of these findings for the benefit of the citizens of the City. 
157.02 DEFINITIONS. For use in this chapter the following terms are defined: 
1. 
“Antenna” means a device, dish or array used to transmit or receive telecommunications signals. 

2. 
“Communications tower” means a tower, pole, or similar structure which supports a telecommunications antenna operated for commercial purposes above ground in a fixed location, free standing, guyed or on a building. 

3. 
“Height” of a communications tower is the distance from the base of the tower to the top of the structure. 

4. 
“Telecommunications” means the transmission, between or among points specified by the user, of information of the user’s choosing, without change in the form or content of the information as sent and received. 


157.03 LOCAL REGULATION AND COMPLIANCE WITH THE TELECOMMUNICATIONS ACT OF 1996. The Telecommunications Act of 1996 prohibits the City from establishing policies that discriminate against one or a group of providers in favor of another or another group of providers or potential providers. The following objectives shall be applied consistently to all telecommunications providers that request a location on City property for their communications towers and antennas. 
1. 
To minimize the overall number of towers located in the City, providers may be required to participate in collocation agreements. 

2. 
To ensure that new towers will be safe and blend into their environment, providers will propose designs consistent with site characteristics. 

3. 
To minimize placement of wireless equipment in highly populated areas, residential locations will be considered as a last resort. 

4. 
To assure revenues from site leases of City-owned and City-controlled land and structures reflect fair compensation for use of City property and administration of this chapter. 


157.04 LEASE REQUIRED. No person or other entity shall use any public property without first obtaining a lease from the City. 
157.05 FEE REQUIRED. No lease for the use of public property shall be granted without requiring the lessee thereof to pay a reasonable and competitively neutral fee for the use of that public property. 
157.06 LIMIT ON TERM. No lease for the use of public property shall be granted for a term of more than 25 years. 
157.07 PRIORITIES AND PLACEMENT REQUIREMENTS. 
1. Priority. Priority of the use of City-owned land for communications antennas and towers will be given to the following entities in descending order of priority: 
A. All functions of the City. 
B. Public safety agencies that are not a part of the City, including law enforcement, fire and ambulance services, and private entities with a public safety agreement with the City. 
C. Other governmental agencies for uses which are not related to public safety. 
D. Entities providing licensed commercial communications services, including cellular, personal communications services (PCS), specialized mobilized radio (SMR), enhanced specialized mobilized radio (ESMR), paging and similar services that are marketed to the general public for business and/or personal use. 
2. Placement. The placement of communications antennas or towers on City-owned property must comply with the following requirements: A. The antenna or tower will not interfere with the purpose for which the City-owned property is intended. 
B. The antenna or tower will have no adverse impact on surrounding private property. 
C. The applicant will produce proof of adequate liability insurance for potential damage antennas or towers could reasonably cause to City property and facilities and commit to a lease agreement which includes equitable compensation for the use of public land and other necessary provisions and safeguards. The fee shall be established by the Council (Section 157.10) and shall reflect potential expenses and risks to the City and other appropriate factors. 
D. The applicant will submit a letter of credit, performance bond, or other security acceptable to the City to cover the cost of antenna or tower removal. 
E. The antennas or towers will not interfere with other uses which have a higher priority as discussed in the paragraphs above. 
F. Upon reasonable notice, the antennas or towers may be required to be removed at the user’s expense. 
G. The applicant must reimburse the City for any costs which it incurs because of the presence of the applicant’s antenna or tower. 
H. The user must obtain all necessary land use approval. 
I. The applicant will cooperate with the City’s objective to promote collocations and thus limit the number of separate antenna sites requested. 
157.08 APPLICATION PROCESS. 
1. All applicants who wish to locate a communications antenna or tower on City-owned or private property must submit to the City Administrator a completed application accompanied by a fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) and the following documents, if applicable: 
A. One copy of typical specifications for proposed structures and antennas, including description of design characteristics and material. 
B. A site plan drawn to scale showing property lines, tower location, tower height, guy wires and anchors, existing structures, photographs or elevation drawings depicting typical design of proposed structures, parking, fences, landscape plan, and existing land uses on adjacent property. A site plan is not required if the antenna is to be mounted on an approved existing structure. 
C. A current map or update for an existing map on file showing locations of applicant’s antennas, facilities, existing towers and proposed towers which are reflected in public records, serving any property within the City. 
D. A report from a structural engineer showing the tower antenna capacity by type and number, and a certification that the tower is designed to withstand winds in accordance with ANS/EIA/TIA 222, latest revision, standards. 
E. Identification of the owners of all antennas and equipment to be located on the site. 
F. Written authorization from the site owner for the application. 
G. Evidence that a valid FCC license for the proposed activity has been issued. 
H. A line of sight analysis showing the potential visual and aesthetic impacts on adjacent residential districts. 
I. A written agreement to remove the tower and/or antenna within 180 days after cessation of use. 
J. Additional information, as required, to determine that all applicable zoning regulations are met. 
K. Any communications facilities located on the roof of an antenna support structure must be set back at least one foot from the edge of the roof of the structure. This set back requirement shall not apply to (1) communications facilities located above the roof of the structure if the facilities are appropriately screened from view through the use of panels, walls, fences or other screening techniques approved by the City, or (2) camouflage antennas that are mounted to the exterior of the antenna support structures below the roof, but do not protrude more than 24 inches from the side of such an antenna support structure. 
2. Applicant must also show evidence that all of the following conditions which are applicable are met: 
A. Applicant must show that the proposed communications tower, antenna or accessory structure will be placed in a reasonably available location that will minimize the visual impact on the surrounding area and allow the facility to function in 
CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA -888 ­
accordance with minimum standards imposed by applicable communications regulations and applicant’s technical design requirements. 
B. Applicant must show that a proposed antenna and equipment cannot be accommodated and function as required by applicable regulations and applicant’s technical design requirement without unreasonable modifications on any existing structure or tower under the control of the applicant. 
C. Applicant for a permit in a residential district must show that the area cannot be adequately served by a facility placed in a nonresidential district for valid technical reasons. 
D. Prior to consideration of a permit for location on private property which must be acquired, applicant must show that available publicly owned sites, and available privately owned sites occupied by a compatible use, are unsuitable for operation of the facility under applicable communications regulations and applicant’s technical design requirements. 
E. Applicant must provide the names, addresses and telephone numbers of all owners of other towers or useable antenna support structures within a one-half mile radius of the proposed new tower site, including City-owned property, and written documentation that the applicant (1) made diligent but unsuccessful efforts for a minimum of forty (40) days prior to the submission of the application to install or collocate the applicant’s telecommunications facilities on towers or useable antenna support structures owned by the City and other persons located within a one-half mile radius of the proposed tower site, or (2) written technical evidence from an engineer that the proposed tower or facilities cannot be installed or collocated on another person’s tower or support structure within a one-half mile radius of the proposed tower and must be located at the proposed site in order to meet the coverage requirements of the applicant’s wireless communications system. 
F. Applicants must show that a new tower is designed to accommodate additional antenna equal in number to applicant’s present and future requirements. 
G. Applicant must show that all applicable health, nuisance, noise, fire, building and safety code requirements are met. 
H. All towers and communications facilities shall be of camouflage design standards. Examples of camouflage facilities 
CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA 
-889 ­
include, but are not limited to, architecturally screened roof, roof-mounted antennas, antennas integrated into architectural elements, telecommunications towers designed to blend into the surrounding environment or to look other than a tower, such as light poles, power poles and trees. At a minimum, all towers not requiring FAA painting or markings shall have an exterior finish which is galvanized or painted dull blue, gray or black. 
I. Applicant must show by certificate from a registered engineer that the proposed facility will contain only equipment meeting FCC rules, and must file with the Clerk a written indemnification of the municipality and proof of liability insurance or financial ability to respond to claims up to $1,000,000.00 in the aggregate which may arise from operation of the facility during its life, at no cost to the municipality, in form approved by the City Attorney. 
J. Land use regulations, visibility, fencing, screening, landscaping, parking access, lot size, exterior illumination, sign, storage, and all other general zoning district regulations except setback and height, shall apply to the use. Setbacks on all sides shall be a distance equal to the height of the tower. The following height conditions apply: 
Residential (RS, RD, RM, MH) -Free-standing tower with height not exceeding 100 feet is a permitted conditional use; height exceeding 100 feet requires special exception. 
Commercial (AC, BC) -Free-standing or guyed tower with height not exceeding 180 feet is a permitted conditional use; height exceeding 180 feet requires special exception. 
Industrial (LI, HI) -Free-standing or guyed tower with height not exceeding 360 feet is a permitted conditional use; height exceeding 360 feet requires special exception. 
Other (AG) -Free-standing or guyed tower with height not exceeding 500 feet is a permitted conditional use; height exceeding 500 feet requires special exception. 
K. A tower must be a minimum distance equal to one and one-half the height of the tower from property designated historic or architecturally significant, and must be set back from all lot lines distances equal to the district setback requirements or 25% of the tower height, whichever is greater. 
CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA 
-890 ­
All responses to applications for siting of telecommunications towers and facilities shall be in writing and shall be made within thirty (30) days after all application materials are received. 
157.09 NOISE AND EMISSION STANDARDS. 
1. 
Noise. No equipment shall be operated at towers and telecommunications facilities so as to produce noise in excess of applicable noise standards under WAC 173-60, except during emergencies or periodic routine maintenance which requires the use of a back-up generator, where the noise standards may be exceeded temporarily. 

2. 
Emissions. The Federal Telecommunications Act of 1996 gives the FCC sole jurisdiction to regulate radio frequency emissions. Facilities that meet the FCC standards shall not be conditioned or denied on the basis of emissions impacts. Applicants for tower sites shall be required to provide information on the projected power density of the facility and how this meets the FCC standards. 


157.10 PLACEMENT OF FACILITIES AND RELATED LEASE FEES. 
The placement and maintenance of communications antennas or towers on City-owned sites, such as water towers and parks, will be allowed when the following additional requirements are met. 
1. Water Tower or Reservoir Sites. The City’s water tower and reservoir represent a large public investment in water pressure stabilization and peak capacity reserves. Therefore, its protection is of prime importance. As access to the City’s water storage system increases, so does the potential for contamination of the public water supply. For these reasons, the placement of communications towers or antennas on water towers or reservoir sites will be allowed only when the following requirements are met: 
A. The applicant must have written approval from the Public Works Director each time access to the facility is desired. This will minimize the risk of contamination to the water supply. 
B. There is sufficient room on the structure and/or the grounds to accommodate the applicant’s facility. 
C. The presence of the facility will not increase the water tower or reservoir maintenance cost to the City. 
D. The presence of the facility will not be harmful to the health or safety of the workers maintaining the water tower or reservoir. 
The fees assessed for placing facilities on a City water tower shall be determined by the Water Board of Trustees. 
2. Parks. The presence of certain communications antennas or towers represents a potential conflict with the purpose of certain City-owned parks and recreational facilities. Towers shall be prohibited in designated conservation areas. Communications antennas or towers will be considered only in the following parks after the recommendation of the Parks and Recreation Advisory Commission and approval of the Council. 
A. Public parks of a sufficient scale and character that are adjacent to an existing commercial or industrial use. 
B. Commercial recreational areas and major ball fields. 
C. Park maintenance facilities. 
The fee for placing facilities on park property shall be based on market value for the property and inconvenience to the public. 
157.11 ABANDONMENT. In the event the use of any communication tower has been discontinued for a period of 180 consecutive days, the tower shall be deemed to be abandoned. Determination of the date of abandonment shall be made by the City Administrator, who shall have the right to request documentation and/or affidavits from the communications tower owner/operator regarding the issue of tower usage. Upon such abandonment, the owner/operator of the tower shall have an additional 180 days within which to: (1) reactivate the use of the tower or transfer the tower to another owner/operator who makes actual use of the tower, or (2) dismantle and remove the tower. At the earliest, 181 days from the date of abandonment, without reactivating or upon completion of dismantling and removal, any special exception and/or variance approval for the tower shall automatically expire. 
157.12 TERMINATION. The Council may terminate any lease if it is determined that any one of the following conditions exist. 
1. 
A potential user with a higher priority cannot find another adequate location and the potential use would be incompatible with the existing use. 

2. 
A user’s frequency broadcast unreasonably interferes with other users of higher priority, regardless of whether or not this interference was adequately predicted in the technical analysis. 

3. 
A user violates any of the standards in this chapter or the conditions attached to the City’s lease agreement. 


Before taking action, the City will provide notice to the user of the intended termination and the reasons for it, and provide an opportunity for a hearing before the Council regarding the proposed action. This procedure need not be followed in emergency situations. 
157.13 HOME RULE. This chapter is intended to be and shall be construed as consistent with the reservation of local authority contained in the 25th Amendment to the Iowa Constitution granting cities Home Rule powers. To such end, any limitation on the power of the City contained herein is to be strictly construed and the City reserves to itself the right to exercise all power and authority to regulate and control its local affairs and all ordinances and regulations of the City shall be enforced against the holders of any lease. 
157.14 NEW TECHNOLOGIES. Should, within the term of any lease, developments within the field for which the grant was made to the holder of the lease present the opportunity to the holder of the lease to be more effective, efficient and economical through the use of a substance or material other than those for which the lease was originally made, the holder of the lease may petition the Council which, with such requirements or limitations as it deems necessary to protect public health, safety and welfare, may allow the use of such substances under the terms and conditions of the lease. 
CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA 
-893 ­[The next page is 901] 
CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA 
-894 ­
CHAPTER 158 
LEAD HAZARDS IN DWELLINGS 

158.01 Definitions 158.08 Retaliatory Actions 
158.02 Scope and Applicability 158.09 Hearings 
158.03 Use or Sale of Lead-Based Paint 158.10 Jurisdiction 
158.04 Disposal of Lead-Based Paint 158.11 Enforcement 
158.05 Inspections 158.12 Injunction 
158.06 Refusal of Admittance 158.13 Penalty 
158.07 Hazard Reduction 158.14 Variances 
158.01 DEFINITIONS. The following words have the following meanings for the purpose of this chapter: 
1. “Accessible,” “impact” or “friction surfaces” include, but are not limited to, such surfaces as windowsills, doors and door frames, protruding corners, stair treads and lips, floors, and any other areas offering accessible, impact or friction surfaces. 
A. “Accessible” means any surface at a level or height which is easily accessible for children to bite, chew, or mouth (e.g., windowsills). 
B. “Impact” means any surface where hard objects often hit or run into the surface and cause the paint to be knocked off (e.g., protruding corners). 
C. “Friction” means any surface where there is any rubbing movement that creates dust (e.g., floors). 
2. 
“Board of Health” means the (City or County) Board of Health pursuant to Chapter 137 of the Code of Iowa. 

3. 
“Child-occupied facility” means a building, or portion of a building, visited by the same child, six years of age or under, for a period that exceeds six (6) hours within any week (Sunday through Saturday period). Child-occupied facilities may include, but are not limited to, day-care centers, preschools and kindergarten classrooms. 

4. 
“Deteriorated lead-based paint” means any lead-based paint that is loose, chipping, peeling, cracking, flaking, chalking, or otherwise coming off a surface. 

5. 
“Dwelling” means a building or structure occupied or designed or intended to be occupied as a place for human habitation and use, including any accessory building, structure, or yard area belonging thereto. 


6. 
“Dwelling unit” means any room or group of rooms located within a dwelling and forming a single habitable unit, with facilities which are used or intended to be used for any of the following: living, sleeping, cooking, and/or eating. 

7. 
“EBL (Elevated Blood Lead) child” means any child who has had one venous blood lead level of 



20 micrograms per deciliter or at least two venous blood lead levels of 15 to 19 micrograms per deciliter. 
8. 
“Health Department” means the (City or County) Health Department. 

9. 
“Health Officer” means the Environmental Officer or authorized representative of the (City or County) Board of Health. 

10. 
“Lead-based paint” means any paint or other surface coating already applied which contains a quantity of lead equal to or in excess of 


1.0 milligrams of lead per square centimeter (1.0 mg/cm) when tested by a radioisotope X-ray fluorescence analyzer (XRF) or more than five-tenths of one percent (0.5%) lead by weight. 
11. “Lead hazard” means any lead-based paint if: 
A. The paint exists in or about a dwelling or other child-occupied facility in which children under age six (6) commonly reside or visit, and 
B. The paint is determined to be on any accessible, impact or friction surface or on any other surface where the paint is determined to be deteriorating in any manner. This also includes areas of bare soil which contain lead-based paint chips. In addition, this includes surfaces which contain lead dust that exceeds the EPA/HUD guidelines (bare floors – 100 milligrams per square foot; interior window sills – 500 milligrams per square foot; window wells – 800 milligrams per square foot). 
12. 
“Occupant” means any person living, sleeping, cooking, eating in or having any actual possession of a dwelling or dwelling unit. 

13. 
“Owner” means any person who, alone or jointly with others: (1) has legal title to any dwelling, with or without accompanying actual possession thereof, or (2) has charge, care or control of any dwelling, by acting as the executor, administrator, trustee or guardian of the estate of the owner. 

14. 
“Premises” means a lot, plot or parcel of land including all facilities and improvements thereon. 


CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA 
-902 ­
158.02 SCOPE AND APPLICABILITY. This chapter shall affect only those dwellings or dwelling units in which an EBL child resides or commonly visits. All owners shall comply with the provisions of this chapter and of the rules, resolutions and orders adopted pursuant to this chapter. 
158.03 USE OR SALE OF LEAD-BASED PAINT. No person shall possess, sell, expose for sale, deliver, or give away any lead-based paint intended for painting or covering any surface on the interior or exterior of a residential dwelling. 
158.04 DISPOSAL OF LEAD-BASED PAINT. 
1. 
Lead-based paint shall be disposed of in accordance with local, State and Federal regulations for disposing of hazardous waste. 

2. 
All repair, renovation or remodeling waste which contains lead-based paint shall be disposed of according to local waste disposal regulations. No person shall re-use or recycle such waste for residential purposes. 


158.05 INSPECTIONS. 
1. 
The Health Officer and/or Building Official may cause to have inspected the dwelling or child-occupied facility of an EBL child for lead hazards. The inspection shall consist of a visual assessment of the condition of all interior and exterior surfaces and a determination of the lead content of the paint on these surfaces. The lead content of the paint shall be determined only through the use of an X-ray fluorescence (XRF) analyzer or laboratory chemical analysis. Methods such as swabs shall not be considered an acceptable means of testing of lead-based paint. Tests which show the presence of lead-based paint on a surface may be extrapolated to similar surfaces in the same room that would be expected to be finished with the same type of paint. A determination of the lead hazards will be made from lead content of the paint and the conditions observed. The findings of such inspection will be recorded and documented by the Health Officer. 

2. 
When a lead hazard is found in a dwelling or dwelling unit inspected pursuant to this section or otherwise, the Health Officer shall recommend to have examined all children under six (6) years of age, such other children said officer may find advisable to recommend to be examined, or other persons residing or who have recently resided or frequently visit in said dwelling or dwelling unit, for undue lead exposure. The results of such examination shall be reported to the Health Officer, the affected individual, and when applicable, said individual’s parent or legal guardian. 


3. The results of an investigation for lead hazards, including the presence or absence of lead-based paint which are not considered to be lead hazards, shall be reported in a written notice, with suggested remedial or maintenance actions, within one (1) week, to the owner. The Health Officer shall inform such other persons or agencies as the Health Officer deems advisable. 
158.06 REFUSAL OF ADMITTANCE. In the event the Health Officer, in proceeding to enter any premises for the purpose of making an inspection to carry out the provisions of this chapter, is refused entry, a complaint may be made under oath to any magistrate of the County, who shall issue a warrant to a peace officer of the County, directing such officer, between the hours of sunrise and sunset, to accompany the Health Officer, when entering said premises to make such inspection, and to obtain such samples as may be required to carry out the provisions of this chapter. 
158.07 HAZARD REDUCTION. 
1. 
When the Health Officer determines that a lead hazard is present in a dwelling or dwelling unit where an EBL child lives, frequently visits or has recently resided, he/she shall, in accordance with Section 158.05(3), issue a written notice within one (1) week to the owner to eliminate the hazard with suggested remedial/maintenance actions to be completed in a time period not to exceed thirty (30) days. However, at the discretion of the Health Officer, additional time may be granted to eliminate said hazard. Methods for compliance shall be in accordance with this section. In the event the dwelling is vacated by the occupant who occupied same at the time of the issuance of corrective notice referred to in this section, such dwelling shall not be let or occupied by any other person until such corrective notice is complied with. 

2. 
The owner of any dwelling or dwelling unit which has been determined to contain lead hazards shall correct these lead hazards by methods approved by the Health Officer within the time period allowed by the Health Officer in a written notice. Failure to correct the lead hazard(s) within the allotted time period shall result in the appropriate legal action against the owner for noncompliance, pursuant to Section 


158.13. 
3. Lead hazards on surfaces other than accessible, impact, or friction surfaces, shall be corrected through one of the three (3) following methods: 
A. All areas of deteriorating lead-based paint on both interior and exterior surfaces and any other appurtenances shall be entirely removed and the surface(s) shall be properly prepared before repainting with lead-free paint or refinishing so that the surface does not begin to deteriorate again. Repainting with lead-free paint without prior removal of all deteriorating lead-based paint shall not be considered an approved method of correcting lead hazards. 
B. The interior or exterior surface or appurtenance which has areas of deteriorating lead-based paint shall be removed from the dwelling and replaced with a surface free of a lead-based paint. 
C. The interior or exterior surface or appurtenance which has areas of deteriorating lead-based paint shall be covered with a permanently affixed lead-free covering. The permanently affixed covering shall be incapable of being readily chewed through, torn from the surface, pierced or otherwise removed so as to expose the hazardous surface. 
4. Lead hazards on surfaces which are accessible, impact or friction surfaces shall be corrected through one of the three (3) following methods: 
A. All lead-based paint on both interior and exterior surfaces and appurtenances which are on accessible, impact or friction surfaces shall be entirely removed to the substrate. The surface(s) must be properly prepared and repainted with lead-free paint or refinished. Repainting with lead-free paint without prior removal of all lead-based paint down to the substrate shall not be considered an approved method of correcting lead hazards on accessible, impact or friction surfaces. 
B. The interior or exterior surface or appurtenance, which is or contains an accessible, impact or friction surface shall be removed from the dwelling and replaced with a surface or appurtenance that is finished with a lead-free coating. 
C. The interior or exterior surface or appurtenance which is an accessible, impact or friction surface shall be covered with a permanently affixed lead-free covering. The permanently affixed covering shall be incapable of being readily chewed through, torn from the surface, pierced or otherwise removed so as to expose the hazardous surface. 
5. The Health Officer shall inspect all areas cited as lead hazards after remediation is complete and approved them as “lead-safe.” A written notice shall be issued to all affected parties and retained by the Health Officer, stating that the property is “lead-safe” and that proper maintenance must occur to ensure the property remains “lead-safe.” 
CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA -905 ­
158.08 RETALIATORY ACTIONS. 
1. 
It is unlawful for the lessor of a dwelling, or his/her employees, agents or persons acting in his/her behalf, to retaliate against lessees of dwellings whose occupants have been tested for lead poisoning. 

2. 
It is unlawful for the lessor of a dwelling, or his/her employees, agents or persons acting in his/her behalf, to prohibit or discourage the occupants of the dwelling from participating in the lead poisoning screening program. 

3. 
“Retaliation” includes harassment, termination of the tenancy, discontinuation of utilities or other services, and any other action taken against the lessee. 

4. 
“Occupants” includes visitors in the dwelling. 

5. 
An action taken against the tenant shall not be considered retaliation if: 


A. It is supported by reasonable cause unrelated to the occupant’s participation in the lead poisoning screening program, OR 
B. It is shown to have occurred as a result of accident or mistake and not the intentional act of the lessor or his/her employees, agents or persons acting in his/her behalf. 
158.09 HEARINGS. In the event any person is aggrieved by any order of the Health Officer, he/she may, within ten (10) days of the date of such order, appeal to the Board of Health and in writing state his/her reasons for requesting such order be rescinded or modified. The Board of Health shall review the action of the Health Officer and shall modify, withdraw or order compliance with said order. Appeal from any order of the Board of Health may be taken within ten (10) days to the District Court. 
158.10 JURISDICTION. The provisions of this chapter shall apply throughout the City. 
158.11 ENFORCEMENT. The Health Officer shall have the duty and responsibility of enforcing this chapter with the assistance of the Building Official for the City. 
158.12 INJUNCTION. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prohibit the (City or County) Board of Health from injunctive relief or other relief as allowed by law. 
CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA 
-906 ­
158.13 PENALTY. Any person violating this chapter shall be in violation of this Code of Ordinances. Each day that a violation of this chapter occurs constitutes a separate offense. Upon failure of any person to correct a lead hazard found on his/her property, the Board of Health may direct or cause the correction of said lead hazards. All expenses incurred thereby may be recovered by suit in the name of the Board of Health, or the Board of Health may certify the amount of said expenses, together with a description of the property, to the County Treasurer who shall enter the same upon the tax books as costs for removing a lead hazard, and said amounts shall be collected as other taxes. 
158.14 VARIANCES. 
1. 
The Health Officer shall have the authority to determine a surface, that may otherwise be identified as a lead hazard, lead safe. If the Health Officer is able to determine a surface (that fits the description of a lead hazard) is not causing or does not have reasonable potential to cause lead exposure, the Health Officer may, with written notice, deem that surface as lead safe. This may be done only after a thorough investigation of the entire premises is complete, and careful evaluation of the source(s) identified as the cause or potential cause of lead poisoning are identified. Detailed documentation of such surfaces shall be included in the final report of the premises and be provided to the owner, tenant, and Health Officer. 

2. 
Any surface with deteriorating lead-based paint will not, under any circumstances, be allowed to be identified as lead safe. 


CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA 
-907 ­[The next page is 925] 
CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA 
-908 ­

CHAPTER 159
WIND ENERGY CONVERSION SYSTEMS
159.01 Purpose and Intent 159.05 Location
159.02 Definitions 159.06 Design and Technical Standards
159.03 General Regulations 159.07 Abandonment and Removal Procedure
159.04 Bulk Regulations 159.08 Application and Approval Requirements
159.01 PURPOSE AND INTENT. It is the purpose and intent of these regulations to
ensure the proper design, siting, and installation of wind energy conversion systems in
order to protect the public health, safety and welfare of surrounding property owners and
the community.
The City recognizes the importance of reducing dependence on non-renewable sources of
energy by promoting alternative energy sources. The City also recognizes wind energy is
an abundant and non-polluting energy resource available to the City. As such, the City
understands wind energy conversion systems have the potential to adversely affect
surrounding properties in terms of noise, aesthetic issues, shadow flickers, fall zone
damage, etc. if not sited and regulated properly.
159.02DEFINITIONS. For use in this chapter the following terms are defined:
1. Commercial Wind Energy Conversion System: A wind energy conversion
system (horizontal or vertical axis) intended to produce electricity for sale to a
rate regulated or non-regulated utility or for use off site.
2. FAA: The Federal Aviation Administration of the United States Department
of Transportation.
3. Fall zone: The area, defined as the furthest distance from the tower base, in
which a wind energy conversion system will collapse in the event of a
structural failure.
4. Guy wire: Any wire extending from a wind energy conversion system for the
purpose of supporting the structure.
5. Height, total system: The height above grade of the system, or above the
roofline if roof-mounted, including the wind generator and the highest vertical
extension of any blade or rotor.
6. MET (Meteorological) tower. A tower with an aggregation of parts
including any anchor, base, base plate, boom, cable, electrical or electronic
equipment, guy wire, hardware, indicator, instrument, telemetry device, vane,
or wiring used to collect or transmit meteorological data, including wind speed
and wind flow information, in order to monitor or characterize wind resources
at or near a wind energy conversion system.
7. Non-Commercial Wind Energy Conversion System: A wind energy
conversion system (horizontal or vertical axis) which has a rated capacity of up
to one hundred (100) kilowatts and which is incidental and subordinate to a
permitted use on the same parcel. A system is considered a non-commercial
wind energy conversion system only if it supplies electrical power solely for
onsite use, except that when a parcel on which the system is installed also
receives electrical power supplied by a utility company, excess electrical
power generated and not presently needed for onsite use may be used by the
utility company in accordance with Section 199, Chapter 15.11(5) of the Iowa
Administrative Code. Any wind energy conversion system not falling under
this definition shall be treated as a commercial wind energy conversion
system.
8. Non-Participating Landowner. Any landowner except those on whose
property all or a portion of a wind energy conversion system is located
pursuant to an agreement with a system owner or operator.
9. Occupied Building. A residence, school, hospital, church, public library or
other building used for public gathering that is occupied or in use when the
permit application is submitted.
10. Operator. The entity responsible for the day-to-day operation and
maintenance of the wind energy conversion system.
11. Participating Landowner. Any landowner whose property has or is proposed
to have all or a portion of a wind energy conversion system located on it
pursuant to an agreement with a Facility Owner or Operator.
12. Tower: The vertical component of a wind energy conversion system that
elevates the wind generator above the ground.
13. Use termination: The point in time at which a wind energy conversion
system owner provides notice to the City that the wind energy conversion
system is no longer used to produce electricity unless due to a temporary
shutdown for repairs. Such notice of use termination shall occur no less than
30 days after actual use termination.
14. Wind Energy Conversion System (WECS): An aggregation of parts
including the base, tower, generator, rotor, blades, supports, guy wires and
accessory equipment such as utility interconnect and battery banks, etc., in
such configuration as necessary to convert the power of wind into mechanical
or electrical energy, e.g., wind charger, windmill or wind turbine.
15. Wind Energy Conversion System (WECS), abandoned: Any wind energy
conversion system which remains non-functional or inoperative for a period of
1 year.
16. Wind generator: The blades and associated mechanical and electrical
conversion components mounted on the top of the tower.
17. Wind Turbine. A wind energy conversion system that converts wind energy
into electricity through the use of a wind turbine generator, and includes but is
not limited to the nacelle, rotor, tower, and pad transformer, if any.
159.03 GENERAL REGULATIONS:
(1) General:
(A) Wind energy conversion systems shall be allowed as a special use
accessory to a permitted use in all zoning districts.
(B) MET towers are subject to all regulations and restrictions set for
wind energy conversion systems set forth in this ordinance.
(2) Commercial Wind Energy Conversion Systems:
(A) Shall be considered a conditional use in the AG - Agricultural zoning
district.
(B) No Commercial Wind Energy Conversion system, or addition of a
wind turbine to an existing commercial wind energy system, shall be
constructed or located within City limits unless a conditional use permit
has been issued to the Facility Owner or Operator approving construction
of the facility according to this Ordinance.
(C) This ordinance applies to all commercial wind energy conversion
systems constructed after the effective date of this Ordinance as well as
any commercial wind energy conversion system where proposed
modification will materially alter the size, type, or number of existing
wind turbines or accessory equipment or structures. Like-kind
replacements shall not require a permit modification.
(3) Number of systems per property: No residential or commercial zoned
properties shall contain more than one wind energy conversion system.
The Zoning Board of Adjustment may permit additional wind energy
conversion systems if the property owner can demonstrate a need for the
extra system(s) in order to further reduce on-site energy consumption and
help satisfy the intent of the ordinance. However, the Zoning Board of
Adjustment shall consider the potential adverse impacts resulting from
visual clutter and noise. Under no circumstances shall the combination of
all wind energy conversion systems on a residential or commercially
zoned lot exceed a total output capacity of 100 kW.
(4) Permit required: All wind energy conversion systems require a special use
permit to be obtained from the Zoning Board of Adjustment prior to site
grading and installation in any zoning district. The Zoning Board of
Adjustment can revoke a special use permit at any time if the requirements
set forth in this ordinance and/or any conditions imposed by the Zoning
Board of Adjustment are not met. The Zoning Board of Adjustment will
revoke the special use permit of an abandoned wind energy conversion
system.
(5) Insurance: The owner/operator of a wind energy conversion system must
demonstrate adequate liability insurance.
(6) FAA regulations: Wind energy conversion systems must comply with
applicable FAA regulations, including any necessary approvals for
installations close to airports. The applicant has the responsibility of
determining applicable FAA regulations and must provide evidence of
securing the necessary approvals.
(7) Maintenance: All wind energy conversion systems shall be properly
maintained in operational condition at all times, subject to reasonable
maintenance and repair outages. Owner must maintain maintenance
documents for proof that proper maintenance is being performed. The
owner of any wind energy conversion system deemed unsafe by the
building official or his/her designee shall repair the structure to meet all
federal, state and local safety standards or remove it within six months.
(8) Nonconforming: Properly maintained wind energy conversion systems
constructed prior to the effective date of this Section shall not be required
to meet the requirements of this Section; provided, however, that any such
pre-existing wind energy conversion system which does not provide
energy for a continuous period of 12 months shall meet the requirements
of this Section prior to recommencing production of energy. However, no
modification or alteration to an existing wind energy conversion system,
other than routine maintenance, shall be allowed unless in compliance
with this Section.
159.04 BULK REGULATIONS
(1) Setbacks: The minimum distance between a wind energy conversion
system and any property line shall be no less than a distance equivalent to
110 percent of the total system height. The setback shall be measured
from the center of the tower’s base. Associated guy wires, if applicable,
must be set back a distance of 10 feet from all property lines. The Zoning
Board of Adjustment may authorize lesser setback distances if a registered
engineer licensed by the State of Iowa specifies in writing that the collapse
of the system will occur within a lesser distance under all foreseeable
circumstances. Commercial wind energy conversion systems shall be set
back from the nearest occupied building located on a non-participating
landowner’s property a distance of not less than 1000 feet, as measured
from the center of the wind turbine base to the nearest point on the
foundation of the occupied building.
(2) Waiver of Commercial Wind Energy conversion System Setback
Regulations.
(A) Waiver. Non-participating landowners may waive the setback
requirements, as required above, by signing a waiver that sets forth
the applicable setback provision(s) and the proposed changes.
(1). The written waiver shall notify the non-participating
landowners of the setback(s) required by this Ordinance, describe
how the proposed commercial wind energy conversion system is
not in compliance, and state that consent is granted for the
commercial wind energy conversion system to not be setback as
required by this Ordinance as shown on the site plan submitted
with the permit application.
(2). Any such waiver shall be recorded in the City and Dallas
County Recorder’s Office. The waiver shall describe the
properties benefited and burdened, and advise all subsequent
purchasers of the burdened property that the waiver of setback
shall run with the land and may forever burden the subject
property.
(3) Maximum Total System Height:
(A) The maximum height for a freestanding or guy wired monopole
tower wind energy conversion system is 200 feet in a residential or
commercial zoning district.
(B) The maximum height for a roof-mounted wind energy conversion
system is 15 feet above the maximum building height allowed in
the zoning district in which it is located.
159.05 LOCATION
(1) No wind energy conversion system shall be located over any public road
right-of-way unless the governmental entity with jurisdiction over the road
provides written permission.
(2) No wind energy conversion system shall be located over any adjacent
properties unless the affected land owner(s) provides written permission.
This permission shall come in the form of a recorded easement or other
recorded instrument.
(3) No wind energy conversion system shall be located within or over any
drainage, utility or other established easements.
(4) Wind energy conversion systems shall be located entirely within the rear
yard of residential zoned property unless mounted on a roof.
159.06 DESIGN AND TECHNICAL STANDARDS:
(1) Tower: Wind generators must be attached to a freestanding monopole
tower, guy wired lattice tower or mounted on a roof.
(2) Color: Wind energy conversion systems shall be white, grey or another
non-obtrusive color unless other patterns or colors are required by State or
Federal regulations. Blades may be black to facilitate de-icing. Finishes
shall be non-reflective or matte.
(3) Lighting: Minimum lighting necessary for safety and security purposes
shall be permitted. Security lighting shall be directed downward and
shaded or concealed so as to not shine directly on adjacent properties. No
other lighting is allowed unless required to meet State or Federal
regulations.
(4) Signage Permitted: Wind energy conversion systems shall include
warning signage, not to exceed 4 square feet, highlighting the risk of
electrical shock, high voltage, harm from revolving machinery, hazard
from falling ice and the name and emergency contact telephone number of
the system’s owner. Required signage must be placed on the tower at a
height of 5 feet and able to be viewed if a fence is installed. In addition, a
system or tower’s manufacturer’s logo may be displayed on a wind energy
conversion system in an un-obstructive manner. Permitted signage shall
not be considered as part of a property’s total allowable sign area
permitted. All other signs are prohibited.
(5) Climbing Apparatus: Climbing apparatuses must be located 12-15 feet
from the ground and the tower must be designed to prevent climbing
within the first 12-15 feet. All efforts must be made to prevent persons
that are not authorized to climb the tower, are discouraged from climbing
the tower. Roof-mounted wind energy conversion systems are exempt
from this requirement.
(6) Fencing: It is a recommendation, not required, that all wind energy
conversion systems and associated guy wire anchor points be enclosed by
a 6 foot high fence with a securely locked gate to limit uncontrolled access
and reduce safety hazards.
(7) Electrical Wires: All electrical wires associated with a wind energy
conversion system, other than wires necessary to connect the wind
generator to the tower wiring, the tower wiring to the disconnect junction
box, and the grounding wires shall be located underground.
(8) Noise: Wind energy conversion systems shall not exceed 65 decibels
(dBA), except during short-term events such as severe wind storms and
utility outages, as measured under test procedures established by Section
157.09(1) of the City of Perry Code of Ordinances. Maximum sound
pressures will be measured from the closest point on the closest property
line.
Commercial wind energy conversion systems shall not exceed fifty-five
(55) dBA, as measured at the exterior of any occupied building on a nonparticipating
landowner’s property. Methods for measuring and reporting
acoustic emissions from wind turbines and the commercial wind energy
conversion system shall be equal to or exceed the minimum standards for
precision described in AWEA Standard 2.1 - 1989 titled Procedures for
the Measurement and Reporting of Acoustic Emissions from Wind
Turbine Generation Systems Volume I: First Tier.
(9) Blade Clearance: No wind energy conversion system shall have any
portion of a blade extend within 20 feet of the ground.
(10) Automatic Over speed Controls: All wind energy conversion systems
shall be equipped with manual and automatic over speed controls to limit
the blade rotation speed to within the design limits of the wind energy
conversion system.
(11) Electromagnetic Interference: No wind energy conversion system shall
produce electromagnetic interference so as to disrupt transmissions such
as those from radio, television or microwave towers.
(12) Waste Disposal: Solid and hazardous wastes, including but not limited to
crates, packaging materials, damaged or worn parts, as well as used oils
and lubricants, shall be removed from the site promptly and disposed of in
accordance with all applicable local, state and federal regulations.
(13) Ice Shedding: Wind energy conversion system owners shall ensure that
ice from the rotor blades does not impact any off-site properties.
(14) Shadow Flicker: Wind energy systems shall be sited in a manner that does
not result in significant shadow flicker impacts. Significant shadow flicker
is defined as more than 30 hours per year on affected occupied buildings.
The applicant has the burden of proving that the shadow flicker will not
have significant adverse impact on neighboring or adjacent uses. Potential
shadow flicker will be addressed either through siting or mitigation
measures.
The owner and operator of a commercial wind energy conversion system
shall make reasonable efforts to minimize shadow flicker to any occupied
building on a non-participating landowner’s property, both through the
initial design of the system and as the result of any shadow flicker
complaints occurring after the facility is operational. A shadow flicker
mitigation plan shall be submitted with the commercial wind energy
conversion system application, outlining steps that will be taken to so
minimize shadow flicker. Reasonable efforts shall include but not be
limited to the use of computer modeling to identify optimum location and
orientation of each commercial wind energy conversion system and
programs to ensure wind turbine blades do not rotate during times when
shadow flicker may adversely affect a non-participating landowner’s
property.
(15) Waiver of Noise and Shadow Flicker Provisions for Commercial Wind
Energy Conversion Systems:
(A) Waiver of Noise Regulations. Non-participating landowners may
waive, in whole or part, the noise regulation requirements in
subsection 159.06 (8) of this ordinance by signing a waiver that
sets forth the applicable noise provision(s) and the proposed
changes.
(1) Any such waiver shall be recorded in the City and Dallas
County Recorder’s Office.
(2). The waiver shall describe the properties benefited and
burdened, and advise all subsequent purchasers of the
burdened property that the waiver of noise regulation
requirements shall run with the land and may forever burden
the subject property.
(B) Waiver of Shadow Flicker Impact Regulations. Non-participating
landowners may waive, in whole or part, the Shadow Flicker
Impact regulation requirements in subsection 159.06 (14) of this
ordinance by signing a waiver that sets forth the applicable shadow
flicker Impact provision(s) and the proposed changes.
(1) Any such waiver shall be recorded in the City and Dallas
County Recorder’s Office.
(2) The waiver shall describe the properties benefited and
burdened, and advise all subsequent purchasers of the
burdened property that the waiver of Shadow Flicker
regulation requirements shall run with the land and may
forever burden the subject property.
159.07 ABANDONMENT AND REMOVAL PROCEDURE:
(1) All wind energy conversion systems shall be removed from the site within
3 months of use termination notice to the City by the owner of the facility
or within 3 months of a special use permit revocation by the Zoning Board
of Adjustment.
(2) The site shall be stabilized, graded and cleared of any debris by the
property owner.
(3) Any foundation shall be removed to a minimum depth of 4 feet below
grade, or to the level of the bedrock if less than 4 feet below grade.
(4) If the removal of the wind energy conversion system is required to be
done by the City, the City will assess the costs of removal against the
property upon which the wind energy conversion system is located for
collection in the same manner as a property tax.
159.08 APPLICATION AND APPROVAL REQUIREMENTS:
Applications for a special use permit shall be submitted with the following information:
(1) A properly completed and signed application.
(2) A statement from the applicant that the wind energy conversion system
will be installed in compliance with manufacturer’s specifications, and a
copy of the manufacturer’s specifications.
(3) A statement indicating what hazardous materials will be used or stored on
the site and how those materials will be stored.
(4) Documentation demonstrating adequate liability insurance for the wind
energy conversion system.
(5) A description of the wind energy conversion system’s height and design,
including a cross section, elevation, and diagram of how the wind energy
conversion system will be anchored to the ground or attached to the roof,
prepared by a professional engineer licensed in the State of Iowa.
(6) A site plan including the following information:
A) Legal description of the property
B) Parcel boundaries
C) Existing buildings
D) Easements
E) Fencing
F) Proposed location of wind energy conversion system
G) Setbacks
H) Travel ways
I) Overhead utility lines
J) USGS detailed topographic map showing the proposed tower and
turbine location.
K) If connection to the publicly regulated utility grid is proposed, a
copy of the contract between applicant and utility verifying that the
proposed connection is acceptable, and/or other evidence making
clear that the utility is aware of the proposed connection and finds
it acceptable.


CHAPTER 160 
FLOOD PLAIN REGULATIONS 
160.01 Purpose 	160.11 Flood Plain Development Permit Required 
160.02 Definitions 	160.12 Application for Permit 
160.03 Lands to Which Chapter Applies 160.13 Action on Application 
160.04 Rules for Interpretation of Flood Plain 	160.14 Construction and Use to be as Provided in (Overlay) District Application and Plans 
160.05 Compliance 	160.15 Variances 
160.06 Abrogation and Greater Restrictions 160.16 Factors Upon Which the Decision to Grant Variances 
160.07 Interpretation 	Shall be Based 
160.08 Warning and Disclaimer of Liability 160.17 Conditions Attached to Variances 
160.09 Flood Plain (Overlay) District Standards 160.18 Nonconforming Uses 
160.10 Administration 	160.19 Amendments 
160.01 PURPOSE. It is the purpose of this chapter to protect and preserve the rights, privileges and property of the City and its residents and to preserve and improve the peace, safety, health, welfare and comfort and convenience of its residents by minimizing flood losses with provisions designed to: 
1. 
Restrict Use. Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety, or property in times of flood or which cause excessive increases in flood heights or velocities. 

2. 
Vulnerable Uses Protected. Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including public facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction or substantial improvement. 

3. 
Unsuitable Land Purchases. Protect individuals from buying lands which may not be suited for intended purposes because of flood hazard. 

4. 
Flood Insurance. Assure that eligibility is maintained for property owners in the community to purchase flood insurance through the National Flood Insurance Program. 


160.02 DEFINITIONS. Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application. 
1. 
“Base flood” means the flood having one (1) percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. (See 100-year flood.) 

2. 
“Basement” means any enclosed area of a building which has its floor or lowest level below ground level (subgrade) on all sides. Also see “lowest floor.” 


3. 
“Development” means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations. 

4. 
“Existing construction” means any structure for which the “start of construction” commenced before the effective date of the community’s Flood Insurance Rate Map. May also be referred to as “existing structure.” 

5. 
“Existing factory-built home park or subdivision” means a factory-built home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the factory-built homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) was completed before the effective date of the flood plain management regulations adopted by the community. 

6. 
“Expansion of existing factory-built home park or subdivision” means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the factory-built homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads). 

7. 
“Factory-built home” means any structure designed for residential use which is wholly or in substantial part made, fabricated, formed or assembled in manufacturing facilities for installation or assembly and installation on a building site. For the purpose of this chapter, factory-built homes include mobile homes, manufactured homes and modular homes and also includes “recreational vehicles” which are placed on a site for greater than 180 consecutive days and not fully licensed for and ready for highway use. 

8. 
“Factory-built home park” means a parcel or contiguous parcels of land divided into two or more factory-built home lots for sale or lease. 

9. 
“Flood” means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas resulting from the overflow of streams or rivers or from the unusual and rapid runoff of surface waters from any source. 

10. 
“Flood elevation” means the elevation floodwaters would reach at a particular site during the occurrence of a specific flood. For instance, the 100-year flood elevation is the elevation of floodwaters related to the occurrence of the 100-year flood. 

11. 
“Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM)” means the official map prepared as part of (but published separately from) the Flood Insurance 


CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA -926 ­
Study which delineates both the flood hazard areas and the risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
12. 
“Flood plain” means any land area susceptible to being inundated by water as a result of a flood. 

13. 
“Flood plain management” means an overall program of corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damages and promoting the wise use of flood plains, including but not limited to emergency preparedness plans, flood control works, floodproofing and flood plain management regulations. 

14. 
“Floodproofing” means any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures, including utility and sanitary facilities which will reduce or eliminate flood damage to such structures. 

15. 
“Floodway” means the channel of a river or stream and those portions of the flood plains adjoining the channel, which are reasonably required to carry and discharge flood waters or flood flows so that confinement of flood flows to the floodway area will not cumulatively increase the water surface elevation of the base flood by more than one 


(1) foot. 
16. 
“Floodway fringe” means those portions of the flood plain, other than the floodway, which can be filled, leveed, or otherwise obstructed without causing substantially higher flood levels or flow velocities. 

17. 
“Historic structure” means any structure that is: 


A. Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places, maintained by the Department of Interior, or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing in the National Register; 
B. Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; 
C. Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or, 
CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA 
-927 ­
D. Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified by either (i) an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior or (ii) directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs. 
18. “Lowest floor” means the floor of the lowest enclosed area in a building including a basement except when all the following criteria are met: 
A. The enclosed area is designed to flood to equalize hydrostatic pressure during floods with walls or openings that satisfy the provisions of Section 160.09(4)(A); and 
B. The enclosed area is unfinished (not carpeted, drywalled, etc.) and used solely for low damage potential uses such as building access, parking or storage; and 
C. Machinery and service facilities (e.g., hot water heater, furnace, electrical service) contained in the enclosed area are located at least one (1) foot above the 100-year flood level; and 
D. The enclosed area is not a “basement” as defined in this section. 
In cases where the lowest enclosed area satisfies criteria A, B, C and D above, the lowest floor is the floor of the next highest enclosed area that does not satisfy the criteria above. 
19. 
“New construction” (new buildings, factory-built home parks) means those structures or development for which the start of construction commenced on or after the effective date of the Flood Insurance Rate Map. 

20. 
“New factory-built home park or subdivision” means a factory-built home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the factory-built homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective date of the flood plain management regulations adopted by the community. 

21. 
“100-Year Flood” means a flood, the magnitude of which has a one percent (1%) chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year or which, on the average, will be equaled or exceeded at least once every one hundred (100) years. 


CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA 
-928 ­
22. “Recreational vehicle” means a vehicle which is: 
A. Built on a single chassis; 
B. Four hundred (400) square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; 
C. Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and 
D. Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as a temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
23. 
“Special flood hazard area” means the land within a community subject to the “100-year flood.” This land is identified as Zone A on the community’s Flood Insurance Rate Map. 

24. 
“Start of construction” includes substantial improvement, and means the date the development permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement or permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as pouring of a slab or footings, the installation of pile, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a factory-built home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 

25. 
“Structure” means anything constructed or erected on the ground or attached to the ground, including, but not limited to, buildings, factories, sheds, cabins, factory-built homes, storage tanks and other similar uses. 

26. 
“Substantial damage” means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damage condition would equal or exceed fifty (50) percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 


CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA 
-929 ­
27. “Substantial improvement” means any improvement to a structure which satisfies either of the following criteria: 
A. Any repair, reconstruction, or improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the structure either (i) before the “start of construction” of the improvement, or (ii) if the structure has been “substantially damaged” and is being restored, before the damage occurred. The term does not, however, include any project for improvement of a structure to comply with existing State or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which are solely necessary to assure safe conditions for the existing use. The term also does not include any alteration of an “historic structure,” provided the alteration will not preclude the structure’s designation as an “historic structure.” 
B. Any addition which increases the original floor area of a building by twenty-five percent (25%) or more. All additions constructed after the effective date of the Flood Insurance Rate Map shall be added to any proposed addition in determining whether the total increase in original floor space would exceed twenty-five percent. 
28. 
“Variance” means a grant of relief by a community from the terms of the flood plain management regulations. 

29. 
“Violation” means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community’s flood plain management regulations. 


160.03 LANDS TO WHICH CHAPTER APPLIES. The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all lands within the jurisdiction of the City which are located within the boundaries of the Flood Plain (Overlay) District. The areas within the jurisdiction of the City having special flood hazards are hereby designated as a Flood Plain (Overlay) District and shall be subject to the standards of the Flood Plain (Overlay) District (as well as those for the underlying zoning district). The Flood Plain (Overlay) District boundaries are shown on the Dallas County and Incorporated Areas Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) City of Perry Panels 050 and 075, dated December 4, 2007. 
(Ord. 861 – Oct. 07 Supp.) 
160.04 RULES FOR INTERPRETATION OF FLOOD PLAIN (OVERLAY) DISTRICT. The boundaries of the Flood Plain (Overlay) District areas shall be determined by scaling distances on the official Flood Insurance Rate Map. When an interpretation is needed as to the exact location of a boundary, the Building Official shall make the necessary interpretation. The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged that there is an error in any requirement, decision, or determination made by the Building Official in the enforcement or administration of this chapter. 
160.05 COMPLIANCE. No structure or land shall hereafter be used and no structure shall be located, extended, converted or structurally altered without full compliance with the terms of this chapter and other applicable regulations which apply to uses within the jurisdiction of this chapter. 
160.06 ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS. It is not intended by this chapter to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter imposes greater restrictions, the provision of this chapter shall prevail. Any ordinances inconsistent with this chapter are hereby repealed to the extent of the inconsistency only. 
160.07 INTERPRETATION. In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter shall be held to be minimum requirements and shall be liberally construed in favor of the governing body and shall not be deemed a limitation or repeal of any other powers granted by State statutes. 
160.08 WARNING AND DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY. The standards required by this chapter are considered reasonable for regulatory purposes. This chapter does not imply that areas outside the designated Flood Plain (Overlay) District will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the City or any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder. 
160.09 FLOOD PLAIN (OVERLAY) DISTRICT STANDARDS. All uses must be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage and shall meet the following applicable performance standards. Where 100-year flood data has not been provided on the Flood Insurance Rate Map, the Department of Natural Resources shall be contacted to compute such data. The applicant will be responsible for providing the Department of Natural Resources with sufficient technical information to make such determination. 
1. All development within the Flood Plain (Overlay) District shall: 
A. Be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage. 
B. Use construction methods and practices that will minimize flood damage. 
C. Use construction materials and utility equipment that are resistant to flood damage. 
D. Obtain all other necessary permits from Federal, State and local governmental agencies including approval when required from the Iowa Department of Natural Resources. 
2. 
Residential buildings. All new or substantially improved residential structures shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated a minimum of one (1) foot above the 100-year flood level. Construction shall be upon compacted fill which shall, at all points, be no lower than one (1) foot above the 100-year flood level and extend at such elevation at least 18 feet beyond the limits of any structure erected thereon. Alternate methods of elevating (such as piers) may be allowed, subject to favorable consideration by the Zoning Board of Adjustment, where existing topography, street grades, or other factors preclude elevating by fill. In such cases, the methods used must be adequate to support the structure as well as withstand the various forces and hazards associated with flooding. All new residential structures shall be provided with a means of access which will be passable by wheeled vehicles during the 100-year flood. 

3. 
Nonresidential buildings. All new or substantially improved nonresidential buildings shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated a minimum of one (1) foot above the 100-year flood level, or together with attendant utility and sanitary systems, be floodproofed to such a level. When floodproofing is utilized, a professional engineer registered in the State shall certify that the floodproofing methods used are adequate to withstand the flood depths, pressures, velocities, impact and uplift forces and other factors associated with the 100-year flood; and that the structure, below the 100-year flood level, is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water. A record of the certification indicating the specific elevation (in relation to National Geodetic Vertical Datum) to which any structures are floodproofed shall be maintained by the Administrator. 

4. 
All new and substantially improved structures: 


A. Fully enclosed areas below the “lowest floor” (not including basements) that are subject to flooding shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered professional engineer or meet or exceed the following minimum criteria: 
CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA -932 ­
(1) 
A minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding shall be provided. 

(2) 
The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade. 

(3) 
Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters. 


Such areas shall be used solely for parking of vehicles, building access and low damage potential storage. 
B. New and substantially improved structures must be designed (or modified) and adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy. 
C. New and substantially improved structures must be constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding. 
5. Factory-built Homes. 
A. All factory-built homes, including those placed in existing factory-built home parks or subdivisions, shall be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the structure is a minimum of one (1) foot above the 100-year flood level. 
B. All factory-built homes, including those placed in existing factory-built home parks or subdivisions, shall be anchored to resist flotation, collapse or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. 
6. Utility and Sanitary Systems. 
A. On-site waste disposal and water supply systems shall be located or designed to avoid impairment to the system or contamination from the system during flooding. 
B. All new and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system as well as the discharge of effluent into flood waters. 
CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA -933 ­
Wastewater treatment facilities (other than on-site systems) shall be provided with a level of flood protection equal to or greater than one (1) foot above the 100-year flood elevation. 
C. New or replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system. Water supply treatment facilities (other than on-site systems) shall be provided with a level of protection equal to or greater than one (1) foot above the 100-year flood elevation. 
D. Utilities such as gas or electrical systems shall be located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage to the system and the risk associated with such flood damaged or impaired systems. 
7. 
Storage of materials and equipment that are flammable, explosive or injurious to human, animal or plant life is prohibited unless elevated a minimum of one (1) foot above the 100-year flood level. Other material and equipment must either be similarly elevated or (i) not be subject to major flood damage and be anchored to prevent movement due to flood waters or (ii) be readily removable from the area within the time available after flood warning. 

8. 
Flood control structural works such as levees, flood-walls, etc. shall provide, at a minimum, protection from a 100-year flood with a minimum of 3 feet of design freeboard and shall provide for adequate interior drainage. In addition, structural flood control works shall be approved by the Department of Natural Resources. 

9. 
Watercourse alterations or relocations must be designed to maintain the flood carrying capacity within the altered or relocated portion. In addition, such alterations or relocations must be approved by the Department of Natural Resources. 

10. 
Subdivisions (including factory-built home parks and subdivisions) shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damages and shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood damage. Development associated with subdivision proposals (including the installation of public utilities) shall meet the applicable performance standards of this chapter. Subdivision proposals intended for residential use shall provide all lots with a means of access which will be passable by wheeled vehicles during the 100-year flood. Proposals for subdivisions greater than five (5) acres or fifty (50) lots (whichever is less) shall include 100-year flood elevation data for those areas located within the Flood Plain (Overlay) District. 

11. 
Accessory Structures. 


CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA -934 ­
A. Detached garages, sheds, and similar structures accessory to a residential use are exempt from the 100-year flood elevation requirements where the following criteria are satisfied: 
(1) 
The structure shall not be used for human habitation. 

(2) 
The structure shall be designed to have low flood damage potential. 

(3) 
The structure shall be constructed and placed on the building site so as to offer minimum resistance to the flow of floodwaters. 

(4) 
The structure shall be firmly anchored to prevent flotation which may result in damage to other structures. 

(5) 
The structure’s service facilities such as electrical and heating equipment shall be elevated or floodproofed to at least one (1) foot above the 100-year flood level. 


B. Exemption from the 100-year flood elevation requirements for such a structure may result in increased premium rates for flood insurance coverage of the structure and its contents. 
12. Recreational Vehicles. 
A. Recreational vehicles are exempt from the requirements of Section 160.09(5) of this chapter regarding anchoring and elevation of factory-built homes when the following criteria are satisfied. 
(1) 
The recreational vehicle shall be located on the site for less than 180 consecutive days, and 

(2) 
The recreational vehicle must be fully licensed and ready for highway use. A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system and is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices and has no permanently attached additions. 


B. Recreational vehicles that are located on the site for more than 180 consecutive days or are not ready for highway use must satisfy requirements of Section 160.09 (5) of this chapter regarding anchoring and elevation of factory-built homes. 
13. Pipeline river and stream crossings shall be buried in the streambed and banks, or otherwise sufficiently protected to prevent rupture due to channel degradation and meandering. 
CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA -935 ­
160.10 ADMINISTRATION. The Building Official shall implement and administer the provisions of this chapter and will herein be referred to as the Administrator. Duties and responsibilities of the Administrator shall include, but not necessarily be limited to, the following: 
1. 
Review all flood plain development permit applications to assure that the provisions of this chapter will be satisfied. 

2. 
Review all flood plain development permit applications to assure that all necessary permits have been obtained from Federal, State and local governmental agencies including approval when required from the Department of Natural Resources for flood plain construction. 

3. 
Record and maintain a record of the elevation (in relation to National Geodetic Vertical Datum) of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new or substantially improved structures in the Flood Plain (Overlay) District. 

4. 
Record and maintain a record of the elevation (in relation to National Geodetic Vertical Datum) to which all new or substantially improved structures have been floodproofed. 

5. 
Notify adjacent communities and/or counties and the Department of Natural Resources prior to any proposed alteration or relocation of a watercourse and submit evidence of such notifications to the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 

6. 
Keep a record of all permits, appeals and such other transactions and correspondence pertaining to the administration of this chapter. 


160.11 FLOOD PLAIN DEVELOPMENT PERMIT REQUIRED. A Flood Plain Development Permit issued by the Administrator shall be secured prior to any flood plain development (any manmade change to improved and unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations) including the placement of factory-built homes. 
160.12 APPLICATION FOR PERMIT. Application for a Flood Plain Development Permit shall be made on forms supplied by the Administrator and shall include the following information: 
1. 
Work To Be Done. Description of the work to be covered by the permit for which application is to be made. 

2. 
Location. Description of the land on which the proposed work is to be done (i.e., lot, block, tract, street address or similar description) that will readily identify and locate the work to be done. 


3. 
Use or Occupancy. Indication of the use or occupancy for which the proposed work is intended. 

4. 
Flood Elevation. Elevation of the 100-year flood. 

5. 
Floor Elevation. Elevation (in relation to National Geodetic Vertical Datum) of the lowest floor (including basement) of buildings or of the level to which a building is to be floodproofed. 

6. 
Cost of Improvement. For buildings being improved or rebuilt, the estimated cost of improvements and market value of the building prior to the improvements. 

7. 
Other. Such other information as the Administrator deems reasonably necessary (e.g., drawings or a site plan) for the purpose of this chapter. 


160.13 ACTION ON APPLICATION. The Administrator shall, within a reasonable time, make a determination as to whether the proposed flood plain development meets the applicable standards of this chapter and shall approve or disapprove the application. For disapprovals, the applicant shall be informed, in writing, of the specific reasons therefor. The Administrator shall not issue permits for variances except as directed by the Zoning Board of Adjustment. 
160.14 CONSTRUCTION AND USE TO BE AS PROVIDED IN APPLICATION AND PLANS. Flood Plain Development Permits, issued on the basis of approved plans and applications, authorize only the use, arrangement, and construction set forth in such approved plans and applications and no other use, arrangement or construction. Any use, arrangement, or construction at variance with that authorized shall be deemed a violation of this chapter. The applicant shall be required to submit certification by a professional engineer or land surveyor, as appropriate, registered in the State, that the finished fill, building floor elevations, floodproofing, or other flood protection measures were accomplished in compliance with the provisions of this chapter, prior to the use or occupancy of any structure. 
160.15 VARIANCES. The Zoning Board of Adjustment may authorize upon request in specific cases such variances from the terms of this chapter that will not be contrary to the public interest, where owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement of the provisions of this chapter will result in unnecessary hardship. Variances granted must meet the following applicable standards: 
1. Cause. Variances shall only be granted upon (i) a showing of good and sufficient cause, (ii) a determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant, and (iii) a determination that the granting of the variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public or conflict with existing local codes or ordinances. 
2. 
Required To Afford Relief. Variances shall only be granted upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief. 

3. 
Notice To Applicant. In cases where the variance involves a lower level of flood protection for buildings than what is ordinarily required by this chapter, the applicant shall be notified in writing over the signature of the Administrator that (i) the issuance of a variance will result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up to amounts as high as $25 for $100 of insurance coverage and (ii) such construction increases risks to life and property. 


160.16 FACTORS UPON WHICH THE DECISION TO GRANT VARIANCES SHALL BE BASED. In passing upon applications for variances, the Zoning Board of Adjustment shall consider all relevant factors specified in other sections of this chapter and: 
1. 
The danger to life and property due to increased flood heights or velocities caused by encroachments. 

2. 
The danger that materials may be swept on to other land or downstream to the injury of others. 


CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA 
-938 ­
3. 
The proposed water supply and sanitation systems and the ability of these systems to prevent disease, contamination and unsanitary conditions. 

4. 
The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner. 

5. 
The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the City. 

6. 
The requirements of the facility for a flood plain location. 

7. 
The availability of alternative locations not subject to flooding for the proposed use. 

8. 
The compatibility of the proposed use with existing development and development anticipated in the foreseeable future. 

9. 
The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and flood plain management program for the area. 

10. 
The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles. 

11. 
The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment transport of the flood water expected at the site. 

12. 
The cost of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities (sewer, gas, electrical and water systems), facilities, streets and bridges. 

13. 
Such other factors which are relevant to the purpose of this chapter. 


160.17 CONDITIONS ATTACHED TO VARIANCES. Upon consideration of the factors listed in Section 160.16, the Zoning Board of Adjustment may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purpose of this chapter. Such conditions may include, but not necessarily be limited to: 
1. 
Modification of waste disposal and water supply facilities. 

2. 
Limitation of periods of use and operation. 

3. 
Imposition of operational controls, sureties, and deed restrictions. 

4. 
Requirements for construction of channel modifications, dikes, levees, and other protective measures, provided such are approved by the Department of Natural Resources and are deemed the only practical alternative to achieving the purposes of this chapter. 

5. 
Floodproofing measures. 


160.18 NONCONFORMING USES. 
1. A structure or the use of a structure or premises which was lawful before the passage or amendment of this chapter, but which is not in conformity with the provisions of this chapter, may be continued subject to the following conditions: 
A. If such use is discontinued for six (6) consecutive months, any future use of the building premises shall conform to this chapter. 
B. Uses or adjuncts thereof that are or become nuisances shall not be entitled to continue as nonconforming uses. 
2. If any nonconforming use or structure is destroyed by any means, including flood, it shall not be reconstructed if the cost is more than fifty 
(50) percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred, except unless it is reconstructed in conformity with the provisions of this chapter. This limitation does not include the cost of any alteration to comply with existing State or local health, sanitary, building or safety codes or regulations or the cost of any alteration of a structure listed on the National Register of Historic Places, provided that the alteration shall not preclude its continued designation. 
160.19 AMENDMENTS. The regulations and standards set forth in this chapter may from time to time be amended, supplemented, changed, or repealed. No amendment, supplement, change, or modification shall be undertaken without prior approval from the Department of Natural Resources. 
CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA 
-940 ­
CHAPTER 161 
SAFEGUARDING OF HISTORIC, AESTHETIC 
AND CULTURAL HERITAGE 

161.01 Purpose and Intent 161.04 Designation of Historic Districts 
161.02 Definitions 161.05 Amending and Repealing Historic Landmark and 
161.03 Designation of Historic Landmarks Historic District Designations 
161.01 PURPOSE AND INTENT. The purpose of this chapter is to: 
1. 
Promote the educational, economic and general welfare of the public through the recognition, enhancement and perpetuation of sites and districts of historical and cultural significance. 

2. 
Foster pride in the legacy of beauty and achievement of the past. 

3. 
Enhance the City’s attractions to tourists and visitors and the support and stimulus to business thereby provided. 

4. 
Promote the use of sites and districts of historic and cultural significance as places for the education, pleasure and welfare of the people of the City. 


161.02 DEFINITIONS. Where words and phrases used in this chapter have the following meanings unless the context clearly indicates otherwise: 
1. 
“Abutting property” means any property within one hundred feet of the subject, or applicant’s property. 

2. 
“Historic district” means a significant concentration, linkage or continuity of sites, buildings, structures or objects united historically by plan or physical development. This area must contain contiguous pieces of property under diverse ownership which meets one or more of the historic significance criteria and has been officially designated by the City through the passage of an ordinance. 

3. 
“Historic landmark” is a building, structure, site or object that meets one or more of the Historic Significance Criteria and has been officially designated through passage of an ordinance. 

4. 
“Historic Significance Criteria” applies to the quality of significance in American history, architecture, archeology, engineering, and culture that is present in districts, sites, buildings, structures, and objects that possess integrity of location, design, setting, materials, workmanship, feeling, and association, and: 


A. That are associated with events that have made a significant contribution to the broad patterns of our history; 
B. That are associated with the lives of significant persons in the past; 
C. That embody the distinctive characteristics of a type, period, or method of construction, or that represent the work of a master, or that possess high artistic values, or that represent a significant and distinguishable entity whose components may lack individual distinction; 
D. That have yielded, or may be likely to yield, information important in history or prehistory. 
5. “Preservation Commission” means the Perry Historic Preservation Commission, as established by Chapter 27 of the City of Perry Code of Ordinances, 2001. 
161.03 DESIGNATION OF HISTORIC LANDMARKS. 
1. 
A property owner, the Preservation Commission, or an interested party, agency, or organization may request designation of a historic landmark or district. 

2. 
Nominations to designate historic districts will be submitted to the Preservation Commission and must contain the following: 

A. A completed Iowa site inventory form with all attachments or National Register of Historic Places Nomination Form for a listed property; 
B. Photo-documentation of the property at the time of designation; 
C. A scale map showing the location of the property within the City at the time of designation; 
D. A scale map of the property showing the proposed boundaries, extant buildings, structures, objects, and sites within the tract at the time of designation; 
E. Statement of, and documentation that the property meets one or more of the designation/significance criteria. 

3. 
Nominations must be submitted thirty days in advance of the regularly scheduled meeting of the Historic Preservation Commission. 

4. 
Nominations must be complete when submitted to the Historic Preservation Commission; if the nomination is not complete the nomination will be returned to the applicant. 

5. 
Nominations will be considered at the next meeting of the Historic Preservation Commission following the submission of the nominations. 

6. 
Nominations will be made available for public review at City Hall. 


CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA 
-942 ­
7. 
The City Clerk will notify all owners of abutting properties by mail of the proposed nomination, the date, time, and location of the Commission meeting at which the nomination will be considered. 

8. 
The nomination will be sent to the State Historic Preservation Office for review and comment within twenty-one working days of receipt. 

9. 
The Historic Preservation Commission during their meeting will determine if the property meets the significance criteria. If the property meets the criteria, they will recommend designation. If the property does not meet the criteria, they will not recommend designation. 

10. 
If the Historic Preservation Commission recommends designation, the Historic Preservation Commission will prepare an ordinance designating the property as a historic landmark. The ordinance: 

A. Will include the legal description of the property; 
B. Will specify the applicable significance criteria and provide an explanation of significance, and; 
C. Will contain a statement that the proposed alterations to the property as described in the nomination on file in the property inventory will require issuance of a Certificate of Appropriateness (Chapter 162) before they are initiated. 

11. 
The proposed ordinance will be submitted to the State Preservation Office for review and comment within twenty-one working days of receipt. 

12. 
The Historic Preservation Commission will submit their recommendation, the nomination, and the ordinance designating the property to the Perry City Council. 

13. 
The Perry City Council will consider the nomination, the ordinance, the recommendations of the Historic Preservation Commission and the State at a regularly scheduled meeting. If the Perry City Council approves designation, the designation will be forwarded to the City Clerk for recording and the designation and nomination will be filed in the City’s property inventory. 


161.04 DESIGNATION OF HISTORIC DISTRICTS. 
1. 
A property owner, the Historic Preservation Commission, or an interested party, agency, or organization may initiate designation of a historic district. 

2. 
Nominations to designate historic landmarks will be submitted to the Historic Preservation Commission and must contain the following: 


A. Completed Iowa site inventory forms with all attachments or the National Register Nomination for the listed district; 
B. Photo-documentation of the property at the time of designation; 
CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA 
-943 ­
C. A scale map showing the location of the proposed district within the City at the time of designation; 
D. A scale map of the district showing the proposed boundaries, extant buildings, structures, objects, and sites within the tract at the time of designation; 
E. Statement of, and documentation that the district meets one or more of the designation/significance criteria. 
3. 
The Historic Preservation Commission will seek to demonstrate owner support, which may be in the form of a petition or public testimony at a public hearing. 

4. 
Nominations must be submitted thirty days in advance of the regularly scheduled meeting of the Historic Preservation Commission. 

5. 
Nominations must be complete when submitted to the Historic Preservation Commission; if the nomination is not complete, the nomination will be returned to the applicant. 

6. 
Nominations will be considered at the next meeting of the Historic Preservation Commission following the submission of the nomination. 

7. 
Nominations will be made available for public review at City Hall. 

8. 
The City Clerk will notify all property owners within the Historic District and owners of abutting properties by mail of the proposed nomination, the date, time, and location of the Historic Preservation Commission meeting at which the nomination will be considered. 

9. 
The nomination will be sent to the State Historic Preservation office for review and comment within fifteen working days of receipt. 


19. The Historic Preservation Commission, during their meeting, will determine if the properties meet the significance criteria. If the properties meet the criteria, they will recommend designation. If the properties do not meet the criteria, they will not recommend designation. 
11. If the Historic Preservation Commission recommends designation, the Historic Preservation Commission will prepare an ordinance designating the properties as Historic Districts. The ordinance: 
A. Will include the legal description of the property; 
B. Will specify the applicable significance criteria and provide an explanation of significance; and 
C. Will contain a statement that proposed alterations to the property as described in the nomination on file in the property inventory will require issuance of Certificate of Appropriateness before they are installed. 
CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA 
-944 ­
12. 
The proposed ordinance will be submitted to the State Preservation Officer for review and comment within fifteen working days of receipt. 

13. 
The Historic Preservation Commission will submit their recommendation, the nomination, and the ordinance designating the property to the Planning and Zoning Commission. 

14. 
The Planning and Zoning Commission will review and submit approval or denial of the ordinance to the City Council. 

15. 
City Council will consider the nomination, the ordinance, the recommendations of the Planning and Zoning Commission and the State Preservation Office at a regularly schedule meeting. If the City Council approves designation, the designation will be forwarded to the City Clerk for recording and the designation and nomination will be filed in the City’s property inventory. 


161.05 AMENDING AND REPEALING HISTORIC LANDMARK AND HISTORIC DISTRICT DESIGNATIONS. 
1. 
A property owner, the Historic Preservation Commission, an interested agency or organization may initiate the amendment or repeal of a historic landmark or historic district designation by following the process outlined in this chapter. 

2. 
Amending a historic landmark or district will involve adding buildings, structures, objects and sites by following the appropriate designation process outlined in this chapter. 

3. 
A repeal of designation may occur if the historic landmark or historic district no longer meets the significance criteria due to subsequent discovery of information on the significance or destruction of the historic property by an Act of God. 


(Ch. 161 – Ord. 864 – Dec. 07 Supp.) 
CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA 
-945 ­
°°°°°°°°°° 

CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA 
-946 ­
CHAPTER 162 
ESTABLISHMENT OF CERTIFICATE OF 
APPROPRIATENESS FOR STRUCTURES 
LOCATED IN THE DOWNTOWN PERRY 
HISTORICAL/CULTURAL DISTRICT 

162.01 Purpose and Intent 162.05 Principles for Review 
162.02 Definitions 162.06 Certificate of Appropriateness—Hearings 
162.03 Certificate of Appropriateness—Required 162.07 Fees 
162.04 Certificate of Appropriateness—Applications 
162.01 PURPOSE AND INTENT. The purpose of this chapter is to: 
1. 
Safeguard the City’s historic, aesthetic and cultural heritage by preserving sites and districts of historical and cultural significance; 

2. 
Foster pride in the legacy of beauty and achievement of the past; 

3. 
Stabilize and improve property values. 


162.02 DEFINITIONS. For use in this chapter the following terms are defined: 
1. 
“Alteration” means any addition or modification of any portion of the exterior of a building, structure, object, site or site feature that changes the architectural style, arrangement, texture, or material of the building or feature or significantly changes the color; if such change, addition, or modification is visible from the public street, sidewalk, alley, or park. 

2. 
“Certificate of Appropriateness” is issued by the Historic Preservation Commission and documents their approval or approval with modification, or proposed alterations to designated historic landmarks or buildings, structures, sites, and objects within designated historic districts, which are subject to review. 

3. 
“Demolition” of a building means the act or process of pulling down, destroying, removing or razing a building or commencing the work of total or substantial destruction. 

4. 
“Historic Preservation Commission” means the Perry Historic Preservation Commission, as established by Chapter 27 of the City of Perry Code of Ordinances, 2001. 


162.03 CERTIFICATE OF APPROPRIATENESS — REQUIRED. Within the City of Perry Historic/Cultural District of Downtown, no person, owner, or other entity shall carry out or permit to be carried out the erection, movement, demolition, reconstruction, restoration, renovation, or alteration of structures without first having applied for and being granted a Certificate of Appropriateness by the City of Perry Historic Preservation Commission in conjunction with the City of Perry Building 
CHAPTER 162 ESTABLISHMENT OF CERTIFICATE OF APPROPRIATENESS FOR STRUCTURES LOCATED IN THE DOWNTOWN PERRY HISTORICAL/CULTURAL DISTRICT 
Official for the proposed work under this chapter. This requirement applies to exteriors only unless interiors are specifically designated. 
162.04 CERTIFICATE OF APPROPRIATENESS—APPLICATIONS. 
1. An owner or tenant of a designated property seeking to alter an improvement must apply to the Building Official/Historic Preservation Commission for a Certificate of Appropriateness on forms prescribed by the Building Official/Historic Preservation Commission and including all information that they determine necessary to consider the application. Required submittal material may include, but is not limited to the following documentation: 
A. Completed application form; 
B. Site plan/roof plan; 
C. Application relating to all forms of construction, modification, restoration, or renovation must adhere to the Perry Design Guide; 
D. Photographs of the building conditions (existing and historic) if possible; 
E. Product literature and specifications; 
F. Materials sample and color samples. 
Incomplete applications will not be considered by the Historic Preservation Commission/Building Official. 
2. Applications for a Certificate of Appropriateness shall be filed a minimum of 14 days before the next regularly scheduled Historic Preservation meeting at which the application is to be considered. 
A. Upon receipt of an application for a Certificate of Appropriateness, the Historic Preservation Commission staff representative shall log in the application including the date filed and shall establish a separate file for each application. This file shall provide a record of the certificate application and all actions taken by the Historic Preservation Commission, and any subsequent action or reports of the Building Official, if appropriate. 
B. The staff member shall then place the application on the agenda for the next regularly scheduled Historic Preservation Commission meeting and shall notify the applicant of the time, date, and place of said meeting. 
3. The applicant may request to meet with a subcommittee of the Historic Preservation Commission for a conceptual review of the proposed work, particularly relating to new construction or additions, prior to the Historic 
CHAPTER 162 ESTABLISHMENT OF CERTIFICATE OF APPROPRIATENESS FOR STRUCTURES LOCATED IN THE DOWNTOWN PERRY HISTORICAL/CULTURAL DISTRICT 
Preservation Commission meeting. Any recommendations made by the subcommittee shall be reported at the formal commission meeting. 
4. 
Upon reviewing the application, the Historic Preservation Commission may determine that the application be approved as submitted, denied as submitted, or approved with conditions. 

5. 
If the Historic Preservation Commission approves the application as submitted, the certificate shall be issued within three working days per plans submitted and approved or modified by the Historic Preservation Commission and accepted by the applicant. Conditions of the permit shall be noted on the permit. 


162.05 PRINCIPLES FOR REVIEW. 
1. The Historic Preservation Commission shall adhere to the following principles when reviewing applications for Certificates of Appropriateness. 
A. The anticipated use for the property remains that for which it was originally intended or requires minimal alteration of the building, structure or site and its environment for the proposed reuse. 
B. The distinguishing original qualities or character of a building, structure, or site and its environment shall not be compromised. The removal or alteration of any historic material or distinctive architectural features should be avoided when possible. 
C. Certain alterations which may have taken place in the course of time are potentially significant to understanding the history and development of a building, structure, or site and its environment.  These historic alterations may have acquired significance in their own right and this significance shall be recognized and respected. 
D. Distinctive stylistic features or examples of skilled craftsmanship which characterize a building, structure, or site shall be retained. 
E. Deteriorated architectural features shall be repaired rather than replaced, wherever possible. In the event replacement is necessary, the new material should match the material being replaced in composition, design, color, texture, and other visual qualities. Repair and replacement of missing architectural features should be based on accurate duplications of features, substantiated by historic, physical or pictorial evidence rather than on conjectural designs or the availability of different architectural elements from other buildings or structures. 
F. Surface cleaning of historic structures shall be undertaken with methods that will avoid damage to the historic building materials. 
CHAPTER 162 ESTABLISHMENT OF CERTIFICATE OF APPROPRIATENESS FOR STRUCTURES LOCATED IN THE DOWNTOWN PERRY HISTORICAL/CULTURAL DISTRICT 
G. Contemporary design for alterations and additions shall not be discouraged when such alterations and additions do not compromise significant historical, architectural, or cultural materials, and such design is compatible with the size, scale, color, material, and character of the property, neighborhood, or environment. 
H. Whenever possible, new additions or alterations to the structure shall be done in such a manner that if such additions or alterations were to be removed in the future, the essential form and integrity of the historic structure would be unimpaired. 
2. The Historic Preservation Commission shall consider the following site development and design issues when applicable to reviewing Certificate of Appropriateness applications. 
A. Architectural design; 
B. Scale and proportion; 
C. Construction materials; 
D. Method of construction; 
E. Grading; 
F. Off-street parking; 
G. Landscaping; 
H. Signs; 
I. Street furniture; 
J. Public areas; 
K. Relationship of the project to its surroundings. 
162.06 CERTIFICATE OF APPROPRIATENESS—HEARINGS. 
1. The Historic Preservation Commission shall hold a public hearing on an Application for a Certificate of Appropriateness within fifteen (15) working days after the completed application was filed, under the procedures, prescribed by Section 162.04, “Certificate of Appropriateness—Applications.” 
A. The Historic Preservation Commission shall determine whether the application meets the standards in the Perry Design Guide. Within thirty days after the hearing date the Historic Preservation Commission shall adopt written findings and conclusions. The Historic Preservation Commission shall either recommend that the application be approved as submitted, denied as submitted, or approved, with conditions. 
2. At least ten days before the hearing date, the City shall post the application on the property to indicate that a Certificate of Appropriateness has been requested. The Building Official’s staff shall send notice to the recorded 
CHAPTER 162 ESTABLISHMENT OF CERTIFICATE OF APPROPRIATENESS FOR STRUCTURES LOCATED IN THE DOWNTOWN PERRY HISTORICAL/CULTURAL DISTRICT 
owners of all property that is the subject of the application, to abutting properties, and to the chair of the Historic Preservation Commission. 
3. 
An appeal shall be heard by the Historic Preservation Appeals Board within a timely fashion after the Historic Preservation Commission action. 

4. 
The Historic Preservation Commission Appeals Board will consist of five members. The members shall be the Building Official, two members of the Historic Preservation Commission, one person from the Historic/Cultural District and one member of the Perry City Council. 

5. 
The Historic Preservation Appeals Board shall review the application and apply the standards as set forth in this chapter in considering the appeal. 

6. 
The Historic Preservation Appeals Board may affirm, reverse, or modify the decision of the Historic Preservation Commission. 


162.07 FEES. 
1. 
A fee shall be paid for review by the Historic Preservation Commission of an application for a project that includes erection, movement, demolition, reconstruction, restoration, renovation, or alteration of exterior of structures.  Payments of such fee shall be required from the applicant upon submission of the application to the City Clerk. 

2. 
Fees will be set by a resolution submitted to the Perry City Council by the Historic Preservation Commission. Such fees may be set and adjusted by the City Council from time to time, as deemed necessary. 

3. 
Applicants proposing demolition shall be required to post a bond, the amount of which shall be set by the Building Official, prior to the issuance of the Certificate of Appropriateness, in order to ensure complete removal of debris left by said demolition and recompense for damage done to adjacent properties. 

4. 
Applicants proposing work on their property shall be required to apply for and remit payment for any permits required by the Building Official’s Department prior to the beginning of any work on property in the Historic/Cultural area prior to the issuance of the Certificate of Appropriateness. 


(Ch. 162 – Ord. 865 – Dec. 07 Supp.) 
CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA 
-951 ­
CHAPTER 162 ESTABLISHMENT OF CERTIFICATE OF APPROPRIATENESS FOR STRUCTURES LOCATED IN THE DOWNTOWN PERRY HISTORICAL/CULTURAL DISTRICT 
°°°°°°°°°° 

CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA 
-952 ­
CHAPTER 163 
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE REQUIREMENTS FOR 
PROPERTY LOCATED IN THE HISTORIC/CULTURAL 
DISTRICT OF DOWNTOWN PERRY 

163.01 Purpose and Intent 163.04 Violation Deemed a Municipal Infraction or 
163.02 Definitions Misdemeanor 
163.03 Property Maintenance Required 
163.01 PURPOSE AND INTENT. The purpose of this chapter is to: 
1. 
Stabilize and improve property values; 

2. 
Protect and enhance the City’s attractions to tourists and visitors and the support and stimulus to business thereby provided; 

3. 
To provide additional protection for the people who use and visit the buildings in the Historic/Cultural District of Downtown Perry. 


163.02 DEFINITIONS. For use in this chapter the following terms are defined: 
1. 
“Building” for the purpose of this chapter “building” refers to all buildings within an area designated as Historic/Cultural District with the exception of single-family dwellings. 

2. 
“Contributing” means any building site, object, and/or structure contained in the designated Historic/Cultural District or National Register of Historic Places Historic District that is identified as a contributor to the Historic District. 

3. 
“Minimum Maintenance Requirements” mean those regulations adopted by the City of Perry requiring property owners to maintain the buildings, structures and sites associated within the Historic/Cultural District. 


163.03 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE REQUIRED. 
1. The Perry City Council and the Historic Preservation Commission intends to preserve from deliberate or inadvertent neglect the exterior portions of designated landmarks, contributing buildings or structures in the Historic/Cultural District and all interior portions thereof whose maintenance is necessary to prevent deterioration of any exterior portion. No owner, lessee, or occupant of any landmark, contributing building or structure in the Historic/Cultural District shall fail to prevent significant deterioration of the exterior of the structure or special feature beyond the condition of the structure on the effective date of the designating ordinance. Examples of minimum maintenance requirements stipulate the prompt repair or removal of the following: 
A. Facades which may fall and injure members of the public or property; 
CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA 
-953 ­
B. Removal of satellite dishes hanging out over the sidewalks where pedestrians will be walking under them; 
C. Window air conditioners and signs which are not properly installed and may fall on passersby; 
D. Deteriorated or ineffective waterproofing of exterior walls, roofs, foundations or floors, including broken windows, window casements or doors; 
E. Addresses must be displayed on both the front and back sides of a building to facilitate safety in case of 911 emergencies; 
F. Any fault or defect in the building which renders it not properly watertight or structurally unsafe; 
G. Deteriorated or inadequate foundation, defective or deteriorated flooring or floor supports, deteriorated walls or other vertical structural supports; 
H. Members of ceilings, roofs, ceiling and roof supports or other horizontal member with age, split or buckle due to defective material or deterioration. 
2. 
No owner, lessee, or occupant of any historic structure shall fail to comply with all applicable provisions of this code and other ordinances of the City of Perry regulating property maintenance, including without limitation weed control, garbage, and housing. 

3. 
Applicants may reference the Perry Design Guide or a series of preservation briefs published by the National Park Service for detailed descriptions of appropriate treatment and maintenance methods for historic properties. 

4. 
Before the City Attorney files a complaint in court for failure to maintain the property, the Building Official shall notify the property owner, lessee, or occupant of the need to repair, maintain, or restore the property, shall assist the owner, lessee, or occupant in determining how to preserve the property and shall give the owner a reasonable time to perform such work. 


163.04 VIOLATION DEEMED A MUNICIPAL INFRACTION OR MISDEMEANOR. 
1. 
Any person, firm, or corporation violating any of the terms of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a municipal infraction or misdemeanor and shall be punishable in accordance with the provisions of the City of Perry Municipal Code, Chapter 4. Each day a violation occurs can constitute a separate offense. 

2. 
The remedies herein provided shall be cumulative and not exclusive and shall be in addition to any other remedies provided by law. 


(Ch. 163 – Ord. 866 – Dec. 07 Supp.) 
CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA 
-954 ­
CHAPTER 165 
ZONING REGULATIONS 

165.01 Title 	165.17 Sidewalks 
165.02 Purpose 	165.18 Board of Adjustment: Establishment 
165.03 Application of District Regulations 165.19 Board of Adjustment: Powers and Duties 
165.04 Establishment of Districts; Provision for 165.20 Appeals from the Board of Adjustment Official Zoning Map 165.21 Districts Established 
165.05 Rules for Interpretation of District Boundaries 165.22 AG – Agricultural District 
165.06 Definitions 	165.23 RS – Residential Single-Family District 
165.07 Nonconformities – Intent 	165.24 RD – Residential Duplex District 
165.08 Nonconforming Lots of Record 165.25 RM – Residential Multi-Family District 
165.09 Nonconforming Uses of Land (or Land With 	165.26 MH – Mobile Home District Minor Structures Only) 165.27 AC – Arterial Commercial District 
165.10 Nonconforming Structures 	165.28 BC – Central Business Commercial District 
165.11 Nonconforming Uses of Structures or of 	165.29 LI – Light Industrial District Structures and Premises in Combination 165.30 HI – Heavy Industrial District 
165.12 Repairs and Maintenance 	165.31 Supplementary District Regulations 
165.13 Uses Under Special Exception Provision Not 	165.32 Enforcement and Interpretation Nonconforming Uses 165.33 Amendments 
165.14 Administration and Enforcement 165.34 Penalties for Violation 
165.15 Zoning/Building Permits Required 165.35 Schedule of Fees, Charges and Expenses 
165.16 Residential Dwelling Standards 165.36 Complaints Regarding Violations 
165.37 Adult Entertainment Business Regulations 
165.01 TITLE. This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the “City of Perry, Iowa, Zoning Ordinance.” 
165.02 PURPOSE. The purpose of this chapter is to provide adequate light and air to prevent the overcrowding of land to avoid undue concentration of population, to regulate the use of land and to promote the health, safety and general welfare in the City. 
165.03 APPLICATION OF DISTRICT REGULATIONS. The regulations set by this chapter within each district shall be minimum regulations and shall apply uniformly to each class or kind of structure of land, and particularly, except as hereinafter provided: 
1. 
No building, structure or land shall hereafter be used or occupied, and no building or structure or part thereof shall hereafter be erected, constructed, reconstructed, moved, or structurally altered except in conformity with all the regulations herein specified for the district in which it is located. 

2. 
No part of a yard, or other open space, or off-street parking or loading space required about or in connection with any building for the purpose of complying with this chapter shall be included as part of a yard, open space, or off-street parking or loading space similarly required for any other building. 


3. 
No yard or lot existing at the time of passage of the Zoning Ordinance codified in this chapter shall be reduced in dimension or area below the minimum requirements set forth herein. Yards or lots created after the effective date of this chapter shall meet at least the minimum requirements established by this chapter. 

4. 
Whenever the requirements of this chapter are at variance with the requirements of any other lawfully adopted rules, regulations, ordinances, deed restrictions, or covenants, the most restrictive or that imposing the higher standards shall govern. 

5. 
All structures existing as of the effective date of this chapter, and which comply with the terms and conditions of this chapter, shall be considered lawful and be allowed to continue and exist or be reconstructed as they currently exist. 


165.04 ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS; PROVISION FOR OFFICIAL ZONING MAP. 
1. 
Official Zoning Map. The City shall be divided into districts, as shown on the official zoning map which, together with all explanatory matter thereon, shall be adopted by ordinance. The official zoning map shall be identified by the signature of the Mayor, attested by the Clerk, and bearing the seal of the City under the following words: “This is to certify that this is the official zoning map referred to in Section 165.04 of Ordinance No. _______ of the City of Perry, Iowa,” together with the date of adoption. If, in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and Chapter 414, Code of Iowa, changes are made in district boundaries or other matter portrayed on the official zoning map, such changes shall be entered on the official zoning map promptly after the amendment has been approved by the City Council, with an entry on the official zoning map as follows: “By official action of the City Council, the following changes were made in the official zoning map.” (indicating the changes by ordinance numbers and date of publication.) No amendment of this chapter which involves matter portrayed on the official zoning map shall become effective until after such change and entry has been made on said map. (See EDITOR’S NOTE at the end of this chapter for ordinances amending the zoning map.) 

2. 
Annexation of New Land. Any land annexed to the City after the effective date of this chapter shall be zoned [AG] Agricultural until the Zoning Commission and City Council shall have studied the area and adopted a final zoning plan for the area in accordance with this chapter. 

3. 
Replacement of the Official Zoning Map. In the event that the official zoning map becomes damaged, destroyed, lost or difficult to 


interpret because of the nature or number of changes and additions, the City Council may by ordinance adopt a new official zoning map which shall supersede the prior official zoning map. The new official zoning map may correct drafting or other errors or omissions in the prior official zoning map, but no such correction shall have the effect of amending the original official zoning map or any subsequent amendment thereof. The new official zoning map shall be identified by the signature of the Mayor, attested by the City Clerk, and bearing the Seal of the City under the following words: “This is to certify that this official zoning map supersedes and replaces the official zoning map adopted as part of Ordinance No. _______ of the City of Perry, Iowa.” Unless the prior official zoning map has been lost or has been totally destroyed, the prior map or any significant parts thereof remaining shall be preserved, together with all available records pertaining to its adoption or amendment. 
165.05 RULES FOR INTERPRETATION OF DISTRICT BOUNDARIES. 
Where uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of districts as shown on the official zoning map, the following rules shall apply: 
1. 
Boundaries indicated as approximately following the centerlines of streets, highways, or alleys shall be construed to follow such centerlines; 

2. 
Boundaries indicated as approximately following platted lot lines shall be construed as following such lot lines; 

3. 
Boundaries indicated as approximately following City Limits shall be construed as following such City Limits; 

4. 
Boundaries indicated as following railroad lines shall be construed to be midway between the main tracks; 

5. 
Boundaries indicated as following shorelines shall be construed to follow such shorelines, and in the event of change in the shoreline shall be construed as moving with the actual shoreline; boundaries indicated as approximately following the centerlines of streams, rivers, or other bodies of water shall be construed to follow such centerlines; 

6. 
Boundaries indicated as parallel to or extensions of features indicated in Subsections 1 through 3 above shall be so construed. Distances not specifically indicated on the official zoning map shall be determined by the scale of the map; 

7. 
Where physical or cultural features existing on the ground are at variance with those shown on the official zoning map, or in other 


circumstances not covered by Subsections 1 through 6 above, the Board of Adjustment shall interpret the district boundaries; 
8. 
Where a district boundary line divides a lot which was in single ownership at the time of passage of the Zoning Ordinance codified in this chapter, the Board of Adjustment may permit, as a special exception, the extension of the regulations for either portion of the lot not to exceed 50 feet beyond the district line into the remaining portion of the lot; 

9. 
Whenever the Council vacates and disposes of a street or alley, adjacent districts shall extend to the centerline of the vacation; 

10. 
Whenever a variance exists between the official zoning map and the legal description on an amendment to this chapter, the legal description applies. 


165.06 DEFINITIONS. For the purposes of this chapter the words “used or occupied” include the words “intended, designed or arranged to be used or occupied,” the word “lot” includes the words “plot” or “parcel,” and the following terms or words used herein shall be interpreted as follows: 
1. 
“Abutting” means having property or district lines in common. 

2. 
“Access” means a way of approaching or entering a property from a public street. 

3. 
“Accessory building” means a subordinate building located on the same lot with the main building, occupied by or devoted to an accessory use. Where an accessory building is attached to the main building in a substantial manner, as by a wall or roof, such accessory building shall be considered part of the main building. 

4. 
“Accessory use” means a use customarily incidental and subordinate to the main use or building and located on the same lot therewith. In no case shall such accessory use dominate, in area, extent or purpose, the principal lawful use or building. 

5. 
“Agriculture” means the production, keeping or maintenance, for sale, lease, or personal use, of plants and animals useful to humans, including but not limited to: forages and sod crops; grains and seed crops; dairy animals and dairy products; poultry and poultry products; livestock, including beef cattle, sheep, swine, horses, mules, or goats, or any mutations or hybrids thereof including the breeding and grazing of any or all such animals; bees and apiary products; fur animals; trees and forest products; fruits of all kinds; vegetables; or lands devoted to a soil conservation or forestry management program. 


CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA 
-958 ­
6. 
“Alley” means a public way, other than a street, twenty (20) feet or less in width, affording secondary means of access to abutting property. 

7. 
“Basement” means a story having part but not more than one-half (½) its height above grade. A basement shall be counted as a story if the vertical distance from the average adjoining grade to its ceiling is over five (5) feet. 

8. 
“Bed and breakfast house” means a house or portion thereof where short-term lodging, rooms, and meals are provided. The operator shall live on the premises. 

9. 
“Board” means the Board of Adjustment 

10. 
“Boarding house” means a building other than a hotel where, for compensation, meals and lodging are provided for four (4) or more persons. 

11. 
“Building” means any structure designed or intended for the support, enclosure, shelter, or protection of persons, animals, or property, but not including signs or billboards and not including structures or vehicles originally designed for transportation purposes. 

12. 
“Building, height of” means the vertical distance from the average natural grade at the building line to the highest point of the coping of a flat roof, or to the deck line of a mansard roof, or to the mean height level between eaves and ridge for gable, hip, and gambrel roofs. 

13. 
“Condominium” means a building, or group of buildings, in which units are owned individually, and the structure, common areas and facilities are owned by all of the owners on a proportional undivided basis. 

14. 
“District” means a section or sections of the City within which the regulations governing the use of buildings and premises or the height and area of buildings and premises are uniform. 

15. 
“Dwelling/dwelling unit” means any building or portion thereof which is designed or used exclusively for residential purposes, but not including a tent, cabin, trailer, or mobile home. 

16. 
“Dwelling, multiple” means a building or portion thereof designed for or occupied exclusively for residence purposes by two or more families. 

17. 
“Dwelling, single-family” means a building designed for or occupied exclusively for residence purposes by one family. 


CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA 
-959 ­
18. 
“Dwelling, two-family” means a building designed for or occupied exclusively for residence purposes by two families. 

19. 
“Family” means one or more persons related by blood, marriage or adoption occupying a single dwelling unit. A family may, except by special exception of Board of Adjustment, include 4, but not more than 4 persons not related by blood, marriage or adoption but further provided that domestic employees employed on the premises may be housed on the premises without being counted as a family or families. 

20. 
“Family home” means a community-based residential home which is licensed as a residential care facility under Chapter 135C or as a child foster care facility under Chapter 237 to provide room and board, personal care, habilitation services, and supervision in a family environment exclusively for not more than eight developmentally disabled persons and any necessary support personnel. However, family home does not mean an individual foster care family home licensed under Chapter 237. 

21. 
“Frost-free foundation” means a foundation supporting a structure and which is required to be at least forty-two (42) inches below grade. 

22. 
“Garage” means a building or portion thereof in which a motor vehicle containing gasoline, distillate or other volatile, flammable liquid in its tank is stored, repaired, or kept. 

23. 
“Garage, private” means a building or part thereof accessory to a main building and providing for the storage of automobiles and in which no occupation or business for profit is carried on. 

24. 
“Garage, public or storage” means a building or part thereof other than a private garage for the storage of motor vehicles and in which service station activities may be carried on. 

25. 
“Grade” means the average elevation of the finished ground at the exterior walls of the main building. 

26. 
“Health care facility” means any residential care facility, intermediate care facility, or skilled nursing facility. 


A. Residential Care Facility -Any institution, place, building, or agency providing, for a period exceeding twenty-four consecutive hours, accommodation, board, personal assistance and other essential daily living activities to three or more individuals, not related to the administrator or owner thereof within the third degree of consanguinity, who by reason of illness, disease, or physical or mental infirmity are unable to sufficiently or properly care for themselves but who do not require the 
CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA -960 ­
services of a registered or licensed practical nurse except on an emergency basis. 
B. Intermediate Care Facility -Any institution, place, building or agency providing, for a period exceeding twenty-four consecutive hours, accommodation, board, and nursing services, the need for which is certified by a physician, to three or more individuals, not related to the administrator or owner thereof within the third degree of consanguinity, who by reason of illness, disease, or physical or mental infirmity require nursing services which can be provided only under the direction of a registered nurse or a licensed practical nurse. 
C. Skilled Nursing Facility -Any institution, place, building, or agency providing, for a period exceeding twenty-four consecutive hours, accommodation, board, and nursing services, the need for which is certified by a physician, to three or more individuals not related to the administrator or owner thereof within the third degree of consanguinity who by reason of illness, disease, or physical or mental infirmity require continuous nursing care services and related medical services, but do not require hospital care. The nursing care services provided must be under the direction of a registered nurse on a twenty-four hour per day basis. 
27. “Home occupation” means an occupation conducted in a dwelling unit, provided that: 
A. No person other than members of the family residing on the premises shall be engaged in such occupation, except by special exception by the Board of Adjustment which may allow one person other than family members not residing on the premises to be employed; 
B. The use of the dwelling unit for the home occupation shall be clearly incidental and subordinate to its use for residential purposes by its occupants, and not more than 50 percent of the gross floor area of the dwelling unit shall be used in the conduct of the home occupation; 
C. There shall be no change in the outside appearance of the building or premises, nor shall there be any outdoor storage associated with the home occupation or other visible evidence of the conduct of such home occupation other than one sign, not exceeding two square feet in area, non-illuminated, and mounted flat against the wall of the principal building; 
CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA -961 ­

D. No home occupation shall be conducted in any accessory building, except by special exception of Board of Adjustment. 
E. No traffic shall be generated by such home occupation in greater volumes than would normally be expected in a residential neighborhood, and any need for parking generated by the conduct of such home occupation shall be met by providing off-street parking and shall not be in a required front yard. Further, no off-street parking resulting from the home occupation shall interfere with the off-street parking of surrounding properties. 
F. No equipment or process shall be used in such home occupation which creates noise, vibration, glare, fumes, odors, or electrical interference detectable to the normal senses off the lot, if the occupation is conducted in a single-family residence, or outside the dwelling unit if conducted in other than a single-family residence, or outside the dwelling unit if conducted in other than a single-family residence. No equipment or process shall be used which creates visual or audible interference in any radio or television receivers off the premises or causes fluctuations in line voltage off the premises. 
28. 
“Hospital” means an institution which is devoted primarily to the maintenance and operation of facilities for the diagnosis, treatment or care over a period exceeding twenty-four hours of two or more non-related individuals suffering from illness, injury, or deformity, or a place which is devoted primarily to the rendering, over a period exceeding twenty-four hours, of obstetrical or other medical or nursing care for two or more non-related individuals, or any institution, place, building or agency in which any accommodation is primarily maintained, furnished or offered for the care, over a period exceeding twenty-four hours, of two or more non-related aged or infirm persons requiring or receiving chronic or convalescent care; and includes sanatoriums or other related institutions. Provided, however, this shall not apply to hotels or other similar places that furnish only food and lodging, or either, to their guests. “Hospital” includes, in any event, any facilities wholly or partially constructed or to be constructed with Federal financial assistance, pursuant to Public Law 725, 79th Congress, approved August 13, 1946. 

29. 
“Hotel” means a building occupied as the more or less temporary residence of individuals who are lodged for compensation with or without meals, in which there are sleeping rooms or suites of rooms with no provision made for cooking in any individual room or suite of rooms, and entrance is through a common lobby or office. 


CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA -962 ­
30. 
“Junk yard” means any area where waste, discarded or salvaged materials are bought, sold, exchanged, baled or packed, disassembled or handled, including places or yards for storage of salvaged house wrecking and structural steel materials and equipment; but not including areas where such uses are conducted entirely within a completely enclosed building and not including the processing of used, discarded or salvaged materials as part of manufacturing operations. 

31. 
“Kennel (commercial)” means an establishment in which dogs or domestic animals more than one year old are housed, groomed, bred, boarded, trained, or sold. 

32. 
“Lodging house” means a building originally designed for or used as single-family, two-family, or multiple-family dwelling, all or a portion of which contains lodging rooms or rooming units which accommodate persons who are not members of the keeper’s family. Lodging or meals, or both, are provided for compensation. The term “lodging house” shall be construed to include: boarding house, rooming house, fraternity house, sorority house and dormitories. 

33. 
“Lot” means a parcel of land of at least sufficient size to meet minimum zoning requirements for use, coverage, and area, and to provide such yards and other open spaces as are herein required. Such lot shall have frontage on an improved public street, or on an approved private street, and may consist of: 

A. A single lot of record; 
B. A portion of a lot of record; 
C. A combination of complete lots of record, or complete lots of record and portions of lots of record, or of portions of lots of record; 
D. A parcel of land described by metes and bounds, provided that in no case of division or combination shall any residual lot or parcel be created which does not meet the requirements of this chapter. 

34. 
“Lot frontage” means the portion of the lot nearest the street. For the purposes of determining yard requirements on corner lots and through lots, all sides of a lot adjacent to streets shall be considered frontage, and yards shall be provided as indicated under “Yards” in this section. 

35. 
“Lot measurements”: 


A. Width of a lot is the distance between straight lines connecting front and rear lot lines at each side of the lot, 
CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA -963 ­
measured across the building line; provided, however, width between side lot lines at their foremost points (where they intersect with the street line or front property line) shall not be less than eighty percent (80%) of the required lot width except in the case of lots on the turning circle of cul-de-sacs where the 80% requirement shall not apply. 
B. Depth of a lot shall be the distance between the midpoints of straight lines connecting the foremost points of the side lot lines in front and the rearmost points of the side lot lines in the rear. 
36. 
“Lot of record” means a lot which is part of a subdivision recorded in the office of the County Recorder, or a lot or parcel described by metes and bounds, the description of which has been so recorded. 

37. 
“Lot types” – Diagram 1 at the end of this section illustrates terminology used in this chapter with reference to “corner” lots, “interior” lots, “through” lots, and “reversed corner” lots, as follows: 

A. “Corner” lot -a lot located at the intersection of two or more streets. 
B. “Interior” lot -a lot other than a corner lot with only one frontage on a street other than an alley. 
C. “Through” lot -a lot other than a corner lot with frontage on more than one street other than an alley. Lots with frontage on two nonintersecting streets may be referred to as “through” lots. 
D. “Reversed corner” lot -a corner lot, the side street line of which is substantially a continuation of the front lot line of the first lot to its rear. 

38. 
“Manufactured home” -A manufactured home shall be located and installed according to the same standards, including but not limited to, a foundation system, setback, and minimum square footage which would apply to a site-built, single-family dwelling on the same lot. A manufactured home is a factory-built structure, which is manufactured or constructed under the authority of 42 U.S.C. Section 4403 and is to be used as a place for human habitation, but which is not constructed or equipped with a permanent hitch or other device allowing it to be moved other than for the purpose of moving to a permanent site and which does not have permanently attached to its body or frame any wheels or axles. A mobile home as defined in Section 135D.1 is not a manufactured home, unless it has been converted to real property as provided in Section 135D.26, and shall be taxed as a site-built dwelling. This 


CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA -964 ­
section shall not be construed as abrogating a recorded restrictive covenant. 
39. 
“Mobile home” means any structure used for living, sleeping, business or storage purposes, having no foundation other than wheels, blocks, skids, jacks, horses, or skirtings, and which is, has been, or reasonably may be, equipped with wheels or other devices for transporting the structure from place to place, whether by motive power or other means. The term “mobile home” includes “camp car” and “house car.” 

40. 
“Modular home” means factory-built housing certified as meeting the State Building Code as applicable to modular housing. Once certified by the State, modular homes shall be subject to the same standards as site-built homes. 

41. 
“Motel” (also “motor hotel,” “motor court,” “motor lodge,” or “tourist court”) means a building or group of buildings designed to provide sleeping accommodations to transient guests for compensation, and provides near each guest room a parking space for the guest’s vehicle. A swimming pool, restaurant, meeting rooms, management offices and other such accessory facilities may be included. 

42. 
“Nonconformities” means lots, structures, uses of land and structures, or characteristics of uses, which are prohibited under the terms of this Zoning Ordinance but were lawful at the date of the chapter’s enactment. 

43. 
“Nursing or convalescent home” means a building or structure having accommodations and where care is provided for invalid, infirm, aged, convalescent, or physically disabled persons, not including insane and other mental cases, inebriate, or contagious cases. 

44. 
“Parking space” means an area of not less than one hundred eighty (180) square feet either within a structure or in the open, exclusive of driveway or access drives, for the parking of a motor vehicle. 

45. 
“Permitted use” means a use by right which is specifically authorized in a particular zoning district. 

46. 
“Principal use” means the main use of land or structures as distinguished from an accessory use. 

47. 
“Projections” (into yards) means parts of buildings such as architectural features that extend beyond the buildings exterior walls. 

48. 
“Service station” (gas station) means a building or premises used for dispensing or offering for sale at retail any automobile fuels, oils, or having pumps and storage tanks therefor, or where battery, tire or any 


CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA -965 ­
similar services are rendered, and where vehicles are not parked for purposes of inspection or sale. 
49. 
“Setback” means the required distance between every structure and lot line on the lot in which it is located. 

50. 
“Signs” means any advertising device or surface outdoors, on or off premises, on which letters, illustrations, designs, figures or symbols are printed or attached and which conveys information or identification. 

51. 
“Signs, off-premises” means an advertising device including the supporting structure which directs the attention of the general public to a business, service, or activity not usually conducted or a product not usually sold upon the premises where such a sign is located. Such a sign shall not include: on-premises signs, directional or other official sign or signs which have a significant portion of their face devoted to giving public service information (date, time, temperature, weather, information, etc.) 

52. 
“Signs, on-premises” means an advertising device concerning the sale or lease of the property upon which they are located and advertising devices concerning activities conducted or products sold on the property upon which they are located. 

53. 
“Statement of intent” means a statement preceding regulations for individual districts intended to characterize the districts and their legislative purpose. 

54. 
“Story” means that portion of a building included between the surface of any floor and the surface of the floor next above it, or if there is no floor above it, then the space between the floor and the ceiling or roof next above it. 

55. 
“Story, half” means a space under a sloping roof which has the line of intersection of roof decking and wall face not more than four (4) feet above the top floor level. A half-story containing independent apartments or living quarters shall be counted as a full story. 

56. 
“Street” means all property dedicated or intended for public or private use for access to abutting land or subject to public easements therefor, and whether designated as a street, highway, thoroughfare, parkway, throughway, expressway, road, avenue, boulevard, lane, place, circle, or however otherwise designated. 

57. 
“Street line” means the right-of-way line of a street. (See Diagram 2 at the end of this section.) 

58. 
“Structural alteration” means any change in the supporting members of a building, such as bearing walls or partitions, columns, 


CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA -966 ­
beams or girders, or any complete rebuilding of the roof or the exterior walls. 
59. 
“Structure” means anything constructed or erected which requires location on the ground or attached to something having location on the ground, including signs, billboards and fences or walls used as fences. 

60. 
“Townhouse” means a one-family dwelling in a row of at least three (3) such units in which each unit has its own front and rear access to the outside, no unit is located over another unit and each unit is separated from any other unit by one or more common fire resistant walls. 

61. 
“Use” means the purpose or activity for which a piece of land or its buildings is designed, arranged, or intended, or for which it is occupied or maintained. 

62. 
“Variance” means a device used by the Board of Adjustment which grants a property owner relief from certain provisions of a Zoning Ordinance when, because of the particular physical surroundings, shape, or topographical condition of the property, compliance would result in particular hardship upon the owner, as distinguished from a mere inconvenience or a desire to make more money and which condition is not of the owner’s own making. 

63. 
“Yard” means an open space on the same lot with a building, unoccupied and unobstructed by any portion of a structure from the ground upward, excepting as otherwise provided herein. In measuring a yard for the purpose of determining the depth of a front yard or the depth of a rear yard, the least distance between the lot line and the main building shall be used. Fences and walls are permitted in any yard, subject to height limitations as indicated herein. (See Diagram 3 at the end of this section.) 

64. 
“Yard, front” means a yard extending across the full width of the lot and measured between the front lot line and the building or any projection thereof, other than the projection of the usual steps or unenclosed porches. Corner lots shall meet the front yard requirements on each street frontage. 

65. 
“Yard, rear” means a yard extending across the full width of the lot and measured between the rear lot line and the building or any projections other than steps, unenclosed balconies or unenclosed porches. On corner lots there shall be no rear yard required. 

66. 
“Yard, side” means a yard extending from the front yard to the rear yard and measured between the side lot lines and the building. On 


CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA -967 ­
corner lots the yards not designated as front yards shall be considered the side yards. Each corner lot shall have two fronts and two side yards. 
67. 
“Zoning/Building Official” means the local official responsible for reviewing zoning/building permits and following a determination by the Zoning Board of Adjustment for special exceptions and variances. Decisions of the Zoning/Building Official may be appealed to the Board of Adjustment. Permits are issued by the Zoning/Building Official. 

68. 
“Zoning district” means a section the City designated in the text of this chapter and delineated on the zoning map in which requirements for the use of land, the building and development standards are prescribed. Within each district, all requirements are uniform. 

69. 
“Zoning map” means the map delineating the boundaries of districts which, along with the zoning text, comprises the Zoning Ordinance. 


CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA 
-968 ­
DIAGRAM 1 

CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA 
-969 ­
DIAGRAM 2 

CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA 
-970 ­
DIAGRAM 3 

CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA 
-971 ­
165.07 NONCONFORMITIES – INTENT. Within the districts established by this chapter there exist lots, structures, uses of land and structures and characteristics of use which were lawful before this chapter was passed or amended, but which are prohibited, regulated, or restricted under the terms of this chapter or future amendment. It is the intent of this chapter to permit these nonconformities to continue until they are removed, but not to encourage their survival. Further nonconformities shall not be enlarged upon, expanded or extended, nor be used as grounds for adding other structures or uses prohibited elsewhere in the same district, but it is the intent of this chapter to allow structures which were nonconforming under the previous ordinance, but which are conforming under this chapter, to be considered legal as of the date of adoption of this chapter and shall be allowed to be rebuilt, added to, or modified within the terms and requirements of this chapter. All uses classified as nonconforming A or B uses under Ordinance No. 521 adopted in May of 1982 shall be considered preexisting nonconforming uses under this section. To avoid undue hardship, nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to require a change in the plans, construction or designated use of any building on which actual construction was lawfully begun prior to the effective date of adoption or amendment of this chapter and upon which actual building construction has been carried on diligently. “Actual construction” is hereby defined to include the placing of construction materials in permanent position and fastened in a permanent manner. Where excavation or demolition or removal of an existing building has been substantially begun preparatory to rebuilding, such excavation or demolition or removal shall be deemed to be actual construction, provided that work shall be carried on diligently. 
165.08 NONCONFORMING LOTS OF RECORD. In any district in which single-family dwellings are permitted, a single-family dwelling and customary accessory buildings may be erected on any single lot of record provided that the lot is not less than 50 feet in width at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this chapter, except by special exception of the Board of Adjustment, notwithstanding limitations imposed by other provisions of this chapter. This provision shall apply even though such lot fails to meet the requirements for area or width, or both, if the lot shall conform to the regulations for the district in which such lot is located. 
165.09 NONCONFORMING USES OF LAND (OR LAND WITH MINOR STRUCTURES ONLY). Where at the time of passage of the Zoning Ordinance codified in this chapter lawful use of land exists which would not be permitted by the regulations imposed by this chapter, and where such use involves no individual structure with a replacement cost exceeding $1,000.00, the use may be continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful, provided: 
1. 
No such nonconforming use shall be enlarged or increased, nor extended to occupy a greater area of land than was occupied at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this chapter. 

2. 
No such nonconforming use shall be moved in whole or in part to any other portion of the lot or parcel occupied by such use at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this chapter. 

3. 
If any such nonconforming use of land ceases for any reason for a period of twelve (12) months, then any subsequent use of such land shall conform to the regulations specified by this chapter for the district in which such land is located unless a special exception is granted by the Board of Adjustment. 

4. 
No additional structure not conforming to the requirements of this chapter shall be erected in connection with such nonconforming use of land unless erected at least 200 feet from all adjacent lot lines. 


165.10 NONCONFORMING STRUCTURES. Where a lawful structure exists at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this chapter that could not be built under the terms of this chapter by reason of restrictions on area, lot coverage, height, yards, its location on the lot, or other requirements concerning the structure, such structure may be continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the following provisions: 
1. 
No such nonconforming structure may be enlarged or altered in such a way which increases its nonconformity, but any structure or portion thereof may be altered to decrease its nonconformity. An addition or alteration to a nonconforming structure shall be allowed to any conforming side of the structure to the extent that the same does not add to nonconforming portion of the structure. 

2. 
Should such nonconforming structure or nonconforming portion of structure be destroyed by any means or to any extent, or be unoccupied for 12 consecutive months it shall be reviewed by the Board of Adjustment and may be allowed by special exception. 

3. 
Should such structure be moved for any reason for any distance whatever, it shall thereafter conform to the regulations for the district in which it is located after it is moved. 


165.11 NONCONFORMING USES OF STRUCTURES OR OF STRUCTURES AND PREMISES IN COMBINATION. If lawful use involving individual structures with a replacement cost of $1,000.00 or more, or of structure and premises in combination, exists at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this chapter that would not be allowed in the district under the terms of this chapter, the lawful use may be continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the following provisions: 
1. 
No existing structure devoted to a use not permitted by this chapter in the district in which it is located shall be enlarged, extended, constructed, reconstructed, or structurally altered except in changing the use of the structure to a use permitted in the district in which it is located. 

2. 
Any nonconforming use may be extended throughout any parts of a building which were manifestly arranged or designed for such use at the time of adoption or amendment of this chapter, but no such use shall be extended to occupy any land outside such building. 

3. 
If no structural alterations are made, any nonconforming use of a structure, or structure and premises, may as a special exception be changed to another nonconforming use provided that the Board of Adjustment, either by general rule or by making findings in the specific case, shall find that the proposed use is equally appropriate or more appropriate to the district than the existing nonconforming use. In permitting such change, the Board of Adjustment may require appropriate conditions and safeguards in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 

4. 
Any structure, or structure and land in combination, in or on which a nonconforming use is superseded by a permitted use, shall thereafter conform to the regulations for the district, and the nonconforming use may not thereafter be resumed. 

5. 
When a nonconforming use of a structure, or structure and premises in combination, is discontinued or abandoned for twelve (12) consecutive months or for eighteen (18) months during any three-year period (except when government action impedes access to the premises) the structure, or structure and premises in combination, shall not thereafter be used except in conformity with the regulations of the district in which it is located. 

6. 
When nonconforming use status applies to a structure and premises in combination, removal or destruction of the structure shall eliminate the nonconforming status of the land. “Destruction” for the purpose of the subsection is defined as damage to an extent of more than fifty percent (50%) of the replacement cost at time of destruction. Replacement shall begin within 6 months of the time of destruction or the nonconforming status shall expire. Said construction shall also be completed within 18 months of the time of destruction or the nonconforming status shall expire. 


165.12 REPAIRS AND MAINTENANCE. On any building devoted in whole or in part to any nonconforming use, work may be done on ordinary repairs, provided that the cubic content of the building as it existed at the time of passage or amendment of this chapter shall not be increased. 
165.13 USES UNDER SPECIAL EXCEPTION PROVISIONS NOT NONCONFORMING USES. Any use which is permitted as a special exception in a district under the terms of this chapter (other than a change through Board of Adjustment action from a nonconforming use to another use not generally permitted in the district) shall not be deemed a nonconforming use in such district, but shall without further action be considered a conforming use. 
165.14 ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT. A Zoning/Building Official designated by the City Council shall administer and enforce this chapter. The Zoning/Building Official may be provided with the assistance of such other persons as the City Council may direct. 
165.15 ZONING/BUILDING PERMITS REQUIRED. No building or other structure shall be erected, moved, or added to, without a permit therefor issued by the Zoning/Building Official. Alterations of commercial buildings requires a permit therefor issued by the Zoning/Building Official. No zoning/building permit shall be issued except in conformity with the provisions of the chapter, except after written order from the Board of Adjustment. Fees for zoning/building permits shall be as provided by City resolution. Zoning/building permits shall be applied for with the Zoning/Building Official and shall expire 12 months after the date of issuance if work is begun within 90 days of issuance or after 90 days if no substantial beginning of construction has occurred. Extensions of time may be granted in writing by the Zoning/Building Official for good cause. (Ord. 872 – May 08 Supp.) 
165.16 RESIDENTIAL DWELLING STANDARDS. All residential dwelling units shall meet the following minimum standards: 
1. 
The minimum dwelling width shall be twenty-four (24) feet at the exterior dimension. 

2. 
Dwelling units including attached garages, with baring point on exterior walls, shall have permanent exterior perimeter walls supported by continuous footings to a depth of 48 inches below finish grade and designed per Chapter 18 of the 1994 Edition of the Uniform Building Code. 

3. 
Manufactured homes that are constructed to bear on pilings shall be placed according to the following requirements to insure visual compatibility with surrounding dwellings: 


A. No skirting is allowed to be attached to the structure and extend downward. 
B. A perimeter wall shall be constructed as follows:† 
(1) 
Minimum depth and width of footings shall be six 

(6) 
inches wide by forty-eight (48) inches in depth below finish grade. 

(2) 
A wall, minimum of four (4) inches wide constructed of block, brick or poured concrete, shall extend from the footings to a point no closer than four (4) inches from the bottom of the structure. Vents shall be provided for proper ventilation. 

(3) 
A board or other material resistant to decay shall be attached to the structure and extend downward and lap over the wall a minimum of two (2) inches. This board or other material shall not be attached to the wall. 

(4) 
The cavity that is formed between the structure and the wall shall be filled with insulation or other material that allows for movement between the structure and wall. 


C. Floors shall have a minimum R rating of thirty (30) or the crawl space shall be capable of maintaining a constant temperature of fifty-five (55) degrees F. to allow installation of water meters. 
4. 
All dwelling units shall provide for a minimum of 900 square feet of habitable floor space. 

5. 
All dwelling units shall have a minimum roof pitch of 4:12. This requirement shall not apply to manufactured housing if the housing otherwise complies with 42 U.S.C. Sec. 5403. 

6. 
All dwelling units shall have a roof overhang of at least four (4) inches around the entire perimeter. 

7. 
Steel siding referred to as barn siding shall not be used as an exterior siding. 

8. 
All single-family dwelling units shall have external utility meters located on an external wall that is perpendicular to the front of the residence. These meters may also be located on the external back wall of the residence, but are not to be installed in the front of a residence. In the case of dwellings that are steel framed, it is permissible to attach utility meters to pedestals adjacent to external walls that are 


† EDITOR’S NOTE: A diagram illustrating the following requirements is attached to Ordinance No. 747, adopted by the Council on January 17, 2000. 
perpendicular to the front of the residence or on pedestals that are adjacent to back walls of the residence. 
165.17 SIDEWALKS. A building permit issued for the construction of a principal building upon any new developed tract or platted subdivision will require the installation of sidewalks by the time of expiration of the permit. In older or established areas of the City, when a building permit is issued for the construction of a principal building upon any lot, the installation of a sidewalk will be required if any one of the following conditions exists: 
1. 
Fifty percent (50%) or more of the properties on that side of the street have sidewalks. 

2. 
There is an existing sidewalk on either side of that lot. 

3. 
The construction of principal buildings occurs and utilizes at least one-half (½) of that block. 


Sidewalks will be installed in accordance with City sidewalk regulations (Chapter 136 of this Code of Ordinances). In addition, if said tract or platted lot has sidewalks in compliance with said regulations but which are in a state of disrepair according to the regulations, a requirement of the building permit will be the repair or replacement of the sidewalk by the time of the expiration of the permit. Sidewalks will be repaired or replaced as required by the sidewalk regulations. 
165.18 BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT: ESTABLISHMENT. 
1. 
Board Created. A Board of Adjustment is hereby established which shall consist of five (5) members. The terms of office of the members of the Board and the manner of their appointment shall be as provided by statute. Vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired term of any member whose term becomes vacant. 

2. 
Proceedings of the Board of Adjustment. The Board of Adjustment shall adopt rules necessary to the conduct of its affairs and in keeping with the provisions of this chapter. Meetings shall be held at the call of the Chairperson and at such other time as the Board may determine. The Chairperson, or in the Chairperson’s absence, the Acting Chairperson may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses. All meetings shall be open to the public. The Board of Adjustment shall, through its Secretary, keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon each question or if absent or failing to vote indicating such fact, and shall keep records of its examinations and other official actions, all of which shall be immediately filed in the office of the Board and shall be a public record. 


It shall be the responsibility of the appellant to record said action and all corresponding stipulations and further said action shall take effect upon the Board receiving sufficient confirmation of the same. A copy of said action shall also be filed in the office of the Zoning/Building Official. 
165.19 BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT: POWERS AND DUTIES. The Board of Adjustment shall have the following powers and duties: 
1. Administrative Review. To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is error in any order, requirement, decision, or determination made by the Zoning/Building Official in the enforcement of this chapter. 
A. Appeals to the Board may be taken by any person aggrieved, or by any officer, department, board or bureau of the City affected by any decision of the administrative officer. Such appeal shall be taken within ten (10) days by filing with the Zoning/Building Official, and with the Board a notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof. The Zoning/Building Official shall forthwith transmit to the Board all papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from is taken. 
B. The Board shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of the appeal, and give not less than seven (7) days’ public notice thereof in a paper of general circulation in the City, and decide the same within 30 days. At said hearing, any party may appear in person, by agent or by attorney. 
C. Stay of Proceedings. An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from, unless the Zoning/Building Official from whom the appeal is taken certifies to the Board of Adjustment after the Notice of Appeal is filed with the Zoning/Building Official, that by reason of facts stated in the certificate, a stay would, in the Zoning/Building Official’s opinion, cause imminent peril to life and property. In such case proceedings shall not be stayed other than by a restraining order which may be granted by the Board of Adjustment or by a court of record on application, on notice to the Zoning/Building Official from whom the appeal is taken and on due cause shown. 
2. Special Exceptions: Conditions Governing Applications; Procedures. To hear and decide only such special exceptions as the Board of Adjustment is specifically authorized to pass on by the terms of this chapter; to decide such questions as are involved in determining whether special exceptions should be granted; and to grant special exceptions with such conditions and safeguards as are appropriate under this chapter, or to deny special exceptions when not in harmony with the purpose and intent of this chapter. A special exception shall not be granted by the Board of Adjustment unless and until: 
A. A written application for a special exception is submitted indicating the section of this chapter under which the special exception is sought and stating the grounds on which it is requested; 
B. The Board shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of the special exception, and give not less than seven (7) days’ public notice thereof in a paper of general circulation in the City, and decide the same within 30 days. At said hearing, any party may appear in person, by agent or by attorney; 
C. The public hearing shall be held. Any party may appear in person, or by agent or attorney; 
D. The Board of Adjustment shall make a finding that it is empowered under the section of this chapter described in the application to grant the special exception, that the granting of the special exception will not adversely affect the public interest. 
3. Variance, Conditions Governing Application; Procedures. To authorize upon appeal in specific cases such variance from the terms of this chapter as will not be contrary to the public interest, where, owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement of the provisions of this chapter would result in unnecessary hardship. A variance from the terms of this chapter shall not be granted by the Board of Adjustment unless and until: 
A. A written application for a variance is submitted demonstrating: 
(1) 
That special conditions and circumstances exist which are peculiar to land, structure, or building involved and which are not applicable to other lands, structures, or buildings in the same district; 

(2) 
That literal interpretation of the provisions of this chapter would deprive the applicant of rights commonly enjoyed by other properties in the same district under the terms of this chapter; 

(3) 
That the special conditions and circumstances do not result from the actions of the applicant; 

(4) 
That granting the variance requested will not confer on the applicant any special privilege that is denied by this 


CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA -979 ­
chapter to other lands, structures, or buildings in the same district. 
No nonconforming use of neighboring land, structures, or buildings in the same district, and no permitted or nonconforming use of land, structures, or buildings in other districts may be considered ground for the issuance of a variance. 
B. The Board shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of the variance, and give not less than seven (7) days’ public notice thereof in a paper of general circulation in the City and decide the same within 30 days. At said hearing, any party may appear in person, by agent or by attorney. 
C. The public hearing shall be held. Any party may appear in person, or by agent or by attorney. 
D. The Board of Adjustment shall make findings that requirements of Section 165.19 have been met by the applicant for a variance. 
E. The Board of Adjustment shall further make a finding that the reasons set forth in the application justify the granting of the variance, and that the variance is the minimum variance that will make possible the reasonable use of the land, building, or structure. 
F. The Board of Adjustment shall further make a finding that the granting of the variance will be in harmony with the general purpose and intent of this chapter, and will not be injurious to the neighborhood, or otherwise detrimental to the public welfare. 
In granting any variance, the Board of Adjustment may prescribe appropriate conditions and safeguards in conformity with this chapter. Violation of such conditions and safeguards, when made a part of the terms under which the variance is granted, shall be deemed a violation of this chapter and punishable under this chapter. Under no circumstances shall the Board of Adjustment grant a variance to allow a use not permissible under the terms of this chapter in the district involved or any use expressly or by implication prohibited by the terms of this chapter in said district. 
4. The concurring vote of three members of the Board shall be necessary to reverse any order, requirement, decision, or determination of the Zoning/Building Official, or to decide in favor of the applicant on any matter upon which it is required to pass under this chapter, or to effect any variation in the application of this chapter. 
CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA -980 ­
165.20 APPEALS FROM THE BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT. Any person or persons, or any board, taxpayer, department, board or bureau of the City, or other areas subject to this chapter aggrieved by any decision of the Board of Adjustment may seek review by a court of record of such decision, in the manner provided by the laws of the State and particularly by Chapter 414, Code of Iowa. 
165.21 DISTRICTS ESTABLISHED. The City is hereby divided into the following districts: 
AG Agricultural District 
RS Residential Single-Family District 
RD Residential Duplex District 
RM Residential Multi-Family District 
MH Mobile Home District 
AC Arterial Commercial District 
BC Central Business Commercial District 
LI Light Industrial District 
HI Heavy Industrial District 

These districts are established as identified on the official zoning map which, together with all explanatory matters thereon, is hereby adopted by reference and declared to be part of this chapter. 
CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA 
-981 ­
165.22 AG – AGRICULTURAL DISTRICT. This district is intended to provide for areas in which agriculture and related uses are encouraged as the principal use of land. However, uses which may be offensive to the surrounding area or to the community as a whole by reasons of noise, dust, smoke, odor, traffic or physical appearance or other similar factors are not permitted. The district prohibits urban density residential use until these areas may be served by utilities and services of the City. This district is also intended to preserve land suited for eventual development into other uses, pending proper timing for economical and practical provisions of streets, utilities, schools and other facilities so that reasonably compact development will occur and the fiscal integrity of the City is preserved. All newly annexed areas to the City will automatically be placed into this district classification unless otherwise suitably classified. 
1 Permitted Uses. The following uses are permitted in the AG District: 
A. Agriculture, including the usual agricultural buildings and structures and excluding offensive uses. 
B. Home occupations. 
2. Accessory Uses. Uses of land or structure customarily incidental and subordinate to a permitted use in the AG District: 
A. Living quarters of persons employed on the premises and not rented or otherwise used as a separate dwelling. 
B. Private garages, barns and other farm buildings. 
C. Roadside stands offering for sale only agricultural products or other products produced on the premises. 
D. Temporary buildings for the uses incidental to construction work which buildings shall be removed upon the completion or abandonment of the construction work. 
3. Special Exceptions. Certain uses may be permitted in the AG District subject to specific conditions and requirements intended to make them compatible with and acceptable to adjacent uses: 
A. Cemeteries, crematories or mausoleums. 
B. Commercial kennels. 
C. Stables, private or public. 
D. Greenhouses and nurseries. 
E. Publicly operated sanitary landfills. 
F. Private recreational camps, golf courses and recreational facilities. 
G. Public or private utility substations, relay stations, etc. 
H. Churches or accessory facilities (on or off site). 
I. Publicly owned and operated buildings and facilities. 
4. 
Bulk Regulations. The following requirements shall provide for light and air around permitted uses and buildings in the AG District: 

5. 
Off-street Parking. The following off-street parking requirements shall apply in the AG District: 

A. Dwellings: two (2) parking spaces on the lot for each living unit in the building. For dwellings not consisting of living units: two (2) parking spaces on the lot for each 1,000 square feet of floor area. 
B. Churches: one (1) parking space on the lot for each 5 seats in the main auditorium. 
C. Public buildings and facilities: one (1) parking space for each 300 square feet of gross floor area. 
D. Roadside stands: one (1) parking space for each 50 square feet of enclosed floor area. 
E. Greenhouses and nurseries: one (1) parking space per 1,000 square feet of enclosed floor area. 

6. 
Off-street Loading. The following off-street loading requirements shall apply in the AG District: 

A. All activities or uses allowed in the AG District shall be provided with adequate receiving facilities accessible by motor vehicle off any adjacent service drive or open space on the same zoning lot. 
B. Loading shall not be permitted to block public right-of­way. 

7. 
Signs. The following sign regulations apply to the AG District: 


Minimum Lot Area  Minimum Lot Width  Minimum Front Yard  Minimum Side Yard  Minimum Rear Yard  Maximum Height (lesser of)  
5 acres  200 feet  40 feet  40 feet  30 feet  2½ stories or 35 feet, excluding farm buildings  

CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA -983 ­
A. Off-premises signs are not permitted. 
B. No sign may be lighted in a manner which impairs the vision of the driver of any motor vehicle. 
C. No sign may obstruct the view of any highway or railroad so as to render dangerous the use of the highway. 
D. No sign may imitate or resemble an official traffic control sign, signal or device. 
E. Signs shall not encroach or extend over public right-of­way. 
F. No sign may obscure or physically interfere with an official traffic control sign, signal or device. 
G. No advertisement or advertising structure shall be posted, erected or maintained which simulates any official, directional or warning sign erected or maintained by the State, County, City or other governmental subdivision or which incorporates or makes use of lights simulating or resembling traffic signals or control signs. 
H. No advertisement shall be posted or maintained on rocks, fences, trees, or other perennial plants, or on poles maintained by public utilities. 
CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA 
-984 ­
165.23 RS – RESIDENTIAL SINGLE-FAMILY DISTRICT. This district is intended to provide for a variety of single-family residential areas where public utilities and services are available and to encourage a suitable living environment through the promotion of public health, safety and welfare. Low and medium population density neighborhoods are recognized and provided for by varying the minimum bulk regulations. Criteria such as topography, soil types, access, traffic load on streets, schools, utilities, recreation and other public facilities shall be taken into consideration when the lot area requirement is established for the various single-family residential areas of the City. 
1. Permitted Uses. The following uses are permitted in the RS District: 
A. Single-family detached dwellings. 
B. Family homes. 
C. Home occupations. 
2. Accessory Uses. Uses of land or structure customarily incidental and subordinate to a permitted use in the RS District: 
A. Private garages. 
B. Private recreational facilities. 
C. Temporary buildings for the use incidental to construction work which buildings shall be removed upon the completion or abandonment of the construction work. 
3. 
Accessory Buildings. No accessory building may be erected in any required front yard and no separate accessory building may be erected within 4 feet of a main building. No accessory building shall be closer than 4 feet to the rear or side lot line. Accessory buildings located in the rear yard may not occupy more than 30 percent of the rear yard. No accessory building shall be used without occupancy of the principal building. 

4. 
Special Exceptions. Certain uses may be permitted in the RS District subject to specific conditions and requirements intended to make them compatible with and acceptable to adjacent uses. 


A. Nursery schools. 
B. Public or private utility substations, relay stations, etc. 
C. Churches. 
D. Publicly owned and operated buildings and facilities. 
E. Private schools with a curriculum similar to public schools. 
F. Golf courses including miniature courses and driving ranges. 
G. Bed and breakfast houses. 
H. Hospitals. 
I. Home occupations in accessory buildings. 
5. 
Bulk Regulations. The following requirements shall provide for light and air around permitted residential uses and buildings in the RS District: 

6. 
Off-street Parking. The following off-street parking requirements shall apply in the RS District: 


Zoning Symbol  Minimum Lot Area  Minimum Lot Width  Minimum Front Yard  Minimum Side Yard  Minimum Rear Yard  Maximum Height (lesser of)  
10 RS  10,000  75 feet  20 feet  8 feet  20 feet  2½ stories or 35 feet  
40 RS  40,000  200 feet  50 feet  20 feet  50 feet  2½ stories or 35 feet  

A. Dwellings: two (2) parking spaces on the lot for each living unit in the building. For dwellings not consisting of living units: two (2) parking spaces on the lot for each 1,000 square feet of floor area. 
B. Churches: one (1) parking space on the lot for each 5 seats in the main auditorium. 
C. Elementary, junior high and equivalent private or parochial schools: one (1) parking space for each classroom and office plus one (1) parking space for each 300 square feet of gross floor area in auditorium or gymnasium. 
D. Senior high schools and equivalent private or parochial schools: one (1) parking space for each employee and one (1) parking space for each ten (10) students. 
E. Colleges, universities, institutions of higher learning and equivalent private or parochial schools: one (1) parking space for each employee and one (1) parking space for each five (5) students. 
F. Public building and facilities: one (1) parking space for each 300 square feet of gross floor area. 
G. Nursery schools: one (1) parking space per employee. 
CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA -986 ­
7. Off-street Loading. The following off-street loading requirements shall apply in the RS District: 
A. All activities or uses allowed in the RS District shall be provided with adequate receiving facilities accessible by motor vehicle off any adjacent service drive or open space on the same zoning lot. 
B. Loading shall not be permitted to block public right-of­way. 
8. Signs. The following sign regulations apply to the RS District: 
A. Off-premises signs are not permitted. 
B. No sign may be lighted in a manner which impairs the vision of the driver of any motor vehicle. 
C. No sign may obstruct the view of any highway or railroad so as to render dangerous the use of the highway. 
D. No sign may imitate or resemble an official traffic control sign, signal or device. 
E. Signs shall not encroach or extend over public right-of­way. 
F. No sign may obscure or physically interfere with an official traffic control sign, signal or device. 
G. No advertisement or advertising structure shall be posted, erected or maintained which simulates any official, directional or warning sign erected or maintained by the State, County, City or other governmental subdivision or which incorporates or makes use of lights simulating or resembling traffic signals or control signs. 
H. No advertisement shall be posted or maintained on rocks, fences, trees, or other perennial plants, or on poles maintained by public utilities. 
CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA 
-987 ­
165.24 RD – RESIDENTIAL DUPLEX DISTRICT. This district is intended to provide for a variety of single and two family residential areas where public utilities and services are available and to encourage a suitable living environment through the promotion of public health, safety and welfare. Medium population density neighborhoods are recognized and provided for by varying the minimum bulk regulations. Criteria such as topography, soil types, access, traffic load on streets, schools, utilities, recreation and other public facilities shall be taken into consideration when the lot area requirement is established for the various single and two family residential areas of the City. 
1. Permitted Uses. The following uses are permitted in the RD District: 
A. Single-family detached dwellings. 
B. Two family dwellings (as per bulk regulations). 
C. Home occupations. 
D. Family homes. 
2. Accessory Uses. Uses of land or structure customarily incidental and subordinate to a permitted use in the RD District: 
A. Private garages. 
B. Parking lots. 
C. Private recreational facilities. 
D. Temporary buildings for the use incidental to construction work which buildings shall be removed upon the completion or abandonment of the construction work. 
3. 
Accessory Buildings. No accessory building may be erected in any required front yard and no separate accessory building may be erected within 4 feet of a main building. No accessory building shall be closer than 4 feet to the rear or side lot line. Accessory buildings located in the rear yard may not occupy more than 30 percent of the rear yard. No accessory building shall be used without occupancy of the principal building. 

4. 
Special Exceptions. Certain uses may be permitted in the RD District subject to specific conditions and requirements intended to make them compatible with and acceptable to adjacent uses. 


A. Nursery schools. 
B. Public or private utility substations, relay stations, etc. 
CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA 
-988 ­
C. Churches and publicly owned and operated buildings and facilities. 
D. Private schools with a curriculum similar to public schools. 
E. Lodging houses, dormitories, fraternities and sororities. 
F. Bed and breakfast houses. 
G. Health care facilities. 
H. Funeral homes. (Ord. 782 – Jul. 02 Supp.) 
5. Bulk Regulations. The following requirements shall provide for light and air around permitted residential uses and buildings in the RD District: 
Minimum Lot Area  Minimum Lot Width  Minimum Front Yard  Minimum Side Yard  Minimum Rear Yard  Maximum Height  
8,000* square feet  75 feet  20 feet  8 feet  20 feet  45 feet  

Where single-family dwellings are constructed, the bulk regulations shall be as follows: 
Minimum Lot Area  Minimum Lot Width  Minimum Front Yard  Minimum Side Yard  Minimum Rear Yard  Maximum Height  
10,000* square feet  75 feet  20 feet  8 feet  20 feet  45 feet  

*Where public sewer facilities are not available, not less than one acre of lot area is required. 
6. Off-street Parking. The following off-street parking requirements shall apply in the RD District: 
A. Dwellings: two (2) parking spaces on the lot for each living unit in the building. For dwellings not consisting of living units: two (2) parking spaces on the lot for each 1,000 square feet of floor area. 
B. Churches: one (1) parking space on the lot for each 5 seats in the main auditorium. 
C. Elementary, junior high and equivalent private or parochial schools: one (1) parking space for each classroom and office plus one (1) parking space for each 300 square feet of gross floor area in auditorium or gymnasium. 
CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA -989 ­
D. Senior high schools and equivalent private or parochial schools: one (1) parking space for each employee and one (1) parking space for each ten (10) students. 
E. Colleges, universities, institutions of higher learning and equivalent private or parochial schools: one (1) parking space for each employee and one (1) parking space for each five (5) students. 
F. Public building and facilities: one (1) parking space for each 300 square feet of gross floor area. 
G. Nursery schools: one (1) parking space per employee. 
7. Off-street Loading. The following off-street loading requirements shall apply in the RD District: 
A. All activities or uses allowed in the RD District shall be provided with adequate receiving facilities accessible by motor vehicle off any adjacent service drive or open space on the same zoning lot. 
B. Loading shall not be permitted to block public right-of­way. 
8. Signs. The following sign regulations apply to the RD District: 
A. Off-premises signs are not permitted. 
B. No sign may be lighted in a manner which impairs the vision of the driver of any motor vehicle. 
C. No sign may obstruct the view of any highway or railroad so as to render dangerous the use of the highway. 
D. No sign may imitate or resemble an official traffic control sign, signal or device. 
E. Signs shall not encroach or extend over public right-of­way. 
F. No sign may obscure or physically interfere with an official traffic control sign, signal or device. 
G. No advertisement or advertising structure shall be posted, erected or maintained which simulates any official, directional or warning sign erected or maintained by the State, County, City or other governmental subdivision or which incorporates or makes use of lights simulating or resembling traffic signals or control signs. 
CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA -990 ­
H. No advertisement shall be posted or maintained on rocks, fences, trees, or other perennial plants, or on poles maintained by public utilities. 
9. Utility Meters. All residential duplex units shall have external utility meters located on an external wall that is perpendicular to the front of the residence. These meters may also be located on the external back wall of the residence but are not to be installed in the front of the residence. In the case of dwellings that are steel framed it is permissible to attach utility meters to pedestals adjacent to external walls that are perpendicular to the front of the residence or on pedestals that are adjacent to back walls of the residence. 
CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA 
-991 ­
165.25 RM – RESIDENTIAL MULTI-FAMILY DISTRICT. This district is intended to provide for a variety of multi-family residential areas where public utilities and services are available and to encourage a suitable living environment through the promotion of public health, safety and welfare. Medium and high population density neighborhoods are recognized and provided for by varying the minimum bulk regulations. Criteria such as topography, soil types, access, traffic load on streets, schools, utilities, recreation and other public facilities shall be taken into consideration when the lot area requirement is established for the various multi-family residential areas of the City. 
1. Permitted Uses. The following uses are permitted in the RM District: 
A. Single-family detached dwellings. 
B. Multi-family dwellings (as per bulk regulations). 
C. Home occupations. 
D. Family homes. 
E. Townhouses. 
2. Accessory Uses. Uses of land or structure customarily incidental and subordinate to a permitted use in the RM District: 
A. Private garages. 
B. Parking lots. 
C. Private recreational facilities. 
D. Temporary buildings for the use incidental to construction work which buildings shall be removed upon the completion or abandonment of the construction work. 
3. 
Accessory Buildings. No accessory building may be erected in any required front yard and no separate accessory building may be erected within 4 feet of a main building. No accessory building shall be closer than 4 feet to the rear or side lot line. Accessory buildings located in the rear yard may not occupy more than 30 percent of the rear yard. No accessory building shall be used without occupancy of the principal buildings. 

4. 
Special Exceptions. Certain uses may be permitted in the RM District subject to specific conditions and requirements intended to make them compatible with and acceptable to adjacent uses. 


A. Nursery schools. 
B. Public or private utility substations, relay stations, etc. 
C. Churches and publicly owned and operated buildings and facilities. 
D. Private schools with a curriculum similar to public schools. 
E. Lodging houses, dormitories, fraternities and sororities. 
F. Bed and breakfast houses. 
G. Health care facilities. 
5. Bulk Regulations. The following requirements shall provide for light and air around permitted residential uses and buildings in the RM District: 
Minimum Lot Area  Minimum Lot Width  Minimum Front Yard  Minimum Side Yard  Minimum Rear Yard  Maximum Height  
8,000 square feet*  75 feet  20 feet  8 feet  20 feet  45 feet  

Where single-family dwellings are constructed, the bulk regulations shall be as follows: 
Minimum Lot Area  Minimum Lot Width  Minimum Front Yard  Minimum Side Yard  Minimum Rear Yard  Maximum Height (lesser of)  
10,000 square feet*  75 feet  20 feet  8 feet  20 feet  2½ stories or 45 feet  

*Where public sewer facilities are not available, not less than one acre of lot area is required. 
6. Off-street Parking. The following off-street parking requirements shall apply in the RM District: 
A. Single-family dwellings: two (2) parking spaces on the lot. 
B. Multi-family dwellings: one (1) parking space on the lot for each dwelling unit. 
C. Churches: one (1) parking space on the lot for each 5 seats in the main auditorium. 
D. Elementary, junior high and equivalent private or parochial schools: one (1) parking space for each classroom and office plus one (1) parking space for each 300 square feet of gross floor area in auditorium or gymnasium. 
CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA -993 ­
E. Senior high schools and equivalent private or parochial schools: one (1) parking space for each employee and one (1) parking space for each ten (10) students. 
F. Colleges, universities, institutions of higher learning and equivalent private or parochial schools: one (1) parking space for each employee and one (1) parking space for each five (5) students. 
G. Public building and facilities: one (1) parking space for each 300 square feet of gross floor area. 
H. Nursery schools: one (1) parking space per employee. 
7. Off-street Loading. The following off-street loading requirements shall apply in the RM District: 
A. All activities or uses allowed in the RM District shall be provided with adequate receiving facilities accessible by motor vehicle off any adjacent service drive or open space on the same zoning lot. 
B. Loading shall not be permitted to block public right-of­way. 
8. Signs. The following sign regulations apply to the RM District: 
A. Off-premises signs are not permitted. 
B. No sign may be lighted in a manner which impairs the vision of the driver of any motor vehicle. 
C. No sign may obstruct the view of any highway or railroad so as to render dangerous the use of the highway. 
D. No sign may imitate or resemble an official traffic control sign, signal or device. 
E. Signs shall not encroach or extend over public right-of­way. 
F. No sign may obscure or physically interfere with an official traffic control sign, signal or device. 
G. No advertisement or advertising structure shall be posted, erected or maintained which simulates any official, directional or warning sign erected or maintained by the State, County, City or other governmental subdivision or which incorporates or makes use of lights simulating or resembling traffic signals or control signs. 
CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA -994 ­
H. No advertisement shall be posted or maintained on rocks, fences, trees, or other perennial plants, or on poles maintained by public utilities. 
9. Utility Meters. All residential multi-family units shall have external utility meters located on an external wall that is perpendicular to the front of the residence. These meters may also be located on the external back wall of the residence but are not to be installed in the front of the residence. In the case of dwellings that are steel framed it is permissible to attach utility meters to pedestals adjacent to external walls that are perpendicular to the front of the residence or on pedestals that are adjacent to back walls of the residence. 
CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA 
-995 ­
165.26 MH – MOBILE HOME DISTRICT. This district is intended to provide for certain medium density residential areas in the City now developed as mobile home parks which by reason of their design and location are compatible with surrounding residential areas and areas of the City where similar development seems likely to occur. This district has useful application as a transition zone between shopping areas and residential areas and is normally located along thoroughfares where direct access to the site is available. 
1. Permitted Uses. The following uses are permitted in the MH District: 
A. Mobile homes located in an approved mobile home park. 
B. Home occupations. 
2. Accessory Uses. 
A. Private recreational facilities. 
B. Temporary buildings for use incidental to construction work, which buildings shall be removed upon completion or abandonment of the construction work. 
3. Special Exceptions. 
A. Public or private utility substation, relay stations, etc. 
B. Nursery schools. 
C. Churches or accessory facilities on or off site. 
D. Home occupations in accessory buildings. 
4. Bulk Regulations. The following requirements shall provide for light and air around permitted residential uses and buildings in the MH District: 
A. Density is limited to seven (7) mobile homes per acre. 
B. No mobile home shall be located within 15 feet of any other, within 5 feet of any driveway or parking space, or within 40 feet of the right-of-way line of a street. 
C. Each mobile home site shall be provided with a stand consisting of a solid, 6-inch thick, poured Portland cement concrete apron not less than 8 feet wide and 45 feet long and a paved outdoor patio of at least 180 square feet located at the main entrance to the mobile home. 
CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA 
-996 ­
D. A greenbelt, at least 30 feet in width, shall be located along all boundaries of each mobile home park, except where it is crossed by driveways. 
E. Each mobile home shall be located on a lot having an area of at least 4,000 square feet. 
F. Each mobile home park shall be graded and drained so that rain water will not stand in pools or puddles. 
G. Each street and parking area in any mobile home park shall be bounded by a sidewalk at least 3 feet wide. 
H. All minimum street widths in mobile home parks shall be approved as private streets and further comply with the following: 
(1) 	
No parking on street 1-way 14 feet 2-way 20 feet 

(2) 	
Parallel parking on side 1-way 20 feet 2-way 30 feet 

(3) 	
Parallel parking both sides 1-way 26 feet 2-way 36 feet 


CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA 
-997 ­
165.27 AC – ARTERIAL COMMERCIAL DISTRICT. This district is intended to provide for certain areas of the City for the development of service, retail, and other non-residential uses which because of certain locational requirements and operational characteristics are appropriately located in close proximity to arterial and other main thoroughfares. Residential type structures are also permitted. The district is further characterized by a typical need for larger lot sizes, off-street parking, adequate setbacks, clear vision, safe ingress and egress, and access to other adjacent thoroughfares. 
1. Permitted Uses. 
A. Sales and display rooms and lots, including yards for the storage or display of new or used building materials but not for any scrap or salvage operation storage or sales. 
B. Offices and clinics. 
C. Churches and publicly owned and operated buildings and facilities. 
D. Hotels and motels. 
E. Any other retail or service sales business, including food preparation for sale off-premises. 
F. Publicly owned and operated buildings and facilities. 
G. Dwellings: single-family, two-family and multi-family. 
2. Accessory Uses. Uses of land or structures customarily incidental and subordinate to a permitted use in the AC District: 
A. Private recreational facilities. 
B. Living quarters of persons employed on the premises and not rented or otherwise used as a separate dwelling. 
C. Private garages. 
D. Parking lots. 
E. Temporary buildings for the uses incidental to construction work which buildings shall be removed upon the completion or abandonment of the construction work. 
3. Special Exceptions. Certain uses may be permitted in the AC District subject to specific conditions and requirements intended to make them compatible with and acceptable to adjacent uses. 
A. Public or private utility substations, relay stations, etc. 
CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA 
-998 ­
4. 
Bulk Regulations. The following requirements shall provide for light and air around permitted uses and buildings in the AC District: 

5. 
Off-street Parking. The following off-street parking requirements shall apply in the AC District: 

A. Sales and service building: one (1) parking space per 300 square feet of gross floor area. 
B. Offices/clinics: one (1) parkings space per 300 square feet of gross floor area. 
C. Churches: one (1) parking space on the lot for each 5 seats in the main auditorium. 
D. Public building and facilities: one (1) parking space for each 300 square feet of gross floor area. 
E. Hotels and motels: one (1) parking space per room plus one (1) parking space for each employee. 

6. 
Off-street Loading. The following off-street loading requirements shall apply in the AC District: 

A. All activities or uses allowed in the AC District shall be provided with adequate receiving facilities accessible by motor vehicle off any adjacent service drive or open space on the same zoning lot. 
B. Loading shall not be permitted to block public right-of­way. 

7. 
Signs. The following sign regulations apply to the AC District: 


Minimum Lot Area  Minimum Lot Width  Minimum Front Yard  Minimum Side Yard  Minimum Rear Yard  Maximum Height (lesser of)  
10,000 square feet  50 feet  40 feet  8 feet  20 feet  3 stories or 45 feet  

A. Off-premises signs are permitted. 
B. Off-premises signs shall comply with the setbacks of the districts they are located in. Other bulk regulations do not apply. Off-premises signs are governed by State and Federal regulations along highways, where zoning exists. 
C. No sign may be lighted in a manner which impairs the vision of the driver of any motor vehicle. 
CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA -999 ­
D. No sign may obstruct the view of any highway or railroad so as to render dangerous the use of the highway. 
E. No sign may imitate or resemble an official traffic control sign, signal or device. 
F. Signs shall not encroach or extend over public right-of­way. 
G. No sign may obscure or physically interfere with an official traffic control sign, signal or device. 
H. No advertisement or advertising structure shall be posted, erected or maintained which simulates any official, directional or warning sign erected or maintained by the State, County, City or other governmental subdivision or which incorporates or makes use of lights simulating or resembling traffic signals or control signs. 
I. No advertisement shall be posted or maintained on rocks, fences, trees, or other perennial plants, or on poles maintained by public utilities. 
J. Signs shall not be permitted, the faces of which are visible from and are located within three hundred (300) feet of any public parkway, public square or public park, public or parochial school building, church building or cemetery, public library, public museum, post office or buildings designed and erected for the purpose of housing the principal, administrative and/or judicial seats of City, County, State and/or Federal government. 
K. Signs may be located on roofs of buildings subject to the following restrictions: 
(1) 
Such signs shall not exceed a height of twenty (20) feet above the roof level from the point of mounting. 

(2) 
The back of such signs shall be effectively shielded from public view by a building wall, by backing the face with another such sign face, by grouping such signs in clusters to conceal the exposed backs or by painting the exposed back a neutral color. Structural supports shall be painted a neutral color. 

(3) 
The total combined height of such signs and the building upon which they are placed shall not exceed the overall height limits of this district. 


CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA 
-1000 ­
L. Signs shall not be erected or maintained where the face of that sign exceeds six hundred (600) square feet in area, including borders and trim, and excluding base or apron supports and other structural members. 
M. Signs shall not be erected or maintained in excess of one 
(1) 
sign structure for each fifty (50) feet of lot frontage. In areas where permitted, these sign structures may be double-faced, back to back, or “V” type, with maximum internal angle of forty-five 

(45) 
degrees. 

N. 
No off-premises sign shall be permitted within a 300 foot radius of another off-premises sign. 

O. 
Sign structures which have become dilapidated and are likely to cause injury or degrade the surrounding neighborhood and signs which advertise a past event or past political election, are no longer legible, or are otherwise unsafe or untimely, are a nuisance or danger to the public. The Zoning/Building Official is authorized to remove, or to have removed, all dangerous or nuisance signs, the cost of which shall be borne by the sign owner. 

P. 
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, it is unlawful for any person to erect, construct, enlarge, move or convert any off-premises sign in the City, or cause the same to be done without first obtaining a sign permit for each such sign from the Zoning/Building Official as required by this chapter. These directives shall not be construed to require any permit for the repainting, cleaning and other normal maintenance or repair of a sign or sign structure. The fees for such permit shall be set by resolution of the City Council. 


CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA 
-1001 ­
165.28 BC – CENTRAL BUSINESS COMMERCIAL DISTRICT. This district is intended to accommodate the major business and office concentration in the City. It is characterized further by a variety of stores and related activities which occupy the central commercial area of the City. This district is intended to be the single central business district of the City and no other use of this district shall be utilized other than contiguously with the currently established BC District. Bulk regulations further reflect a more in time use and development pattern. 
1. Permitted Uses. The following uses are permitted in the BC District: 
A. Business sales and services conducted entirely within the building, including those with incidental manufacturing or processing of goods or products. 
B. Offices and clinics. 
C. Hotels and motels. 
D. Publicly owned and operated buildings and facilities. 
2. Accessory Uses. Uses of land or structures customarily incidental and subordinate to a permitted use in the BC District: 
A. Outdoor sales and service. 
B. Private garages. 
C. Parking lots. 
D. Temporary buildings for the uses incidental to construction work which buildings shall be removed upon the completion or abandonment of the construction work. 
E. Accessory uses customarily incidental to any permitted principal use. 
3. Special Exceptions. Certain uses may be permitted in the BC District subject to specific conditions and requirements intended to make them compatible with and acceptable to adjacent uses. 
A. Service stations. 
B. Churches or accessory facilities on or off site. 
C. Dwellings: second floor and above. 
4. Bulk Regulations. The following requirements shall provide for light and air around permitted uses and buildings in the BC District: 

CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA 
-1002 ­
Lot Area  Lot Width  Front Yard  Side Yard  Rear Yard  Height (lesser of)  
None  None  None  None, except if a side yard is provided it shall be a minimum of 8 feet  None, except if a rear yard is provided it shall be a minimum of 20 feet  3 stories or 45 feet  

Where this district abuts a lower density district, the greater side and rear yard setbacks apply. 
5. 
Off-street Parking. None required. 

6. 
Off-street Loading. The following off-street loading requirements shall apply in the BC District: 

A. All activities or uses allowed in the BC District shall be provided with adequate receiving facilities accessible by motor vehicle off any adjacent service drive or open space on the same zoning lot. 
B. Loading shall not be permitted to block public right-of­way. 

7. 
Signs. The following sign regulations apply to the BC District: 


A. Off-premises signs are not permitted. 
B. No sign may be lighted in a manner which impairs the vision of the driver of any motor vehicle. 
C. No sign may obstruct the view of any highway or railroad so as to render dangerous the use of the highway. 
D. No sign may imitate or resemble an official traffic control sign, signal or device. 
E. No sign may obscure or physically interfere with an official traffic control sign, signal or device. 
F. No advertisement or advertising structure shall be posted, erected or maintained which simulates any official, directional or warning sign erected or maintained by the State, County, City or other governmental subdivision or which incorporates or makes use of lights simulating or resembling traffic signals or control signs. 
G. No advertisement shall be posted or maintained on rocks, fences, trees, or other perennial plants, or on poles maintained by public utilities. 
CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA -1003 ­
H. No sign shall be allowed to overhang, extend or encroach over any public right-of-way. 
I. Signs shall not be permitted, the faces of which are visible from and are located within three hundred (300) feet of any public parkway, public square or public park, public or parochial school building, church building or cemetery, public library, public museum, post office or buildings designed and erected for the purpose of housing the principal, administrative and/or judicial seats of City, County, State and/or Federal government. 
J. Signs may be located on roofs of buildings subject to the following restrictions: 
(1) 
Such signs shall not exceed a height of twenty (20) feet above the roof level from the point of mounting. 

(2) 
The back of such signs shall be effectively shielded from public view by a building wall, by backing the face with another such sign face, by grouping such signs in clusters to conceal the exposed backs or by painting the exposed back a neutral color. Structural supports shall be painted a neutral color. 

(3) 
The total combined height of such signs and the building upon which they are placed shall not exceed the overall height limits of this district. 


K. Signs shall not be erected or maintained where the face of that sign exceeds six hundred (600) square feet in area, including borders and trim, and excluding base or apron supports and other structural members. 
L. Signs shall not be erected or maintained in excess of one 
(1) 
sign structure for each fifty (50) feet of lot frontage. In areas where permitted, these sign structures may be double-faced, back to back, or “V” type, with maximum internal angle of forty-five 

(45) 
degrees. 

M. 
No off-premises sign shall be permitted within a 300 foot radius of another off-premises sign. 

N. 
Sign structures which have become dilapidated and are likely to cause injury or degrade the surrounding neighborhood and signs which advertise a past event or past political election, are no longer legible, or are otherwise unsafe or untimely, are a nuisance or danger to the public. The Zoning/Building Official is authorized to remove, or to have removed, all dangerous or 


CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA 
-1004 ­
nuisance signs, the cost of which shall be borne by the sign owner. 
O. Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, it is unlawful for any person to erect, construct, enlarge, move or convert any off-premises sign in the City, or cause the same to be done without first obtaining a sign permit for each such sign from the Zoning/Building Official as required by this chapter. These directives shall not be construed to require any permit for the repainting, cleaning and other normal maintenance or repair of a sign or sign structure. The fees for such permit shall be set by resolution of the City Council. 
CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA 
-1005 ­
165.29 LI – LIGHT INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT. This district is intended to provide for areas of development by industrial firms that have high standards of performance and that can locate in close proximity to residential and business uses. The district regulations are designed to permit the development of any manufacturing or industrial operations which on the basis of actual physical and operational characteristics, would not be detrimental to the surrounding area or to the community as a whole by reasons of noise, dust, smoke, odor, traffic, physical appearance or other similar factors. Outdoor storage is allowed in this district when the material is enclosed within a solid fence at least six feet high and said fence being within required building lines. All industrial operations must be in an enclosed building. No residential uses are permitted in this district. 
1. Permitted Uses. The following uses are permitted in the LI District: 
A. Any nonresidential building or use which would not be hazardous, obnoxious, offensive or unsightly by reason of odor, sound, vibrations, radioactivity, electrical interference, glares, liquid or solid waste, smoke, or other air pollutants. 
B. Storage, manufacture, compounding, processing, packing and/or treatment of products, exclusive of the rendering or refining of fats and/or oils. 
C. Manufacture, compounding, assembly and/or treatment of articles or merchandise derived from previously prepared materials. 
D. Assembly of appliances and equipment, including manufacture of small parts. 
E. Wholesale distribution of all standard types of prepared or packaged merchandise. 
F. Sale and storage of building materials. Outdoor or open storage shall be allowed only when the material is enclosed within a solid fence at least six feet high and said fence is within required building lines. 
G. Contractors’ offices and storage of equipment. 
H. Public or private utility substations, relay stations, etc. 
2. Accessory Uses. Uses of land or structure customarily incidental and subordinate to a permitted use in the LI District: 
A. Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to a permitted use. 
B. Living quarters for watchmen or custodians of industrial properties. 
3. 
Special Exceptions. Certain uses may be permitted in the LI District subject to specific conditions and requirements intended to make them compatible with and acceptable to adjacent uses. 

4. 
Bulk Regulations. The following requirements shall provide for light and air around permitted uses and buildings in the LI District: 

5. 
Off-street Parking. The following off-street parking requirements shall apply in the LI District: 

A. All commercial uses shall provide one (1) parking space on the lot for each 300 square feet of floor area. 
B. All industrial uses shall provide one (1) parking space on the lot for each two (2) employees of maximum number employed at any one time. 

6. 
Off-street Loading. The following off-street loading requirements shall apply in the LI District: 

A. All activities or uses allowed in the LI District shall be provided with adequate receiving facilities accessible by motor vehicle off any adjacent service drive or open space on the same zoning lot. 
B. Loading shall not be permitted to block public right-of­way. 

7. 
Signs. The following sign regulations apply to the LI District: 


Minimum Lot Area  Minimum Lot Width  Minimum Front Yard  Minimum Side Yard  Minimum Rear Yard  Maximum Height (lesser of)  
10,000 square feet  75 feet  30 feet  8 feet, except that if adjacent to an “RS” / “RM” District, then it shall be 20 feet  20 feet  3 stories or 45 feet  

A. Off-premises signs are permitted. 
B. Off-premises signs shall comply with the setbacks of the districts they are located in. Other bulk regulations do not apply. Off-premises signs are governed by State and Federal regulations along highways, where zoning exists. 
CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA -1007 ­
C. No sign may be lighted in a manner which impairs the vision of the driver of any motor vehicle. 
D. No sign may obstruct the view of any highway or railroad so as to render dangerous the use of the highway. 
E. No sign may imitate or resemble an official traffic control sign, signal or device. 
F. Signs shall not encroach or extend over public right-of­way. 
G. No sign may obscure or physically interfere with an official traffic control sign, signal or device. 
H. No advertisement or advertising structure shall be posted, erected or maintained which simulates any official, directional or warning sign erected or maintained by the State, County, City or other governmental subdivision or which incorporates or makes use of lights simulating or resembling traffic signals or control signs. 
I. No advertisement shall be posted or maintained on rocks, fences, trees, or other perennial plants, or on poles maintained by public utilities. 
J. Signs shall not be permitted, the faces of which are visible from and are located within three hundred (300) feet of any public parkway, public square or public park, public or parochial school building, church building or cemetery, public library, public museum, post office or buildings designed and erected for the purpose of housing the principal, administrative and/or judicial seats of City, County, State and/or Federal government. 
K. Signs may be located on roofs of buildings subject to the following restrictions: 
(1) 
Such signs shall not exceed a height of twenty (20) feet above the roof level from the point of mounting. 

(2) 
The back of such signs shall be effectively shielded from public view by a building wall, by backing the face with another such sign face, by grouping such signs in clusters to conceal the exposed backs or by painting the exposed back a neutral color. Structural supports shall be painted a neutral color. 


CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA 
-1008 ­
(3) The total combined height of such signs and the building upon which they are placed shall not exceed the overall height limits of this district. 
L. Signs shall not be erected or maintained where the face of that sign exceeds six hundred (600) square feet in area, including borders and trim, and excluding base or apron supports and other structural members. 
M. Signs shall not be erected or maintained in excess of one 
(1) 
sign structure for each fifty (50) feet of lot frontage. In areas where permitted, these sign structures may be double-faced, back to back, or “V” type, with maximum internal angle of forty-five 

(45) 
degrees. 

N. 
No off-premises sign shall be permitted within a 300 foot radius of another off-premises sign. 

O. 
Sign structures which have become dilapidated and are likely to cause injury or degrade the surrounding neighborhood and signs which advertise a past event or past political election, are no longer legible, or are otherwise unsafe or untimely, are a nuisance or danger to the public. The Zoning/Building Official is authorized to remove, or to have removed, all dangerous or nuisance signs, the cost of which shall be borne by the sign owner. 

P. 
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, it is unlawful for any person to erect, construct, enlarge, move or convert any off-premises sign in the City, or cause the same to be done without first obtaining a sign permit for each such sign from the Zoning/Building Official as required by this chapter. These directives shall not be construed to require any permit for the repainting, cleaning and other normal maintenance or repair of a sign or sign structure. The fees for such permit shall be set by resolution of the City Council. 


CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA 
-1009 ­
165.30 HI – HEAVY INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT. This district is intended to provide areas for activities and uses of a heavy industrial character and is the least restrictive of any district. In the best interest of the City, certain uses in the HI District shall be subject to final City Council approval, conditional approval or denial to insure that proper safeguards are taken. No residential uses are permitted. 
1. Permitted Uses. There may be any use, excluding residential uses and mobile homes. The following uses must be given separate City Council approval before a zoning/building permit is issued. 
A. Acid manufacture. 
B. Cement, lime, gypsum or plaster of paris manufacture. 
C. Distillation of bones. 
D. Explosive manufacture or storage. 
E. Fat rendering. 
F. Fertilizer manufacture. 
G. Gas manufacture. 
H. Garbage, offal or dead animals, reduction or dumping. 
I. Glue manufacture. 
J. Petroleum or its products, refining of. 
K. Smelting of tin, copper, zinc, or iron ores. 
L. Stockyards or slaughter of animals. 
M. Junk yards. Must be surrounded by a solid fence at least six feet high located within building lines and the junk piled not higher than the fence. 
Before granting such separate approval, the Council shall refer applications to the Commission for study, and report. If no report is received in thirty (30) days, the Council may assume approval of the application. 
2. City Council. The City Council shall then, after holding a public hearing, consider all of the following provisions in its determination upon the particular use at the location requested: 
A. The proposed location design, construction, and operation of the particular use adequately safeguards the health, safety and general welfare of persons residing or working in adjoining or surrounding property. 
B. Such use shall not impair an adequate supply of light and air to surrounding property. 
C. Such use shall not unduly increase congestion in the streets, or public danger of fire and safety. 
D. Such use shall not diminish or impair established property values in adjoining or surrounding property. 
E. Such use shall be in accord with the intent, purpose and spirit of this chapter and the Comprehensive Plan of the City. 
3. Required Conditions. 
A. The best practical means known for the disposal of refuse matter or water-carried waste, the abatement of obnoxious or offensive odor, dust, smoke, gas, noise, or similar nuisance shall be employed and subject to all State and Federal regulations. 
B. All principal buildings and all accessory buildings or structures, including loading and unloading facilities shall be located at least one hundred (100) feet from any “R” District boundary, except where adjoining a railroad right-of-way, and 50 feet from any commercial boundary. 
4. Accessory Uses. Uses of land or structure customarily incidental and subordinate to a permitted use in the HI District: 
A. Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to a permitted use. 
B. Living quarters for watchmen or custodians of industrial properties. 
5. 
Bulk Regulations. The following requirements shall provide for light and air around permitted uses and buildings in the HI District: 

6. 
Off-street Parking. The following off-street parking requirements shall apply in the HI District: 


Minimum Lot Area  Minimum Lot Width  Minimum Front Yard  Minimum Side Yard  Minimum Rear Yard  Maximum Height (lesser of)  
10,000 square feet  None  30 feet  8 feet, except when adjacent to another District, then it shall be 50 feet  20 feet, except when adjacent to another District it shall be 100 feet  3 stories or 45 feet  

A. All commercial uses shall provide one (1) parking space on the lot for each 300 square feet of floor area. 
CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA -1011 ­
B. All industrial uses shall provide one (1) parking space on the lot for each two (2) employees of maximum number employed at any one time. 
7. Off-street Loading. The following off-street loading requirements shall apply in the HI District: 
A. All activities or uses allowed in the HI District shall be provided with adequate receiving facilities accessible by motor vehicle off any adjacent service drive or open space on the same zoning lot. 
B. Loading shall not be permitted to block public right-of­way. 
8. Signs. The following sign regulations apply to the HI District: 
A. Off-premises signs are permitted. 
B. Off-premises signs shall comply with the setbacks of the districts they are located in. Other bulk regulations do not apply. Off-premises signs are governed by State and Federal regulations along highways, where zoning exists. 
C. No sign may be lighted in a manner which impairs the vision of the driver of any motor vehicle. 
D. No sign may obstruct the view of any highway or railroad so as to render dangerous the use of the highway. 
E. No sign may imitate or resemble an official traffic control sign, signal or device. 
F. Signs shall not encroach or extend over public right-of­way. 
G. No sign may obscure or physically interfere with an official traffic control sign, signal or device. 
H. No advertisement or advertising structure shall be posted, erected or maintained which simulates any official, directional or warning sign erected or maintained by the State, County, City or other governmental subdivision or which incorporates or makes use of lights simulating or resembling traffic signals or control signs. 
I. No advertisement shall be posted or maintained on rocks, fences, trees, or other perennial plants, or on poles maintained by public utilities. 
CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA 
-1012 ­
J. Signs shall not be permitted, the faces of which are visible from and are located within three hundred (300) feet of any public parkway, public square or public park, public or parochial school building, church building or cemetery, public library, public museum, post office or buildings designed and erected for the purpose of housing the principal, administrative and/or judicial seats of City, County, State and/or Federal government. 
K. Signs may be located on roofs of buildings subject to the following restrictions: 
(1) 
Such signs shall not exceed a height of twenty (20) feet above the roof level from the point of mounting. 

(2) 
The back of such signs shall be effectively shielded from public view by a building wall, by backing the face with another such sign face, by grouping such signs in clusters to conceal the exposed backs or by painting the exposed back a neutral color. Structural supports shall be painted a neutral color. 

(3) 
The total combined height of such signs and the building upon which they are placed shall not exceed the overall height limits of this district. 


L. Signs shall not be erected or maintained where the face of that sign exceeds six hundred (600) square feet in area, including borders and trim, and excluding base or apron supports and other structural members. 
M. Signs shall not be erected or maintained in excess of one 
(1) 
sign structure for each fifty (50) feet of lot frontage. In areas where permitted, these sign structures may be double-faced, back to back, or “V” type, with maximum internal angle of forty-five 

(45) 
degrees. 

N. 
No off-premises sign shall be permitted within a 300 foot radius of another off-premises sign. 

O. 
Sign structures which have become dilapidated and are likely to cause injury or degrade the surrounding neighborhood and signs which advertise a past event or past political election, are no longer legible, or are otherwise unsafe or untimely, are a nuisance or danger to the public. The Zoning/Building Official is authorized to remove, or to have removed, all dangerous or nuisance signs, the cost of which shall be borne by the sign owner. 


CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA 
-1013 ­
P. Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, it is unlawful for any person to erect, construct, enlarge, move or convert any off-premises sign in the City, or cause the same to be done without first obtaining a sign permit for each such sign from the Zoning/Building Official as required by this chapter. These directives shall not be construed to require any permit for the repainting, cleaning and other normal maintenance or repair of a sign or sign structure. The fees for such permit shall be set by resolution of the City Council. 
CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA 
-1014 ­
165.31 SUPPLEMENTARY DISTRICT REGULATIONS. 
1. Community Unit Plan. The owner or owners of any tract of land comprising an area of not less than ten (10) acres may submit to the City Council a plan for the use and development of the entire tract of land. The development shall be referred to the Planning Commission for study and report and for public hearing. If the Commission approves the development plan, the plan, together with the recommendation of the Commission, shall then be submitted to the Council for consideration and approval. If the Council approves the zoning plan, building permits may be issued even though the use of land and the location of the buildings to be erected in the area and the yards and open spaces contemplated by the plans do not conform in all respects to the district regulations of the district in which it is located except as follows: 
A. Only uses permitted in the “R” Districts shall be permitted. 
B. The average lot area per family contained in the proposed plan, exclusive of the area occupied by right-of-way, will not be less than the lot area per family required in the district in which the development is located. 
C. Said area shall then be designated on the official zoning map. 
2. 
Building Lines on Approved Plats. Whenever the plat of a land subdivision approved by the Planning Commission and on record in the office of the County Recorder shows a building line along any frontage for the purpose of creating a front yard or side street yard line, the building line thus shown shall apply along such frontage in place of any other yard line required in this chapter unless specific yard requirements in this chapter require a greater setback. 

3. 
Structures to Have Access. Every building hereafter erected or moved shall be on a lot adjacent to a public street, or with access to an approved private street, and all structures shall be so located on lots as to provide safe and convenient access for servicing, fire protection, and required off-street parking. 

4. 
Erection of More Than One Principal Structure on a Lot. In any district, more than one structure housing a permitted or permissible principal use may be erected on a single lot, provided that yard and other requirements of this chapter shall be met for each structure as though it were on an individual lot. 

5. 
Accessory Buildings. No accessory building may be erected in any required front yard and no separate accessory building may be 


erected within 4 feet of a main building. No accessory building shall be closer than 4 feet to the rear or side lot line. Accessory buildings located in the rear yard may not occupy more than 30 percent of the rear yard. No accessory building shall be used without occupancy of the principal building. Frost-free footings are required for all accessory buildings over 1,000 square feet. (Ord. 851 – Aug. 
06 Supp.) 
6. 
Fences. The construction of a fence or wall shall require a building/zoning permit. No fence or wall shall be constructed in other but a rear or side yard unless approval is granted by the Board of Adjustment as a variance. A side fence or wall or rear fence or wall shall be set back two (2) feet from the property line. Every side fence or wall in the front yard or front fence or wall shall be set back to a point parallel with the front setback of the primary structure located on the lot or the required structure setback on the lot, whichever setback is greater. A side fence or wall or rear fence or wall can be constructed inside the two (2) foot setback required with consent of the adjacent property owner in writing. Consent by adjacent property owners shall include a legal description of both properties, a notarized signature from all owners, and proof of proper recording with the County Recorder. The original consent will be binding on subsequent property owners unless provided otherwise. A side fence or wall or rear fence or wall can be constructed on the property line with the consent and agreement of both property owners involved. The consent and agreement shall include a legal description of both properties, a reasonable arrangement for maintenance and repair, a method of termination, a notarized signature of all owners, and proof of proper recording with the County Recorder. The original agreement will be binding on subsequent property owners unless provided otherwise. A rear fence or wall cannot exceed six (6) feet in height unless it is set back five (5) feet from the rear lot line. Side or front fences or walls cannot exceed six (6) feet in height. Any fence or wall which does not exceed fifteen (15) feet in length and is not constructed within two (2) feet of an adjacent property line must file an application for a building permit, however the application fee shall be waived. There shall be a limit of one (1) waived fence or wall application fee per property per year. 

7. 
Height Limits. Chimneys, church steeples, cooling towers, elevator bulkheads, fire towers, monuments, stacks, stage towers or scenery lofts, tank, water towers, ornamental towers, spires, wireless tower; grain elevators, or necessary mechanical appurtenances are exempt from height regulations in Sections 165.22 through 165.30. 


CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA -1016 ­
8. 
Sills, belt courses, cornices, and ornamental features may project only two feet into a required yard. 

9. 
Open fire escapes, fireproof outside stairways and balconies opening upon fire towers, and the ordinary projections of chimneys and flues into a rear yard for a distance of not more than 3½ feet when so placed as not to obstruct light and ventilation, may be permitted by the Zoning/Building Official. 

10. 
Terraces which do not extend above the level of the ground (first) floor may project into a required yard, provided these projections are distant at least two feet from the adjacent side lot line. 

11. 
Nothing in this chapter shall have the effect of prohibiting utility service lines. 

12. 
Yards and Visibility. On a corner lot in any district, nothing shall be erected, placed, planted or allowed to grow in such a manner as materially to impede vision between a height of three and ten feet above the centerline grades of the intersecting streets in the area bounded by the street lines of such corner lots and a line joining points along said street lines fifty feet from the point of the intersection. (See Diagram 4 at the end of this section.) 

13. 
All vehicular parking spaces located in required front yards shall be a minimum of ten (10) feet in width and be surfaced with gravel, concrete, or asphalt. 

14. 
Private swimming pools shall be allowed only in rear yards and shall not be allowed in front or side yards. 

15. 
Satellite Dishes. The placement of satellite dish antennas, either permanent or temporary, is permitted in any zoned district and shall be considered an accessory building. No satellite dish shall exceed a diameter of 12 feet except for commercial use. All dishes that exceed a diameter of 12 feet or are intended for commercial use applications require approval by special exception. Satellite dishes less than 2 feet in diameter are not considered structures, do not require a building permit, and may be attached to another structure according to local and State Building Code regulations. All other satellite dishes shall be located on the ground. Only one (1) satellite dish is permitted on a property at the same time except by special exception. 


CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA 
-1017 ­
DIAGRAM 4 

CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA 
-1018 ­
165.32 ENFORCEMENT AND INTERPRETATION. All questions of interpretation and enforcement shall be first presented to the Zoning/Building Official, or that person’s assistant, and such questions shall be presented to the Board of Adjustment only on appeal from the decision of the Zoning/Building Official, and recourse from the decisions of the Board of Adjustment shall be to the courts as provided by law and particularly by Chapter 414, Code of Iowa. 
165.33 AMENDMENTS. The regulations, restrictions, and boundaries may, from time to time, be amended, supplemented, changed, modified, or repealed, provided that at least seven days’ notice of the time and place of such hearing shall be published in a paper of general circulation in the City. In no case shall the notice be published more than 20 days prior to the hearing. The regulations, restrictions, and boundaries may, from time to time, be amended, supplemented, changed, modified, or repealed. Notwithstanding Section 414.2, as a part of an ordinance changing land from one zoning district to another zoning district or an ordinance approving a site development plan, a Council may impose conditions on a property owner which are in addition to existing regulations if the additional conditions have been agreed to in writing by the property owner before the public hearing requited under this section or any adjournment of the hearing. The conditions must be reasonable and imposed to satisfy public needs which are directly caused by the requested change. In case, however, of a written protest against a change or repeal which is filed with the City Clerk and signed by the owners of twenty percent or more of the area of the lots included in the proposed change or repeal, or by the owners of twenty percent or more of the property which is located within two hundred feet of the exterior boundaries of the property for which the change or repeal is proposed, the change or repeal shall not become effective except by the favorable vote of at least three-fourths of all the members of the Council. The protest, if filed, must be filed before or at the public hearing. Proposed amendments not recommended by the Planning and Zoning Commission shall become effective only upon a favorable vote of three fourths (¾) of the members of the City Council. All zoning amendment application forms shall be approved by resolution of the City Council. 
165.34 PENALTIES FOR VIOLATION. Violation of the provisions of this chapter with any of its requirements (including violations of conditions and safeguards established in connection with grants of variances or special exceptions) shall be a violation of this Code of Ordinances. Each day such violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the City from taking such other legal action as is necessary to prevent any violation. 
165.35 SCHEDULE OF FEES, CHARGES, AND EXPENSES. The City Council shall establish a schedule of fees, charges, and expenses and a collection procedure for zoning district changes, zoning permits, appeals, and other matters pertaining to this chapter. The schedule of fees shall be posted in the office of the Zoning/Building Official and the City Clerk and may be altered or amended only by the City Council, as recommended by the Planning and Zoning Commission. Until all applicable fees, charges, and expenses have been paid in full, no action shall be taken on any application or appeal. 
165.36 COMPLAINTS REGARDING VIOLATIONS. Whenever a violation of this chapter occurs, or is alleged to have occurred, any person may file a written complaint. Such complaint, stating fully the causes and basis thereof, shall be filed with the Zoning/Building Official. The Zoning/Building Official shall record properly such complaint, immediately investigate, and take action thereon as provided by this chapter. 
165.37 ADULT ENTERTAINMENT BUSINESS REGULATIONS. 
1. 
Purpose. It is the purpose and intent of this section to regulate adult entertainment businesses in order to limit their adverse impact and detrimental secondary effects in the community while at the same time permitting lawful businesses to conduct operations within the community. By the nature of their business, adult entertainment businesses create serious, objectionable operational characteristics, which are magnified when located in close proximity to residences, churches, schools, day care centers and parks. Special regulation of adult entertainment businesses is necessary to insure that no adverse secondary effects will contribute to the blighting or downgrading of surrounding neighborhoods and areas. These regulations are necessary to protect the minors of the community from these businesses by restricting their location and to protect the health, safety and general welfare of all the residents of the community, prevent crime, protect the City's retail trade, maintain property values and protect and preserve the quality of neighborhoods and are not to suppress the expression of unpopular views. 

2. 
Definitions. For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings given herein. 


A. "Adult booth" shall mean any area of an adult entertainment establishment that is set off from the remainder of such establishment by one or more walls, partitions or other dividers and which is used to show, exhibit, play, display or otherwise demonstrate any adult materials or to view any live performance that is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on the exposure, depiction or description of any specified anatomical areas or the performance or simulation of any specified sexual activities. 
B. "Adult cabaret" shall mean any commercial establishment that as a substantial or significant portion of its business provides any of the following: 
(1) 
Persons who appear nude; 

(2) 
Live performances that are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on the exposure, depiction or description of a specified anatomical area or the performance or simulation of a specified sexual activity; or 

(3) 
Films, motion pictures, video or audio cassettes, slides, computer displays or other visual representations, recordings, imagery, illustration or depictment of any kind that are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on the exposure, depiction or description of any specified sexual activity. 


C. "Adult establishment" or "adult entertainment business" shall mean an adult store, adult cabaret, adult theater, nude model studio, sexual encounter center, adult motel or escort agency. 
D. "Adult material" shall mean any of the following, whether new or used: 
(1) 
Books, magazines, periodicals, or other printed matter or digitally stored materials, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, audio cassettes, slides, computer displays or other visual or audio representations or recordings of any kind, DVD, CD-ROM, or similar item that is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on the exposure, depiction, description, imagery or visual representation of any specified anatomical area or the performance or simulation of any specified sexual activity. 

(2) 
Instruments, novelties, devices or paraphernalia that are designed for use in connection with specified sexual activities or that depict, describe or portray specified anatomical areas; except that this definition shall not include those items used for birth control or for the prevention of sexually transmitted diseases. 


E. "Adult motel" shall mean any motel, hotel or similar business that (1) offers accommodations to the public for any 
CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA 
-1021 ­
form of consideration; and provides patrons with closed-circuit television transmission, telephones, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or other material that is characterized by the depiction or description of any specified anatomical area or any specified sexual activity; and has a sign that is visible from the public right-of-way that advertises the availability of adult materials; or (2) offers a room or suite for consideration for a period of time that is less than ten hours; or (3) allows a tenant, occupant or patron of a room or suite to sublet the room or suite for a period of less than ten hours. 
F. "Adult store" shall mean any commercial establishment that (1) contains one or more adult booths, or (2) as a substantial or significant portion of its business offers for sale, rental, exchange or viewing any adult materials. Adult stores do not include commercial establishments that offer for sale, rental, exchange or viewing any adult materials as a sideline or adjunct to sales, rentals, exchanges or viewings of materials other than adult materials. 
G. "Adult theater" shall mean any commercial establishment that as a substantial or significant portion of its business features or provides films, motion pictures, video or audio cassettes, slides, or other visual representations, recordings, imagery, illustration or depictment of any kind that are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on the exposure, depiction or description of any specified anatomical area or the performance or simulation of any specified sexual activity. 
H. "Commercial establishment" shall mean any place where admission, services, performances, or products are provided for or upon payment of any form of consideration. 
I. "Escort" shall mean a person who, for pecuniary consideration, agrees or offers to act as a companion, guide or date for another person, or who agrees or offers to privately model lingerie or to privately perform a striptease dance or otherwise perform or appear before another person while nude in or about any place of public or private resort or any private quarter or business premises. 
J. "Escort agency" shall mean any person or business entity furnishing or offering to furnish, or advertising to furnish escorts as one of its business purposes, for a fee, tip or any other form of consideration. 
CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA 
-1022 ­
K. "Nude model studio" shall mean any place where a person who appears nude is provided for the purpose of being sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured, photographed or similarly depicted by any other person who has paid money or any other form of consideration, barter or exchange, or for whose benefit someone else has paid money or any other form of consideration, barter or exchange, for the purpose of being allowed to observe the person appearing nude being sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured, photographed or similarly depicted. Nude model studio does not include public or private colleges or universities licensed by the State of Iowa that offer art, modeling or anatomical drawing classes. 
L. "Nude or state of nudity" shall mean a state of dress or undress that exposes to view (1) less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic region, anus, or female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola, but not including any portion of the cleavage exhibited by a dress, blouse, shirt, leotard, bathing suit or other wearing apparel provided the areola is not exposed; or (2) human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state even if completely and opaquely covered, or any device that when worn, simulates human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state. 
M. "Sexual encounter center" shall mean any business or commercial establishment that, for consideration, offers (1) physical contact in the form of wrestling or tumbling between persons of the opposite sex, or (2) activities between two or more persons regardless of gender when one or more of the persons is in a nude condition, or (3) where two or more persons may congregate, associate or consort in connection with specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, or (4) where two persons may congregate, associate, or consort, in a private room, suite, or similar enclosure, with one of the two persons modeling lingerie, dancing in a sexually suggestive manner, or some similar activity for the pleasure or entertainment of the other. Sexual encounter center does not include a gymnastic, acrobatic, athletic or similar demonstration or show. 
N. "Specified anatomical area" shall mean any of the following: 
(1) Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals; pubic region; buttocks; anus; or female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola but 
CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA 
-1023 ­
not including any portion of the cleavage exhibited by a dress, blouse, leotard, bathing suit or other wearing apparel provided the areola is not exposed; 
(2) Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered or any device or covering that when worn, simulates human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, 
O. "Specified sexual activity" shall mean any of the following: 
(1) 
The fondling or touching of one person's human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus or female breasts by another person; 

(2) 
Sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including without limitation, cunnilingus, fellatio, anilingus, bestiality, intercourse, oral copulation or sodomy; 

(3) 
Masturbation, actual or simulated; 

(4) 
Excretory or urinary functions as part of or in connection with any of the activities set forth in Subsection (1), (2), or (3) of this definition. 


P. "Substantial or significant portion of its business" shall mean that ten percent or more of the establishment's income is derived from the sale, rental, exchange or viewing of any adult material; or ten percent or more of the establishment's stock in trade or floor space is utilized for the display of any adult material; or that one or more persons appearing, performing or working in a state of nudity constitutes a fundamental or essential part of or attraction of the business. Regardless of the foregoing, any business establishment that advertises or holds itself out as "XXX", "adult", or "sex" in conjunction with adult material and/or nude appearances or performances is deemed to meet the substantial portion of its business standard. 
Q. "Adult amusement arcade" shall mean an establishment having as one of its principal uses one or more of the following: customer-operated motion picture devices, peep shows, viewing area, or similar devices either coin, token or slug operated, or which in consideration of an entrance fee, displays materials distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on depictions of specified sexual acts or specified anatomical areas. 
CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA 
-1024 ­
3. Adult Establishment Location Requirements. 
A. Adult establishments shall only be permitted in specific zoning districts (AC, LI and HI), 
B. No adult establishments shall be located, established, maintained or operated on any lot that has a property line within five hundred feet of the property line of any other lot on which another adult establishment is located, established, maintained or operated; nor shall more than one adult establishment be located on any lot; nor shall any other business be located, established, maintained or operated on any lot on which an adult establishment is located, established, maintained or operated. 
C. No adult establishment shall be located, established, maintained or operated on any lot that has a property line within five hundred feet of the property line of: 
(1) 
Any residentially zoned property (RS, RD and RM); 

(2) 
A public or private nursery school, a public or private elementary or secondary school; 

(3) 
A childcare facility licensed by the state of Iowa; 

(4) 
A church, synagogue, mosque, or other religious facility or institution; 

(5) 
A public park including public recreational paths or trails; 

(6) 
A public or private cemetery; or 

(7) 
A public housing facility. 


D. No adult establishment shall be located, established, maintained or operated on any lot that has a property line within five hundred feet of the public right-of-way for any arterial street in Perry. 
E. For purposes of this section, distances shall be measured in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the nearest point on the property line of the lot on which the adult establishment is located to the nearest point on the property line of uses protected in subsection C and D of this section, or the nearest point of the property line of the other adult establishment, as the case may be. It is the adult establishment's obligation to provide the City's building official with a survey acceptable and satisfactory to the building official that demonstrates the establishment meets the requirements of this section. 
CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA -1025 ­
4. 
Other Legal Provisions. Adult establishments located, maintained or operated in the City shall comply, in addition to complying with all other applicable regulations set forth in this code, with all regulations set forth in this chapter. In the event of a conflict between the provisions of any other such regulations and the regulations set forth in this chapter, the regulations set forth in this chapter shall control the location of the adult establishment. Nothing in this chapter is intended to authorize, legalize or permit the establishment, operation or maintenance of any business, building or use, which violates any provision of any statute, ordinance or regulation. 

5. 
Adult Establishment Sign Regulations. 


A. Signage. All signs for adult establishments shall be flat wall signs. The maximum allowable sign area shall be one square foot of sign area per foot of lot frontage on the street, but under no circumstances may a sign exceed thirty-two square feet. The maximum number of signs shall be one per lot frontage. Signs otherwise permitted pursuant to this subsection shall contain only 
(1) 
the name of the adult establishment conducting business on the premises, and/or (2) the specific type of adult entertainment being conducted on the premises. 

B. 
Exterior Display. No adult establishment shall be maintained or operated in any manner that causes, creates, or allows public viewing of any adult material, or any entertainment depicting, describing, or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, from any public rights-of-way or private property other than the lot on which the licensed premises is located. No portion of the exterior of an adult establishment shall utilize or contain flashing lights, search lights, spotlights, or other similar lighting systems; or any words, lettering, photographs, silhouettes, drawings or pictorial representations of any manner except to the extent allowed pursuant to subsection A of this section with regard to signs. This subsection shall apply to any advertisement, display, promotional material, decoration, sign, performance, show, and to any window, door or other opening to the adult establishment. 


(Ord. 802 – Nov. 03 Supp.) 
CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA 
-1026 ­
EDITOR’S NOTE  
The following ordinances, not codified herein, which amend the Official Zoning Map as provided in Section 165.04, have been adopted:  
ORDINANCE  ADOPTED  ORDINANCE  ADOPTED  
725 (Official Zoning Map)  May 18, 1998  
733  August 2, 1999  
751  February 22, 2000  
753  May 1, 2000  
754  May 15, 2000  
761  July 17, 2000  
763  January 15, 2001  
764  January 15, 2001  
769  November 5, 2001  
785  August 19, 2002  
795  June 16, 2003  
797  August 18, 2003  
845  October 17, 2005  
862  September 7, 2007  
863  September 7, 2007  
867  October 15, 2007  







CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA 
-1027 ­[The next page is 1045] 
CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA 
-1028 ­
CHAPTER 166 
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS 

166.01 Purpose 	166.15 Easements 
166.02 Jurisdiction 	166.16 Sidewalks 
166.03 Administration 	166.17 Acre Subdivisions 
166.04 Enforcement 	166.18 Dedication and Reservation of Land for Open 
166.05 Rules and Definitions 	Space and Recreational Facilities 
166.06 Application Procedure 	166.19 Preliminary Plat Requirements 
166.07 Procedure for Conditional Approval of 	166.20 Final Plat – Preparation and Filing Preliminary Plat 166.21 Exceptions 
166.08 Procedures for Approval of Final Plat 166.22 Penalty for Violation 
166.09 Streets – General Requirements 166.23 Failure to Complete Improvements 
166.10 Streets – Design Standards 	166.24 Procedure for Improvements 
166.11 Drainage and Storm Sewers 	166.25 Acceptance of Dedication Offers 
166.12 Water Facilities 	166.26 Inspection of Improvements 
166.13 Sanitary Sewer Facilities 	166.27 Maintenance of Improvements 
166.14 Utilities 	166.28 Changes and Amendments 
166.01 PURPOSE. In the best interests of the City and to assist the subdivider in harmonizing his or her interests with those of the City, the following regulations are adopted in order that adherence to the same will bring results that are beneficial to both parties. It is deemed necessary to establish minimum standards for the design and development of all new subdivisions in order to eliminate piecemeal planning and to insure sound community growth and safeguarding of the interests of the homeowner, the subdivider, and the local government. It is the duty of the Planning and Zoning Commission to require that all regulations set forth in this chapter are complied with, before giving their approval. It is the purpose of this chapter to make regulations and requirements for the platting of land which the Council deems necessary for the health, safety and general welfare of the citizens. 
166.02 JURISDICTION. Every owner of any tract or parcel of land who has subdivided or shall hereafter subdivide or plat said tract or parcel into three or more plats, for the purpose of laying out an addition, subdivision, building lot or lots, acreage or suburban lots within the City or within two miles from the incorporated territory of the City, shall cause plats of such area to be made in the form, and containing the information, as hereinafter set forth, before selling any lots therein contained or placing the plat on record. In accordance with Section 354.9 of the Code of Iowa, all subdivision plats situated outside of but within two miles of the incorporated territory of the City shall be subject to review and approval under the provisions of this chapter. 
166.03 ADMINISTRATION. The following offices of the government of the City are concerned with the administration of this chapter. 
1. Council. The Council is vested with the following responsibilities with regard to subdivision control: 
A. Approval or disapproval of all preliminary and final plats referred to it by the Commission. 
B. Approval or disapproval of all variations and exceptions recommended by the Commission. 
C. Amendment of the regulations of this chapter when found necessary and desirable, as hereinafter provided. 
D. Initiation of appropriate proceedings to enforce the provisions of this chapter. 
2. Commission. The City Planning and Zoning Commission shall administer the provisions of this chapter, and in furtherance of said authority, shall: 
A. Maintain permanent and current records of this chapter, including amendments thereto. 
B. Receive and file all preliminary plats and final plats (together with applications). 
C. Forward copies of the preliminary plat to other appropriate offices and agencies for their recommendations and report. 
D. Forward all preliminary plats to the Council with recommendations. 
E. Receive and file all final plats, and check their compliance with the preliminary plat. 
F. Forward, with recommendations, to the Council all final plats. 
G. Make all other determinations required by the regulations herein. 
166.04 ENFORCEMENT. 
1. 
No owner, or agent of the owner, of any parcel of land located in a proposed subdivision shall transfer or sell such parcel before a plat of said subdivision has been approved by the Council, in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, and filed with the County Recorder. 

2. 
The subdivision of any lot or any parcel of land by the use of metes and bounds description with the intent of evading this chapter, for the purpose of sale, transfer, or lease shall be subject to all of the requirements and regulations contained in this chapter. 


3. 
No building or repair permit shall be issued for the construction or repair of any building or structure located on a lot or plot subdivided or sold in violation of these regulations. An original tract, however, may be divided into two (2) lots or tracts and not be subject to the provisions of this section. 

4. 
No plat of a subdivision shall be approved which does not comply with all of the provisions of this chapter, except as may be allowed in Section 166.21. 


166.05 RULES AND DEFINITIONS. As used in this chapter, the word “lot” includes the words “plot,” “piece,” and “parcel.” The phrase “used for” includes the phrases “arranged for,” “designed for,” “intended for,” “maintained for,” and “occupied for.” The following terms are also defined for use in this chapter: 
1. 
“Alley” means a public right-of-way less than 20 feet in width which affords only a secondary means of access to abutting property. 

2. 
“Block” means a tract of land within a subdivision that is entirely bounded by streets or by a combination of streets and public parks, cemeteries, railroad rights-of-way, bulkhead lines or shorelines of waterways, or corporate boundary lines of the City. 

3. 
“Building setback line” means a line within a lot or parcel of land, so designated on the plats, between which line and a street no building or structure may be erected. 

4. 
“Collector street” means a street intended to carry vehicular traffic from minor streets to major streets and/or thoroughfare systems. 

5. 
“Commission” means the Planning and Zoning Commission of the City. 

6. 
“Comprehensive Plan” means the Comprehensive Plan adopted by the Council, known as the Comprehensive Plan for Perry, together with all changes and amendments thereto which are adopted from time to time. 

7. 
“Cul-de-sac” means a minor street having one open end and being permanently terminated by a vehicular turnaround. 

8. 
“Days” refer to calendar days. 

9. 
“Design standards” means the specifications to land owners or subdividers for the preparation of plats, indicating among other things, but not limited to, the optimum, minimum, and maximum dimensions of such items as right-of-way, blocks, easements, and lots. 


10. 
“Developer” means the owner or agent under legal authority of the owner who undertakes to cause a parcel of land to be designed, constructed, and recorded as a subdivision. 

11. 
“Easement” means a grant by a property owner of the use of land for construction or maintenance of facilities in accordance with the Comprehensive Plan and the requirements of these regulations or any utility company. 

12. 
“Engineer” means a registered engineer authorized to practice civil engineering, as defined by the Registration Act of the State of Iowa. 

13. 
“Escrow agreement” means an agreement between the subdivider and the City whereby a percentage of the sale price of each lot in the subdivision, when sold, shall be deposited in escrow as a guarantee for the installation of the required improvements, the percentage to be determined by the City Engineer or Council. 

14. 
“Final plat” means the map or drawing and necessary legal papers, to engineering accuracy and containing the items specified by these regulations, on which the subdivision plan is presented, in the form which if approved will be filed and recorded with the County Recorder. 

15. 
“Frontage street” means a street contiguous to, and generally paralleling, an expressway, parkway, or through street. It is designed so as to intercept, collect, and distribute traffic desiring to cross, enter, or leave such a highway and to furnish access to property that otherwise would be isolated as a result of the controlled access feature. 

16. 
“Grading plan” means a drawing of a proposed subdivision with plans and specifications for grading which is intended to represent the layout which will be approved for construction by the Commission and Council. 

17. 
“Improvements” means changes and additions to land necessary to prepare it for building sites, and including street paving and curbing, grading, monuments, drainage ways, sewers, fire hydrants, water mains, sidewalks, and other public works and appurtenances. 

18. 
“Intersection” means the area embraced within the prolongation or connection of the lateral curb lines, or if none, then the lateral boundary lines of the roadways of two highways which join one another at or approximately at right angles or the area within which vehicles traveling upon different highways joining at any other angle may come in conflict. 

19. 
“Lot” means a parcel of land, abutting on a street, whose area, in addition to the parts thereof occupied or hereafter to be occupied by a 


CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA -1048 ­
building, structure, and/or accessory buildings, is sufficient to provide the yards required by the regulations of the Zoning Regulations. 
20. 
“Maintenance bond” means a surety bond, cash deposit, or escrow agreement made out to the City in an amount equal to the full cost of the improvements which are required by this chapter, said cost being estimated by the City Engineer or Council, and said surety bond or cash deposit being legally sufficient to secure to the City that said improvements shall be kept in good repair from the time of acceptance by the City of said improvements for such period of time as is specified by this chapter. 

21. 
“Major thoroughfare” means an arterial street with intersections at grade and direct access to abutting property, and on which geometric design and traffic control measures are used to expedite the safe movement of through traffic. 

22. 
“Minor street” means a street used primarily for access to the abutting properties, having a minimum right-of-way width of fifty-five 


(55) feet. 
23. 
“Outlot” means a parcel of land within a subdivision and which has been included on a preliminary or final plat but not designated as a buildable lot due to insufficient size and/or frontage or peculiar site or topographical problems. 

24. 
“Performance bond” means a surety bond or cash deposit made out to the City in an amount equal to the full cost of the improvements which are required by this chapter, and said surety bond or cash deposit being legally sufficient to secure to the City that said improvements will be constructed in accordance with this chapter. 

25. 
“Plat” means a graphic presentation on which the subdivider’s plan for the subdivision of land is presented and which is submitted for approval and subsequent action. 

26. 
“Preliminary plat” means a map or plan showing all the facts needed to enable the Commission to determine whether the proposed layout of the land is satisfactory from the standpoint of public interest. 

27. 
“Replat” means a plat representing land which has previously been included in a recorded plat. 

28. 
“Roadway” means that portion of the street available for vehicular traffic and where curbs are laid, the portion from back to back curbs. 

29. 
“Street” means an improved right-of-way dedicated to public use, which serves as a primary access to abutting lands. 


CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA -1049 ­
30. 
“Street, private” means any street which is under the jurisdiction of an individual, corporation, or trustee, or any street which is privately owned or established. 

31. 
“Subdivision” means the division of land into three (3) or more lots for the purpose, whether immediate or future, or transfer of ownership or building development; or, any change in existing street lines or public easement. The term, when appropriate to the context, relates to the process of subdividing or to the land subdivided, or the resubdivision of land heretofore divided or platted into lots or other divisions of land, or if a new street is involved, any division of land. 

32. 
“Subdivider” means any person commencing proceedings under this chapter to effect a subdivision of land hereunder. 


All other terms used in these regulations shall have their normal meanings, except that terms common to engineering and surveying shall be used in their professional sense. 
166.06 APPLICATION PROCEDURE. 
1. 
Three (3) copies of the preliminary plat and supplementary material specified shall be submitted to the Commission with written application for approval. These materials shall be retained by the Commission. 

2. 
The application for approval of the preliminary plat shall be accompanied by a certified check or money order payable to the City in the amount of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) plus three dollars ($3.00) for each lot in the proposed subdivision. 

3. 
Following review of the preliminary plat and other data submitted in compliance with these regulations, and following negotiations with the subdivider on changes deemed advisable and the kind and extent of improvements to be made by the subdivider, the Commission shall within forty-five (45) days act on the plat and data as submitted or modified, and, if approved, state the conditions of such approval, if any, or, if disapproved, the Commission shall express its disapproval and its reasons therefor. 


166.07 PROCEDURE FOR CONDITIONAL APPROVAL OF PRELIMINARY PLAT. 
1. Within fifteen (15) days of the Commission’s decision, they shall inform the subdivider that the plans and datum submitted or as modified do or do not meet the objectives of these regulations. When the Commission finds that the plans and datum do not meet the objectives of these regulations, it shall express its reasons therefor. 
2. 
If the Commission does not act within the forty-five (45) days, the preliminary plat shall be deemed to be approved as is. The approval of the preliminary plat shall be null and void unless the final plat is presented to the Commission within one hundred eighty (180) days of the date of approval. 

3. 
Approval of the preliminary plat shall not constitute approval of the final plat. 

4. 
Action must be taken by the Council within thirty days after the preliminary plat has been submitted for approval. 

5. 
When the preliminary plat has been approved, one copy of the plat shall be returned to the applicant, with street addresses annotated to the lots. 


166.08 PROCEDURES FOR APPROVAL OF FINAL PLAT. 
1. 
The final plat shall conform substantially to the preliminary plat as approved, and, if desired by the subdivider, it may constitute only that portion of the approved preliminary plat which the subdivider proposes to record and develop at the time, provided, however, that such portion conforms to all requirements of these regulations. 

2. 
Six (6) copies of the final plat and other exhibits required for approval shall be prepared as specified in Section 166.20 and shall be submitted to the Commission. The plat shall be accompanied by a notice from the Council stating that there has been filed with and approved by the Council a bond which shall: 

A. Run to the Mayor and Council; 
B. Be in an amount determined by the Mayor and Council to be sufficient to complete the improvements and installations in compliance with these regulations; 
C. Be with surety by a company entered and licensed to do business in the State of Iowa; and 
D. Specify the time for the completion of the improvements and installations. 

3. 
Application for approval of the final plat shall be submitted in writing to the Commission at least fifteen (15) days prior to the meeting at which it is to be considered. 


166.09 STREETS – GENERAL REQUIREMENTS. 
1. 
Grading Plan. Roads shall be graded to conform to the construction standards and specifications recommended by the City Engineer and approved by the Council prior to final plat endorsement. 

2. 
Topography and Arrangement. 

A. Roads shall be related appropriately to the topography. Local roads should be curved wherever possible to avoid conformity of lot appearance. All streets shall be arranged so as to obtain as many as possible of the building sites at, or above, the grades of the streets. Grades of streets shall conform as closely as possible to the original topography. A combination of steep grades and curves shall be avoided. (See Section 166.10 Design Standards) 
B. All streets shall be properly integrated with the existing and proposed system of thoroughfares and dedicated right-of-way as established by the Comprehensive Plan. 
C. Minor or local streets should be laid out to discourage use by through traffic and to permit efficient drainage and utility systems. The use of curvilinear streets, cul-de-sacs, and loop streets shall be encouraged where such use will result in a more desirable layout. 
D. In business and industrial developments, the streets and other access-ways shall be planned in connection with the grouping of buildings, location of rail facilities, alleys, truck loading and maneuvering areas, and walks and parking areas so as to minimize conflict of movement between the various types of traffic, including pedestrian. 
E. The layout of the streets shall afford maximum solar access to a minimum of eighty percent (80%) of all dwelling units within the proposed plat. 

3. 
Arrangement of Streets. The arrangement of streets shall provide for the continuation of principal streets between adjacent properties when such continuation is necessary for convenient movement of traffic, effective fire protection, for efficient provision of utilities, and where such continuation is in accordance with the Comprehensive Plan. If the adjacent property is undeveloped and the street must be a dead-end street temporarily, the right-of-way shall be extended to the property line. A temporary T-or L-shaped turnabout shall be provided on all temporary dead-end streets, with the notation on the subdivision plat that land outside the normal street right-of-way shall revert to abuttors whenever the street is continued. The Commission may limit the length of 


CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA -1052 ­
temporary dead-end streets in accordance with the design standards of these regulations. 
4. 
Cul-de-sacs. Where a cul-de-sac is permitted, its terminus shall normally not be nearer to the boundary of the subdivision than the minimum lot depth requirement of the Zoning District in which it is located. The Commission may require the reservation of an appropriate easement at the closed end of the cul-de-sac to accommodate drainage facilities, pedestrian traffic, and/or utilities. Minimum turnaround radii and maximum length shall be limited as provided by Section 166.10 of this chapter. 

5. 
Proposed Streets. Proposed streets shall be extended to the boundary lines of the tract to be subdivided, unless prevented by topography or other physical conditions, or unless in the opinion of the Commission such extension is not necessary or desirable for the coordination of the layout of the subdivision with the existing layout or the most advantageous future development or adjacent tracts. 

6. 
New Perimeter Streets. Street systems shall be laid out so as to avoid perimeter half-streets. The Commission may authorize a new perimeter street where the subdivider improves and dedicates the entire required street right-of-way width within his or her own subdivision boundaries. 

7. 
Reserve Strips. The creation of reserve strips shall not be permitted adjacent to a proposed street in such a manner as to deny access from adjacent property to such street. 

8. 
Widening and Realignment of Existing Roads. Where a subdivision borders an existing narrow road or when the Comprehensive Plan indicates plans for realignment or widening a road that would require use of some of the land in the subdivision, the applicant shall be required to dedicate such areas as are required for widening or realignment of such roads. The Council may at its discretion require that such streets also be improved by the subdivider at his or her own expense to the full width as required by these subdivision regulations. Land reserved for any road purposes shall not be counted in satisfying yard or area requirements of the Zoning Regulations. 

9. 
Alleys. Alleys may be required in business and industrial subdivisions for adequate access to block interiors and to off-street loading and parking spaces, but shall as a rule not be permitted in residential subdivisions. 


CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA 
-1053 ­
10. Railroads and Limited Access Highways. Railroad rights-of-way and limited access highways where so located as to affect the subdivision of adjoining lands shall be treated as follows: 
A. In residential districts a buffer strip at least 25 feet in depth in addition to the normal depth of the lot required in the district shall be provided adjacent to the railroad right-of-way or limited access highway. This strip shall be part of the platted lots and shall be designated on the plat: “This strip is reserved for screening. The placement of structures hereon is prohibited.” 
B. In districts zoned for business, commercial, or industrial uses the nearest street extending parallel or approximately parallel to the railroad shall, wherever practicable, be at a sufficient distance therefrom to ensure suitable depth for commercial or industrial sites. 
C. Streets parallel to the railroad when intersecting a street which crosses the railroad at grade shall to the extent practicable, be at a distance of at least 150 feet from the railroad right-of-way. Such distance shall be determined with due consideration of the minimum distance required for future separation of grades by means of appropriate approach gradients. 
11. 
Bridges. Bridges of primary benefit to the subdivider, as determined by the Council, shall be constructed at the full expense of the applicant without reimbursement from the City. The sharing expense for the construction of bridges not of primary benefit to the applicant as determined by the Council will be fixed by special agreement between the Council and the subdivider. Said cost shall be charged to the subdivider pro rata as the percentage of his or her land developed and so served. 

12. 
Street Names. Street names shall be sufficiently different in sound and in spelling from other streets’ names in the City so as not to cause confusion. A road which is or is planned as a continuation of an existing road shall bear the same name. 

13. 
Traffic Regulatory Signs. The applicant shall deposit with the local government at the time of final subdivision approval the sum of fifty dollars ($50.00) for each road sign required by the City Engineer at all road intersections. The City shall install all road signs before issuance of certificates of occupancy for any residence on the streets approved. 

14. 
Street Name Signs. Street name signs shall be provided at the subdivider’s expense at all intersections within or abutting the 


CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA -1054 ­
subdivision. The type and location of said signs shall be recommended by the City Engineer and approved by the Council. 
15. Street Lights. Street lights shall be installed at the subdivider’s expense in accordance with design and specification standards recommended by the City Engineer and approved by the Council. 
166.10 STREETS – DESIGN STANDARDS. 
1. 
Rights-of-way. Street rights-of-way shall have a minimum width as shown in the Comprehensive Plan for the type of street involved. 

2. 
Surfacing and Improvements. All roadways to be dedicated to the City shall be surfaced with six (6) inches of Portland Cement concrete with integral curb and gutter. Minimum pavement width for local streets shall generally be thirty-one (31) feet, but pavement widths of thirty-six 


(36) feet may be required by the Council where such additional width is deemed to be in the public’s interest. Said improvements and surfacing shall be in accordance with design specifications and standards recommended by the City Engineer and approved by the Council prior to final plat endorsement, and shall whenever possible be installed by the subdivider after sewer and water utilities have been installed by the subdivider. Adequate provisions shall be made for culverts, drains and bridges. 
3. 
Minimum Radius of Curves. Minimum radius of curves shall be one hundred (100) feet on the centerline for any residential local or collector street, and two hundred (200) feet on any commercial/ industrial, local or collector street. Minimum radius for any arterial street shall be three hundred (300) feet on the centerline, except that the Council may require a larger radius upon recommendation from the City Engineer. 

4. 
Minimum Length of Tangents. Minimum length of tangents between reverse curves shall be one hundred (100) feet for any local residential street and one hundred fifty (150) feet for any residential collector street. Minimum length of said tangent for any local or collector commercial/industrial street shall be two hundred (200) feet, and minimum tangent for any arterial shall be three hundred (300) feet. 

5. 
Permanent Cul-de-sacs. Permanent cul-de-sacs may be permitted if such arrangement will improve the subdivision design, but shall in no case exceed five hundred (500) feet in length or serve more than fourteen 


(14) dwelling units. Minimum pavement width shall be thirty-one (31) feet. A circular turn-around shall be provided having a minimum right­of-way radius of fifty-five (55) feet and a minimum pavement curb radius of forty-five (45) feet. Temporary dead-end streets shall not exceed one thousand (1,000) feet in length nor serve more than twenty-five (25) dwelling units, and shall be provided with a temporary turnabout as provided by Section 166.09(3) of this chapter. Said temporary turnabout shall be surfaced with a dust-retardant surfacing as approved by the Council. 
6. 
Cross-slope On All Street. The cross-slope on all streets, including intersections, shall not exceed three percent (3%). 

7. 
Intersections. 


A. Streets shall be laid out so as to intersect as nearly as possible at right angles. A proposed intersection of two (2) new streets at an angle of less than seventy-five degrees (75º) shall not be acceptable. An oblique street should be curved approaching an intersection and should be approximately at right angles for at least one hundred (100) feet therefrom. Not more than two (2) streets shall intersect at any one point unless specifically approved by the Council. 
B. Proposed new intersections along one side of an existing street should, wherever practicable, coincide with any existing intersections on the opposite side of such street. Street jogs with centerline offsets of less than one hundred fifty (150) feet shall not be permitted, except where specifically approved by the Council. Where any major street is intersected by another street, the alignment of said intersecting street shall generally be continuous. 
C. Minimum curb radius at the intersection of two (2) local streets shall be at least twenty (20) feet; and minimum curb radius at an intersection involving a collector or arterial street shall be at least twenty-five (25) feet; provided that at any intersection where a curb radius has been previously established, such radius shall be used as standard. Alley intersections and abrupt changes in alignment within a block shall have the corners cut off in accordance with standard engineering practice to permit safe vehicular movement. 
D. Where any street intersection will involve earth banks or existing vegetation inside any lot corner that would create a traffic hazard by limiting visibility, the developer shall cut such ground and/or vegetation (including trees) in connection with the grading of the public right-of-way to provide an adequate sight distance. 
166.11 DRAINAGE AND STORM SEWERS. 
1. 
General Requirements. The Council shall not approve any plat of subdivision which does not make adequate provision for drainage of storm or flood water runoff. The storm water drainage system shall be separate and independent of any sanitary sewer system. Storm sewers, where required, shall be designed according to the method recommended by the City Engineer and approved by the Council, and a copy of design computations shall be submitted along with plans. Inlets should be provided so that surface water is not carried across any intersection, nor for a distance of more than six hundred (600) feet in the gutter. When calculations indicate that curb capacities are exceeded at a point, no further allowance shall be made for flow beyond that point, and basins shall be used to intercept flow at that point. Surface water drainage patterns shall be shown for each and every lot and block. 

2. 
Drainage. The applicant may be required by the Council to carry away by pipe or open ditch any spring or surface water that may exist either previously to, or as a result of the subdivision. Such drainage facilities shall be constructed in accordance with the construction standards and specifications approved by the Council. 

3. 
Storm Sewers. Underground storm sewers systems shall be constructed throughout the subdivision and connected to an existing storm sewer if feasible. If no suitable outlets are available with a reasonable distance but a public storm sewer will be provided eventually, as determined by the City Engineer and the Council, the developer shall make arrangements for future storm water disposal by a public utility system at the time the plat receives final approval. Provision for such connection shall be included in the performance bond or escrow agreement required for the subdivision plat. The subdivider shall also provide a suitable interim outfall or drainage system as approved by the Council. 

4. 
Accommodation of Upstream Drainage Areas. A culvert or other drainage facility should in each case be large enough to accommodate potential runoff from its entire upstream drainage area, whether inside or outside the subdivision. The City Engineer shall determine the necessary size of the facility, based on the provisions of the construction standards and specifications assuming conditions of maximum potential watershed development as established by land uses projected in the Comprehensive Plan, and as permitted by the zoning regulations applicable to such land uses. 

5. 
Effect on Downstream Drainage Areas. The City Engineer shall also study the effect of each subdivision on existing downstream drainage facilities outside the area of the subdivision. Local government 


CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA -1057 ­
drainage studies together with such other studies as shall be appropriate, shall serve as a guide to needed improvements. Where it is anticipated that the additional runoff incident to the development of the subdivision will overload an existing downstream drainage facility, the Council may withhold approval of the subdivision until provision has been made for the improvement of said potential condition in such sum as the Council shall determine. 
6. 
Subdivision Approval. No subdivision shall be approved unless adequate drainage will be provided to an adequate drainage watercourse or facility. 

7. 
Dedication of Drainage Easements. 


A. Where a subdivision is traversed by a watercourse, drainageway, channel, or stream, there shall be provided a storm water easement or drainage right-of-way conforming substantially to the lines of such watercourse, and of such width and construction as will be adequate for the purpose. Wherever possible, it is desirable that the drainage be maintained by an open channel with landscaped banks and adequate width for maximum potential volume of flow. 
B. Where topography or other conditions are such as to make impractical the inclusion of drainage facilities within the road rights-of-way, perpetual unobstructed easements at least fifteen 
(15) 
feet in width for such drainage facilities shall be provided across property outside the road lines and with satisfactory access to the road. Easements shall be indicated on the plat. Drainage easements shall be carried from the road to a natural watercourse or other drainage facilities. 

C. 
When a proposed drainage system will carry water across private land outside the subdivision, appropriate drainage rights shall be secured and indicated on the plat. 

D. 
The Council may require dedication to the City, either in fee or by drainage or conservation easement, of land on both sides of existing watercourses, to a distance to be determined by the Commission or City Engineer, if such dedication is deemed necessary to assure preservation of said watercourses, drainageways, channels, or streams. 

E. 
Low-lying lands along watercourses subject to flooding or overflowing during storm periods, whether or not included in areas for dedication, shall be preserved and retained in their natural state as drainage ways. Such land or lands subject to 


CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA -1058 ­
periodic flooding shall not be computed in determining the number of lots to be utilized for planned unit development or for computing the area requirement of any lot. 
166.12 WATER FACILITIES. 
1. Public Water. 
A. Where a public water main is accessible the subdivider shall install adequate water facilities (including fire hydrants) in accordance to the plans and specifications adopted by the Council. All water mains shall be at least six (6) inches in diameter, and shall be properly valved and looped where feasible to insure adequate water pressure. 
B. To facilitate the above, the location of all fire hydrants, all water supply improvements, and all development proposed to be served shall be shown on the preliminary plat, and the cost of installing same shall be included in the performance bond to be furnished by the subdivider. 
2. Individual Wells and Central Water Systems. 
A. In low-density zoning districts, in the discretion of the Council, if a public water system is not available, individual wells may be used or a central water system provided in such a manner that an adequate supply of potable water will be available to every lot in the subdivision. Water samples shall be submitted to the Health Department for its approval, and individual wells and central water systems shall be approved by the appropriate health authorities. Orders of approval shall be submitted to the Council. 
B. If the Council requires that a connection to a public water main be eventually provided as a condition to approval of an individual well or central water system, the applicant shall make arrangements for future water service at the time the plat receives final approval. Performance or cash bonds may be required to insure compliance. 
3. Fire Hydrants. Fire hydrants shall be required for all subdivisions except those with approved individual wells. Fire hydrants shall be located as approved by the Council after recommendation from the Fire Department. To eliminate future street openings, all underground utilities for fire hydrants, together with the fire hydrants themselves and all other supply improvements shall be installed before any final paving of a street shown on the subdivision plat. 
166.13 SANITARY SEWER FACILITIES. Sanitary sewer facilities shall be provided by the subdivider for each lot in accordance with the general regulations listed below and with design specifications and plans approved by the Council prior to final plat endorsement. The Council may seek recommendation from the City Engineer in determining design criteria for said facilities. 
1. Public Sanitary Sewer. Where a public sanitary sewerage system is reasonably accessible the subdivider shall connect with same and provide sewers accessible to each lot in the subdivision. Design criteria for slope, size, manhole locations, manhole and pipe elevations, materials, construction techniques, and other considerations shall be reviewed by the City Engineer and approved by the Council. 
A. Sanitary sewer systems shall be designed for the ultimate tributary population. Due consideration should be given to current zoning regulations and approved planning and zoning reports where applicable. Sewer capacities should be adequate to handle the anticipated maximum hourly quantity of sewerage and industrial waste together with an adequate allowance for infiltration and other extraneous flow. 
B. The diameter of sewers proposed shall not exceed the diameter of the existing or proposed outlet, whichever is applicable, unless otherwise approved by the City Engineer. 
C. No public sewer shall be less than eight (8) inches in diameter. 
D. Sewers shall generally be located within street or alley rights-of-way unless topography dictates otherwise. Where sewers are located in easements on private property, access shall be provided to all manholes. 
E. Adequate provisions shall be made to prevent any sewage from entering any source of potable water. The Council may require a minimum horizontal distance of ten (10) feet to be maintained between parallel water and sewer lines or for sewer lines to be installed at least two (2) feet below any water main, or other precautions. 
F. Storm sewerage, foundation drains, roof drains and similar installations shall not be connected to the sanitary sewer system unless expressly permitted by the Council. 
2. Individual Sewerage Systems. If public sanitary sewer facilities are not available when the subdivision is platted and individual disposal systems are proposed, minimum lot areas shall conform to the requirements of the Zoning Regulations and percolation tests and test holes shall be made as directed by the Health Department and the results submitted with design specifications for the individual disposal system(s), including the size of the tile fields or other secondary treatment device, at the time the preliminary plat is submitted for review by the Commission. Said systems shall be approved by the Commission and Council. Cesspools shall not be permitted. 
A. Where public sanitary sewerage systems are not reasonably accessible but will become available within a period of not to exceed fifteen (15) years as determined by the Council, the Council may require that the subdivider install sanitary sewer lines, laterals, and mains within the subdivision to a point in the subdivision boundary where a future connection with the public sewer shall be made. Sewer lines shall be laid to the house from the street lines, and a connection shall be available in the home to connect from the individual disposal system to said sewer system when the public sewer becomes available. Such sewer shall be capped until ready for use and shall conform to all plans for installation of the public sewer system, where such exist, and shall be ready for connection to such public sewer mains. Provisions shall be made in the performance bond or escrow agreement for installation and dedication of said system. 
B. If a public sewer is accessible and a sanitary sewer is placed in a street or alley abutting upon property, the owner thereof may be required to connect to said sewer for the purpose of disposing waste, and it may be deemed unlawful for any such owner or occupant upon such property to operate and maintain an individual sewage disposal system. 
166.14 UTILITIES. The Council shall require all utility facilities, including but not limited to gas, electrical lines of nominal voltage not in excess of 15,000 volts, telephone, and CATV cables, to be located underground throughout the subdivision. Wherever existing utilities are located above ground, except where existing on public roads and rights-of-way, they shall be removed and placed underground. All utility facilities existing and proposed and their easement throughout the subdivision shall be shown on the plat. The subdivider shall be responsible for making the necessary arrangements with the utility companies for installation of such facilities. Said utility lines shall be installed in a manner so as not to interfere with other underground utilities. Said lines which cross underneath the right-of-way of any street, alley, or way shall be installed prior to the improvement of any such street, alley, or way. Incidental appurtenances, such as transformers and their enclosures, pedestal mounted terminal boxes, meters and meter boxes may be placed above ground but shall be located so as not to be unsightly or hazardous to the public. If overhead utility lines or wires are permitted, they shall be placed in the easements provided in the rear of the lots. In their determination on whether or not to require underground utilities, the Council and Commission may consider that soil, topographical or other conditions make such installations within the subdivision unreasonable or impractical. 
166.15 EASEMENTS. Easements for utilities (private and public) may be required along rear or side lot lines where deemed necessary. Such easements shall be at least ten (10) feet wide. 
166.16 SIDEWALKS. Sidewalks shall be required along both sides of any street. Sidewalks shall be at least four (4) feet wide when located along a local street, and may be required to be five (5) feet wide or more when along any collector or arterial street. Said walks shall be located one (1) foot inside the street right-of-way line and shall be constructed according to the design specifications approved by the Council. The Commission or Council may require, in order to facilitate pedestrian access from the roads to schools, parks, playgrounds, or other nearby roads, perpetual unobstructed easements or dedicated rights-of-way at least twenty (20) feet in width for provision of sidewalks. Such easements or rights-of-way shall be indicated on the plat. 
166.17 ACRE SUBDIVISIONS. Whenever the area is divided into lots larger than ordinarily used in the area for building purposes, and there is reason to believe that such lots will eventually be re-subdivided into smaller building lots, consideration shall be given to the street and lot arrangement of the original subdivision so that additional minor streets can be opened which will permit a logical arrangement of smaller lots. Easements or deeds providing for the present or future opening and extension of such streets, may, at the discretion of the Council, be made a condition of the approval of the plat. 
166.18 DEDICATION AND RESERVATION OF LAND FOR OPEN SPACE AND RECREATIONAL FACILITIES. In order to provide for the proper location and preservation of adequate open spaces and sites for public uses; to safeguard the health, safety, and welfare of the public by providing safe places for children to play and for adequate recreational areas within new subdivisions and developments in the City, and to apportion most equitably the cost of providing the public school, park, and recreation sites and facilities necessary to serve the additional number of people brought into the community by subdivision development on basis of the additional need created by such developments, the following provisions are established. 
1. Procedure. 
A. Consideration shall be given in the design of a residential subdivision plat to the provision of adequate and suitable open space and recreational areas for use by the inhabitants of the subdivision. The owner or subdivider of the land to be subdivided, at the time of filing a preliminary plat with the Clerk for consideration by the Commission shall indicate whether he or she desired to dedicate or reserve property for open space and recreational purposes, or whether he or she desires to pay a fee in lieu thereof. If he or she desires to dedicate or reserve land for this purpose, he or she shall designate the area thereof on the preliminary plat as submitted. 
B. The Commission and Council shall review such plat, and where the Commission and Council determine pursuant to this section that open space and recreational areas are necessary and required and are feasible and compatible with the comprehensive plan for development of the City, the subdivider shall provide and dedicate to the public adequate land to provide for said open space and recreational needs of the subdivision. 
C. Where such dedication is not feasible or compatible with the comprehensive plan as determined by the Council upon recommendation by the Commission, the subdivider shall in lieu thereof pay to the City a fee or combination of fee and land, equivalent to the value of the required dedication as provided by subsection (2)(B) of this section. 
D. Such dedication or payment of fees in lieu thereof shall be made as condition of final plat approval and shall be accomplished prior to endorsement of final plat and recording of same. Where dedication is required, it shall be accomplished by providing to the Council a properly executed warranty deed dedicating the required land to the City without cost to the City. Where fees in lieu of dedication are required, the same shall be deposited with the Clerk for deposit in a special fund as provided by subsection (2)(B) of this section. 
2. Amount of Dedication. Dedication of land or payment of fees in lieu thereof for public open space and recreational facilities shall be required for all residential subdivisions, but shall not be required for any commercial or industrial subdivisions. The provisions of this section are minimum standards and shall not be construed as prohibiting a developer from dedicating or reserving other land for recreational or open space purposes in addition to these requirements. 
CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA -1063 ­
A. The amount of land to be dedicated by the subdivider for public open space and recreation facilities as provided by this chapter shall not be less than seven hundred (700) square feet per dwelling unit. 
B. Where the Council determines that a suitable park or parks cannot be properly located in the area covered by any such plat, or if the application of the standard for dedication of lands would result in open space sites too small to be used, or if the Comprehensive Plan calls for such neighborhood open space to be located elsewhere, the subdivider shall in lieu thereof pay to the City a fee, the amount of such to be based upon the fair market value of the amount of land which would otherwise be required to be dedicated. “Fair market value” shall be determined as of the time of filing the final plat in accordance with the following: the fair market value as determined by the Council based on current appraisals; or, if the subdivider objects to such amount of evaluation, he or she may, at his or her own expense, obtain an appraisal of property by a qualified real estate appraiser approved by the City, which appraisal may be accepted by the Council if found reasonable; or the City and subdivider may agree as to the fair market value. All funds so levied, assessed and collected by the City shall be deposited as a non-lapsing special fund to be known and designated as the “Open Space and Recreational Facilities Improvement Fund.” Said funds shall be used exclusively for immediate or future site acquisition and development and shall be used only for the purpose of providing open space and recreational facilities that will be available to and benefit the future inhabitants of the subdivision for which they were collected. Any and all interest accumulated upon such funds shall be added to the Open Space and Recreational Facilities Improvement Fund and shall be used only for acquisition and development of open space and recreational facilities. 
C. Where private open space for park and recreational purposes is provided in a proposed subdivision or planned unit development and such space is to be privately owned and maintained by the future residents of the subdivision, such areas shall be credited against the requirements of dedication for park and recreation purposes, as set forth in subsection (1)(A) of this section, or the payment of fees in lieu thereof, as set forth subsection (2)(B) hereof, provided the Council finds it is in the public interest to do so, and that the following standards are met: 
CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA 
-1064 ­
(1) 
That yards, court areas, setbacks and other open areas required to be maintained by the zoning and building regulations shall not be included in the computation of such private open space; and 

(2) 
That the private ownership and maintenance of the open space is adequately provided for by written agreement; and 

(3) 
That the use of the private open space is restricted for park and recreational purposes by recorded covenants which run with the land in favor of the future owners of the property within the tract and which cannot be defeated or eliminated without the consent of the Council; and 

(4) 
That the proposed private open space is reasonably adaptable for use for park and recreational purposes, taking into consideration such factors as size, shape, topography, geology, access, and location of the private open space land; and 

(5) 
That facilities proposed for the open space are in substantial accordance with the provisions of the recreational element of the Comprehensive Plan, and are approved by the Council. 


3. 
Reservation of Open Space, Recreational Facilities, and School Sites. If the Comprehensive Plan requires public open space and/or recreation facilities larger than that area required to be dedicated, or a proposed school site is located within the area to be subdivided, the Council may require the subdivider to reserve additional area in excess of the dedication requirements of this chapter for purchase by the appropriate agency. Park and other public recreational sites are to be reserved for purchase within two (2) years of the recording date of the subdivision. School sites shall be reserved for four (4) years, giving the school district the option of purchase. The purchase price in all cases shall be at the appraised raw land value prior to subdivision plus one-half (½) of the cost of grading and paving, including curb, of that portion of any street contiguous to the site. Should the park or school sites not be purchased within the time limits specified above, the subdivider may then sell them for an alternate purpose as shown on the approved subdivision plat. 

4. 
Location and Design Criteria. The Council shall determine whether dedication, reservation, or payment of fees in lieu of dedication 


CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA -1065 ­
or a combination of cash, dedication, and reservation shall be required. In making such decision, the Council shall consider the following: 
A. Recreation element of the City’s Comprehensive Plan. 
B. The size and shape of the land available for dedication. The dedicated land shall form a single parcel of land except where the Council determines that two or more parcels would be in the public interest, in which case the Council may require that the parcels be connected by a path or strip of land not less than fifteen 
(15) 
feet wide. In general, no parcel less than two (2) acres should be reserved for recreational purposes if it will be impractical or impossible to secure additional lands to increase its area. The shape of the dedicated parcel should accommodate development of recreational facilities suitable to the subdivision said parcel is intended to serve. 

C. 
The dedicated land shall be located so to be reasonably accessible to all inhabitants of the subdivision it is intended to serve. Public access to the dedicated land shall be provided either by adjoining street frontage or public easements to the dedicated parcel. The easements shall be sufficiently wide so that maintenance equipment will have reasonably convenient access to the land. 

D. 
Site Suitability. A minimum of sixty percent (60%) of the parcel to be dedicated shall be suitable for dry ground recreational use. Fifty percent (50%) of the area suitable for dry ground recreational use should not exceed three percent (3%) grade, and the remainder of such area should not exceed five percent (5%) grade. Exceptions to the preceding may be given in cases of exceptional topography or natural amenities. 

E. 
Existing or proposed open space and recreational facilities in adjoining lands which may serve in whole or in part the open space and recreational needs of the development. 

F. 
Any and all other relevant information. 


The determination of the Council as to whether land shall be dedicated or reserved or a fee paid, or combination thereof, shall be final and conclusive. 
5. Development and Maintenance. It is the duty of the City to properly develop and maintain the dedicated area for open space and recreational facilities, and the subdivider shall in no way be responsible for development, maintenance, or liability thereof except that said subdivider shall not develop the surrounding area in a manner which 
CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA -1066 ­
would unduly depreciate the purpose, use of value of the dedicated property. Where the land required for open space and recreational purposes and facilities is retained in private ownership, it shall be the owner’s responsibility to properly develop and maintain said area. 
6. Time of Commencement. At the time the final plat is approved and requirements of this chapter met, the Council shall establish a reasonable time table for the development of the park and recreational facilities. 
166.19 PRELIMINARY PLAT REQUIREMENTS. 
1. 
The preliminary plat shall be drawn to a scale of 1" = 100' or larger, and shall be plainly marked as “Preliminary Plat.” 

2. 
The preliminary plat shall include and show the following information. 


A. Proposed name of the subdivision, which shall not duplicate or resemble previously filed plat names. 
B. Location of boundary lines in relation to section or quarter section lines, including a legal description of the property. 
C. Names and addresses of the developer and engineer, surveyor or land planner preparing the plat. 
D. Vicinity sketch showing location of the tract. The vicinity sketch shall show street alignment of existing and proposed subdivision. The vicinity sketch shall not exceed the scale of one inch equals five hundred (500) feet. 
E. North point (which shall be directed to the top or right side of the plat), scale and date. 
F. Location, width and name of each existing or platted street within the proposed subdivision and within two hundred (200) feet thereof; location and width of other public ways, railroads, utility right-of-way or easements, park, and other public open spaces within the proposed subdivision. 
G. All existing sewers, water mains, culverts, and other underground installations within the proposed subdivision or immediately adjacent thereto and the location of the nearest available facility. 
H. Existing contours at intervals adequate to portray existing and proposed conditions, referred to town datum; also the locations of water courses, bridges, wooded areas and such other topographic features as may be pertinent to the subdivision. 
I. Existing and proposed zoning of proposed subdivisions and existing zoning of adjacent tracts. 
J. The location and width of proposed streets, roadways, alleys, pedestrian ways and easements. 
K. The general location and character of proposed surface storm drainage and sanitary sewer facilities. 
L. Layout, numbers and approximate dimensions of lots and the number or each block. 
M. Location and size of any proposed school sites, parks, playgrounds, churches or other public lands in accordance with the Comprehensive Plan, to be considered for sale or dedication to public use. 
N. Draft of protective covenants whereby subdivider proposes to regulate land subdivision and otherwise protect development including any covenants necessary to protect adjoining property rights. 
O. The solar access plan including the shadows that would be cast by buildings. 
P. Location of proper street lighting is necessary to ensure pedestrian and vehicular safety. 
166.20 FINAL PLAT – PREPARATION AND FILING. Following approval of the preliminary plat, the subdivider shall cause to be prepared a final plat and other material required in filing for final approval. Application for final approval shall consist of filing with the Clerk the reproducible final plat and five (5) copies and such additional information outlined here: 
1. Final Plat drawn to the scale of 1" = 100'. The final plat may include all or only part of the preliminary plat and shall include or indicate the following: 
A. Accurate tract boundary lines with dimensions and angles which provide a survey of the tract, closing with an error of not more than one (1) foot in three thousand (3,000) feet. 
B. Property line of residential lots and other sites with accurate dimensions of all straight lines and arcs, bearings of property lines or other means of accurately locating property lines. 
C. Accurate bearings and distances to known monuments. 
CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA 
-1068 ­
D. Accurate locations of existing and recorded streets intersecting the boundaries of the tract. 
E. Accurate legal description of the property. 
F. Proposed street names. 
G. Complete and accurate curve data having all but not limited to the following information: 
(1) 
Length of all tangents 

(2) 
The angle of intersection between tangents of the curve. 

(3) 
The degree of curvature for each curve. 


(4 ) The radius of each curve. 
(5) 
The length of the curve. 

(6) 
Complete data on any easement, transition, or spiral curves used. 


H. Street right-of-way lines. 
I. Lot and block numbers. 
J. Property to be dedicated or reserved for public, semi­public, or community use, with accurate dimensions. 
K. Markers or monuments indicating location, type of material, and size. 
L. Subdivision name. 
M. Name and address of the owner and subdivider. 
N. North point, scale, and date. 
O. Certification by a registered land surveyor of the State of Iowa. 
P. Certification of dedication of streets and other public property. 
Q. Final Approval by Council and Commission with signature and date spaces for Mayor and Clerk and Commission Chairperson respectively. 
R. Building setback lines. 
S. Sizes and location of utilities and, unless waived by the Council, certification by an engineering firm acceptable to the 
CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA 
-1069 ­
Council, that the public water and sewer system is adequate to serve the development. 
2. Other Required Documents. 
A. A statement by the proprietors and their spouses, if any, that the plat is prepared with their free consent and in accordance with their desire, signed and acknowledged before an officer authorized to take the acknowledgments of deeds. The statement by the proprietors may also include a dedication to the public of all lands within the plat that are designated for streets, alleys, parks, open areas, school property, or other public use, if the dedication is approved by the Council; 
B. A statement from the mortgage holders or lienholders, if any, that the plat is prepared with their free consent and in accordance with their desire, signed and acknowledged before an officer authorized to take the acknowledgment of deeds. An affidavit and bond as provided for in Section 354.12 of the Code of Iowa may be recorded in lieu of the consent of the mortgage or lienholder. When a mortgage or lienholder consents to the subdivision, a release of mortgage or lien shall be recorded for any areas conveyed to the City or dedicated to the public. 
C. An opinion by an attorney-at-law who has examined the abstract of title of the land being platted. The opinion shall state the names of the proprietors and holders of mortgages, liens or other encumbrances on the land being platted and shall note the encumbrances, along with any bonds securing the encumbrances. Utility easements shall not be construed to be encumbrances for the purpose of this section. 
D. A certificate of the County Treasurer that the land is free from certified taxes and certified special assessments or that the land is free from certified taxes and that the certified special assessments are secured by bond in compliance with Section 
354.12 of the Code of Iowa. 
E. Restrictive covenants, if any, in form for recording. 
F. Certified statement of the Clerk indicating that the subdivider has the subdivider’s estimate for improvements to be installed and a statement from the Clerk concurring with the subdivider’s estimate of cost for improvements. 
G. A resolution and certificate for approval by the Council and for signatures of the Mayor and Clerk. 
CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA -1070 ­
H. All formal irrevocable offers of dedication to the public of all streets, City uses, utilities, parks, and easements, in a form approved by the City Attorney; and the subdivision plat shall be marked with a notation indicating the formal offers of dedication as follows: 
The owner, or representative, hereby irrevocably offers for dedication to the City all the streets, city uses, easements, parks and required utilities shown within the subdivision plat and construction plans in accordance with an irrevocable offer of dedication dated _______________________ and recorded in the County Recorder of Deeds Office. 
By _______________________ Owner or Representative 
Date: _______________ 
The applicant shall deliver a full covenant and warranty deed to all such lands in proper form for recording together with a title policy for the local government in the sum not less than ten thousand dollars ($10,000) which sum shall be determined by the local government attorney before signing of the final subdivision plat. 
166.21 EXCEPTIONS. 
1. 
Special Exceptions Use. Whenever the tract to be subdivided is of such unusual topography, size or shape that the strict application of the requirements contained in these regulations would result in substantial non-self-inflicted hardships, the Council, upon recommendation of the Commission, may vary or modify such requirements so that the subdivider is allowed to develop his property in a reasonable manner, provided that such variance or modification will not have the effect of nullifying the intent and purpose of this chapter or of interfering with carrying out the Comprehensive Plan of the City. 

2. 
Petition for Variance. A petition for any such variance shall be submitted in writing by the subdivider at the time when the preliminary plat is filed for the considerations of the Commission. The petition shall state fully the grounds for the application and all of the facts relied upon by the petitioner. 


166.22 PENALTY FOR VIOLATION. Any person being the owner or agent of the owner of any land located within or adjacent to the City who knowingly or with intent to defraud transfers or sells, by reference to or exhibition of, or by other use of a plat of subdivision of such land before such plat has been approved by the Commission, shall forfeit and pay the penalty of not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each lot so transferred or sold or agreed or negotiated to be sold, and a description by metes and bounds shall not exempt the transaction from such penalties. 
166.23 FAILURE TO COMPLETE IMPROVEMENTS. For subdivisions for which no performance bond has been posted, if the improvements are not completed within the period specified by the Council in the resolution approving the plat, the approval shall be deemed to have expired. In those cases where a performance bond has been posted and required improvements have not been installed within the terms of such performance bond, the City may thereupon declare the bond to be in default and require that all the improvements be installed regardless of the extent of the building development at the time the bond is declared to be in default. 
166.24 PROCEDURE FOR IMPROVEMENTS. The applicant shall be responsible for the design and construction of all public and private improvements within the subdivision including any necessary improvements adjoining the subdivision to provide services to the subdivision. Then the City, on a case-by-case basis, may initiate a public improvement project to provide for the design and construction of any public improvement which may be located within the subdivision. If the City elects to initiate a public improvement project for one or more public improvements, the applicant shall be responsible for that portion of the cost of the public improvement which would be proportioned to the applicant’s property by special assessment, agreement or such other means as may be approved by the City. 
166.25 ACCEPTANCE OF DEDICATION OFFERS. Acceptance of formal offers of dedication of streets, public. areas, easements, and parks shall be by resolution of the Council. The approval by the Council of a subdivision plat shall not be deemed to constitute or imply the acceptance by the City of any street, easement, or park shown on said plat. The Council may require said plat to be endorsed with appropriate notes to this effect. 
166.26 INSPECTION OF IMPROVEMENTS. 
1. General Procedure and Fees. The Council shall provide for inspection of required improvements during construction and insure their satisfactory completion. The applicant shall pay to the local government the cost of the inspection fees which shall include inspection of water mains, sewer, streets, or any other required improvements, and the subdivision plat shall not be signed by the Mayor unless such fee has been paid at the time of application. These fees shall be due and payable upon demand of the City and no building permits or certificates of occupancy shall be issued until all fees are paid. If the City Engineer finds upon the inspection that any of the required improvements have not been constructed in accordance with the approved construction standards and specifications, the applicant shall be responsible for completing the improvements according to such standards and specifications. Wherever the cost of improvements is covered by a performance bond, the applicant and the bonding company shall be severally and jointly liable for completing the improvements in accordance with the standards and specifications approved by the Council. 
2. Release or Reduction of Performance Bond. The City shall not accept dedication of required improvements or release or reduce a performance bond until the City Engineer has submitted a certificate stating that all required improvements have been satisfactorily completed and until the applicant’s engineer or surveyor has certified to the City Engineer, through submission of detailed “as-built” survey plat of the subdivision, indicating location, dimensions, materials, and other information required by the Commission, Council, or City Engineer, that the layout of the line and grade of all public improvement is in accordance with construction plans for the subdivision and that a title insurance policy has been furnished to and approved by the City Attorney indicating that the improvements shall have been completed, are ready for dedication to the local government and are free and clear of any and all liens and encumbrances. Upon such approval and recommendation, the Council shall thereafter accept the improvements for dedication in accordance with the established procedure. A performance bond shall be reduced upon actual dedication of public improvements and then only to the ration that the public improvement dedicated bears to the total public improvements for the plat. In no event shall a performance bond be reduced below twenty-five percent (25%) of the principal amount. 
166.27 MAINTENANCE OF IMPROVEMENTS. The applicant shall be required to maintain all improvements on the individual subdivided lots and provide for snow removal on streets and sidewalks, if required, until acceptance of said improvements by the City. If there are any occupancy permits on a street not dedicated to the City, the City may, on twelve (12) hours’ notice, plow the street or effect emergency repairs and charge same to applicant. The applicant shall be required to file a maintenance bond with the Council, prior to dedication, in an amount considered adequate by the City Engineer and in a form satisfactory to the City Attorney, in order to assure the satisfactory 
condition of the required improvements for a period of time in accordance with 
CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA 
-1074 ­
the schedule below. Said time shall run from the date of their acceptance by the 
Council and dedication of same to the City. 
Type of Maintenance Bond  Bonding Period  
Pavements  4 years  
Sanitary Sewer  2 years  
Storm Sewer  2 years  
Sidewalk  2 years  

166.28 CHANGES AND AMENDMENTS. Any provisions of these regulations may be changed and amended from time to time by the Council, provided, however, that such changes and amendments shall not become effective until after study and report by the Commission and until after a public hearing has been held, public notice of which shall be given in a newspaper of general circulation at least seven (7) days and not more than fifteen (15) days prior to such hearing. 
[The next page is 1101] 
CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA 
-1076 ­
CHAPTER 167 
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT, PUD 
167.01 Purpose 167.05 Process for City Review of Planned Unit 
167.02 Minimum Size, Land Use and Density Development 
167.03 Master Plan 167.06 Modifications 
167.04 Rules and Regulations, Guidelines for Land Use and Performance 
167.01 PURPOSE. The PUD District is intended to provide for the development or redevelopment of land under the control and in accordance with a Master Plan and development guidelines and standards in which the land uses, transportation elements, building densities, arrangements and types are set out in a unified plan, which may provide greater flexibility of land uses, transfer of development rights with the PUD, and building locations than the conventional zoning district may permit. The PUD district is intended to maximize benefits from the use of open spaces, maximize aesthetics, encourage certain architectural standards for buildings, and permit mixed uses and diversity of bulk regulations without endangering the health, safety, welfare and land value of surrounding and internal properties. A PUD may consist of a mix of land uses or residential, commercial and limited industrial, provided such Planned Unit Development is compatible with the Comprehensive Plan of the City. 
167.02 MINIMUM SIZE, LAND USE AND DENSITY. A PUD district shall consist of at least (5) five acres, the land uses shall be permitted in accordance with the Comprehensive Plan of the City, and the density of the PUD shall not be in excess of the density permitted be the Comprehensive Plan. 
167.03 MASTER PLAN. As part of a proposed PUD rezoning of the land of Perry, a master plan shall be prepared and seven (7) copies submitted to the City, which shows the generalized overall land use plan for development. The Master Plan is also recognized as a preliminary plat. The Master Plan shall contain the following information: 
1. 
A vicinity map of sufficient scale to show site boundaries and the zoning of adjacent properties within 1000 feet. 

2. 
Dimensions, legal descriptions, acreage, existing zoning, land use, and ownership of the area proposed PUD; and existing zoning, land use, and ownership of contiguous properties within 250 feet. 

3. 
Delineation of each parcel proposed with their land uses and bulk regulations identified. 


4. 
Existing and proposed locations of streets, pedestrian walkways, trails, Parks, recreation areas, open space, buffers, parking areas, schools, and anticipated traffic generation. 

5. 
Proposed lot locations for all uses, and conceptual building locations and functions for all multiple family residential and non­residential uses. 

6. 
Area and number of dwelling units, and anticipated floor area of nonresidential buildings by parcel. 

7. 
Existing tree masses, water channels, drainage ways, flood hazard areas, and other topographic of environmentally important characteristics. 

8. 
Proposed privately owned common areas and public ownership areas, including open space, park land, and school sites. 

9. 
Locations of existing or proposed municipal utilities to serve the PUD and adjoining properties, including sanitary sewer, storm sewer, and water. 

10. 
In addition to storm sewer facilities, other required storm management facilities and requirements shall be shown and/or explained on the Master Plan. 

11. 
Dimensions of all street right-of-way and paving widths, including all proposed easements. 

12. 
Staging schedule of development, including anticipated year each stage of development is to be implemented. 

13. 
Landscape areas proposed as part of PUD, to include location of shrubs, trees and earth berms. 

14. 
Delineation of traffic impacts that would result from the project and how they can be mitigated. 


167.04 RULES AND REGULATIONS, GUIDELINES FOR LAND USE AND PERFORMANCE. In conjunction with the submittal of a Master Plan illustrating the locations of each development parcel there shall be prepared rules, regulations and guidelines for the development of the PUD, and such matters shall be part of the consideration by the Planning and Zoning Commission and the City Council and incorporated within the ordinance providing for the rezoning of the property to a PUD. The rules, regulations, and guidelines shall set forth the permitted land use, bulk regulations, and transfer of development rights within the area of the PUD, height requirements, buffer requirements, off street parking and loading requirements, and other performance standards as required by the City for each parcel designated by the Master Plan. Any rules, regulations, and guidelines set forth within the ordinance and Master Plan approved by the City Council provided by the rezoning shall be binding on the property owner, their heirs, successors, or assigns, and shall be recorded at the office of the Dallas County Recorder. 
167.05 PROCESS FOR CITY REVIEW OF PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT. The Building Official shall review the submitted PUD proposal, may discuss any suggestions or provide additional information to the developer, and shall file a report together with the applicant’s proposal to the Planning and Zoning Commission. 
1. The Planning and Zoning Commission, after receipt of the report from the Building Official, or other delegated City personnel, and receipt of the PUD proposal shall consider the presentation and give special attention to the following: 
A. Compatibility with the Comprehensive Plan. 
B. Land use and density. 
C. Building types, functions, architecture, buffers, and arrangement. 
D. Provision and use of open space and landscaping. 
E. Access to and from the site and traffic circulation. 
F. General relationship to surrounding area. 
2. 
The Planning and Zoning Commission may approve or disapprove the PUD Master Plan and associated development rules, regulations and guidelines as submitted, or may require the developer to modify, alter, adjust or amend the proposed Master Plan and associated rules, regulations and guidelines as the Planning and Zoning Commission deems necessary, in order to preserve the harmonious intent and purpose of this chapter and the Comprehensive Plan of the City. 

3. 
An application for approval of PUD shall be deemed a petition for rezoning to the PUD zoning district, but prior to an affirmative report from the Planning and Zoning Commission the applicant shall file the necessary petition as prescribed in amendments. 

4. 
Before any report is forwarded to the City Council by the Planning and Zoning Commission pertaining to an application submitted for a PUD, said Commission shall determine if such proposal is in compliance with the Comprehensive Plan or if such proposal represents a substantial change to the Comprehensive Plan. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall hold a public hearing, giving notice as provided by law for a rezoning. 


5. After a complete review by the Planning and Zoning Commission, a written recommendation and report giving reasons as to their action shall be filed with the City Council. 
167.06 MODIFICATIONS. A modification of an approved PUD Master Plan shall occur through an amendment to this title and the official zoning map unless the modification is considered to be a minor modification and may be approved in a manner as set forth by this title for approval of Site Plan Review. A minor modification must be in substantial conformance with the approved Master Plan and may never represent a change in allowable use. A minor modification may not increase the permitted density or intensity of the PUD Master Plan by more than a cumulative 5 percent. 
(Ch. 167 – Ord. 839 – May 06 Supp.) 
CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA 
-1104 ­
CODE OF ORDINANCES 
CITY OF PERRY, IOWA 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 

GENERAL CODE PROVISIONS 
CHAPTER 1 – CODE OF ORDINANCES.............................................................................................1 
CHAPTER 2 – CHARTER ......................................................................................................................9 
CHAPTER 3 – BOUNDARIES..............................................................................................................11 
CHAPTER 4 – MUNICIPAL INFRACTIONS ....................................................................................15 
CHAPTER 5 – OPERATING PROCEDURES....................................................................................21 
CHAPTER 6 – CITY ELECTIONS ......................................................................................................29 
CHAPTER 7 – FISCAL MANAGEMENT...........................................................................................35 
CHAPTER 8 – INDUSTRIAL PROPERTY TAX EXEMPTIONS ...................................................45 
CHAPTER 9 – ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT PROPERTY TAX EXEMPTION........................49 
CHAPTER 10 – URBAN RENEWAL...................................................................................................53 
CHAPTER 11 – URBAN REVITALIZATION....................................................................................61 
CHAPTER 12 – LOCAL SALES TAX .................................................................................................63 
CHAPTER 13 – HOTEL/MOTEL TAX...............................................................................................65 

ADMINISTRATION, BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS 
CHAPTER 15 – MAYOR.......................................................................................................................81 
CHAPTER 16 – MAYOR PRO TEM....................................................................................................83 
CHAPTER 17 – COUNCIL ...................................................................................................................85 
CHAPTER 18 – CITY CLERK .............................................................................................................95 
CHAPTER 19 – CITY TREASURER...................................................................................................99 

CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA 
-i­
ADMINISTRATION, BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS (continued) 
CHAPTER 20 – CITY ATTORNEY................................................................................................... 101 
CHAPTER 21 – CITY ADMINISTRATOR ...................................................................................... 105 
CHAPTER 22 – LIBRARY BOARD OF TRUSTEES ...................................................................... 111 
CHAPTER 23 – PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION ........................................................ 117 
CHAPTER 24 – TREE BOARD ..........................................................................................................121 
CHAPTER 25 – UTILITY BOARD OF TRUSTEES........................................................................125 
CHAPTER 26 – AIRPORT COMMISSION......................................................................................127 
CHAPTER 27 – HISTORIC PRESERVATION COMMISSION.................................................... 129 
CHAPTER 28 – COMPLIANCE OFFICER...................................................................................... 135 
CHAPTER 29– PARKS AND RECREATION ADVISORY BOARD............................................. 137 

POLICE, FIRE AND EMERGENCIES 
CHAPTER 30 – POLICE DEPARTMENT........................................................................................ 145 
CHAPTER 35 – FIRE DEPARTMENT ............................................................................................. 155 
CHAPTER 36 – HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCE SPILLS ................................................................... 165 

PUBLIC OFFENSES 
CHAPTER 40 – PUBLIC PEACE....................................................................................................... 185 
CHAPTER 41 – PUBLIC HEALTH AND SAFETY ......................................................................... 189 
CHAPTER 42 – PUBLIC AND PRIVATE PROPERTY..................................................................193 
CHAPTER 45 – ALCOHOL CONSUMPTION AND INTOXICATION ....................................... 225 
CHAPTER 46 – MINORS.................................................................................................................... 227 
CHAPTER 47 – PARK REGULATIONS .......................................................................................... 233 
CHAPTER 48 – DRUG PARAPHERNALIA .................................................................................... 237 

CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA 
-ii­
NUISANCES AND ANIMAL CONTROL 
CHAPTER 50 – NUISANCE ABATEMENT PROCEDURE...........................................................265 
CHAPTER 51 – JUNK AND JUNK VEHICLES...............................................................................271 
CHAPTER 52 – GRASS AND WEEDS ..............................................................................................273 
CHAPTER 55 – ANIMAL PROTECTION AND CONTROL .........................................................291 
CHAPTER 56 – DANGEROUS ANIMALS .......................................................................................301 
CHAPTER 57 – VICIOUS DOGS .......................................................................................................311 
CHAPTER 58 – REGISTRATION OF DOGS AND CATS..............................................................315 

TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES 
CHAPTER 60 – ADMINISTRATION OF TRAFFIC CODE...........................................................351 
CHAPTER 61 – TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES ...........................................................................355 
CHAPTER 62 – GENERAL TRAFFIC REGULATIONS................................................................356 
CHAPTER 63 – SPEED REGULATIONS .........................................................................................371 
CHAPTER 64 – TURNING REGULATIONS ...................................................................................375 
CHAPTER 65 – STOP OR YIELD REQUIRED ...............................................................................377 
CHAPTER 66 – LOAD AND WEIGHT RESTRICTIONS ..............................................................401 
CHAPTER 67 – PEDESTRIANS ........................................................................................................403 
CHAPTER 68 – ONE-WAY TRAFFIC ..............................................................................................405 
CHAPTER 69 – PARKING REGULATIONS ...................................................................................407 
CHAPTER 70 – TRAFFIC CODE ENFORCEMENT PROCEDURES .........................................451 
CHAPTER 75 – ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLES AND SNOWMOBILES..........................................461 
CHAPTER 76 – BICYCLE, SKATEBOARD AND IN-LINE SKATES REGULATIONS...........465 
CHAPTER 80 – ABANDONED VEHICLES .....................................................................................475 
CHAPTER 81 – RAILROAD REGULATIONS ................................................................................479 

CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA 
-iii-

WATER 
CHAPTER 90 – WATER SERVICE SYSTEM ................................................................................. 495 
CHAPTER 91 – WATER CONSERVATION.................................................................................... 497 

SANITARY SEWER 
CHAPTER 95 – SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM...............................................................................515 

CHAPTER 96 – BUILDING SEWERS AND CONNECTIONS ...................................................... 521 
CHAPTER 97 – USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS..................................................................................... 537 
CHAPTER 98 – ON-SITE WASTEWATER SYSTEMS..................................................................543 
CHAPTER 99 – SEWER SERVICE CHARGES .............................................................................. 545 
CHAPTER 100 – STORM WATER UTILITY..................................................................................551 

GARBAGE AND SOLID WASTE 
CHAPTER 105 – SOLID WASTE CONTROL ................................................................................. 565 
CHAPTER 106 – COLLECTION OF SOLID WASTE .................................................................... 573 

FRANCHISES AND OTHER SERVICES 
CHAPTER 110 – NATURAL GAS FRANCHISE .............................................................................585 
CHAPTER 111 – ELECTRIC FRANCHISE.....................................................................................591 
CHAPTER 112 – CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE .................................................................. 601 
CHAPTER 113 – CABLE TELEVISION RATES AND CHARGES .............................................. 621 
CHAPTER 114 – RIGHTS-OF-WAY................................................................................................. 623 
CHAPTER 115 – CEMETERY ........................................................................................................... 681 

CODE OF ORDINANCES, PERRY, IOWA 
-iv-

REGULATION OF BUSINESS AND VOCATIONS 
CHAPTER 120 – LIQUOR LICENSES AND WINE AND BEER PERMITS ................................701 
CHAPTER 121 – CIGARETTE PERMITS .......................................................................................705 
CHAPTER 122 – PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS AND TRANSIENT MERCHANTS ......................709 
CHAPTER 123 – HOUSE MOVERS ..................................................................................................715 
CHAPTER 124 – JUNKYARDS AND JUNK DEALERS.................................................................718 
CHAPTER 125 – FIREWORKS PERMITS ......................................................................................735 
CHAPTER 126 – COIN-OPERATED AMUSEMENT DEVICES...................................................737 
CHAPTER 127 – PUBLIC SALE OF FOOD, BEVERAGES AND NON-FOOD 

ITEMS ON CITY PROPERTY.............................................................................739 

STREETS AND SIDEWALKS 
CHAPTER 135 – STREET USE AND MAINTENANCE .................................................................761 
CHAPTER 136 – SIDEWALK REGULATIONS ..............................................................................767 
CHAPTER 137 – VACATION AND DISPOSAL OF STREETS .....................................................773 
CHAPTER 138 – STREET GRADES .................................................................................................775 
CHAPTER 139 – NAMING OF STREETS ........................................................................................777 
CHAPTER 140 – CONTROLLED ACCESS FACILITIES .............................................................778 

BUILDING AND PROPERTY REGULATIONS 
CHAPTER 145 – DANGEROUS BUILDINGS..................................................................................789 
CHAPTER 146 – MANUFACTURED AND MOBILE HOMES .....................................................799 
CHAPTER 147 – WATER WELL PROTECTION...........................................................................811 
CHAPTER 150 – BUILDING NUMBERING ....................................................................................831 
CHAPTER 151 – TREES .....................................................................................................................833 
CHAPTER 155 – UNIFORM CONSTRUCTION CODES...............................................................851 


BUILDING AND PROPERTY REGULATIONS (continued) 
CHAPTER 156 – RENTAL CODE ..................................................................................................... 871 
CHAPTER 157 – COMMUNICATION TOWERS AND ANTENNAS........................................... 885 
CHAPTER 158 – LEAD HAZARDS IN DWELLINGS ....................................................................901 
CHAPTER 160 – FLOOD PLAIN REGULATIONS ........................................................................ 925 
CHAPTER 161 – SAFEGUARDING OF HISTORIC, AESTHETIC AND 

CULTURAL HERITAGE .............................................................................. 941 CHAPTER 162 – ESTABLISHMENT OF CERTIFICATE OF APPROPRIATENESS 
FOR STRUCTURES LOCATED IN THE DOWNTOWN PERRY 
HISTORICAL/CULTURAL DISTRICT ..................................................... 947 CHAPTER 163 – PROPERTY MAINTENANCE REQUIREMENTS FOR PROPERTY 
LOCATED IN THE HISTORIC/CULTURAL DISTRICT 
OF DOWNTOWN PERRY ............................................................................953 

ZONING AND SUBDIVISION 
CHAPTER 165 – ZONING REGULATIONS.................................................................................... 955 
CHAPTER 166 – SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS .......................................................................1045 
CHAPTER 167 – PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT, PUD....................................1101 

INDEX APPENDIX: 
USE AND MAINTENANCE OF THE CODE OF ORDINANCES .................................................... 1 

SUGGESTED FORMS: DANGEROUS BUILDINGS -FIRST NOTICE ................................................................................... 9 DANGEROUS BUILDINGS -NOTICE OF HEARING ................................................................... 10 DANGEROUS BUILDINGS -RESOLUTION AND ORDER .......................................................... 11 
NOTICE TO ABATE NUISANCE....................................................................................................... 13 

NOTICE OF REQUIRED SEWER CONNECTION ......................................................................... 14 
NOTICE OF HEARING ON REQUIRED SEWER CONNECTION .............................................. 15 
RESOLUTION AND ORDER .............................................................................................................. 16 


«footer» 
-i­



