CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
- 1 -
CHAPTER 1
CODE OF ORDINANCES
1.01 Title 1.08 Amendments
1.02 Definitions 1.09 Catchlines and Notes
1.03 City Powers 1.10 Altering Code
1.04 Indemnity 1.11 Severability
1.05 Personal Injuries 1.12 Warrants
1.06 Rules of Construction 1.13 General Standards for Action
1.07 Extension of Authority 1.14 Standard Penalty
1.01 TITLE. This code of ordinances shall be known and may be cited as the Code of
Ordinances of the City of Sioux Center, Iowa.
1.02 DEFINITIONS. Where words and phrases used in this Code of Ordinances are
defined in the Code of Iowa, such definitions apply to their use in this Code of Ordinances unless
such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the Council or repugnant to
the context of the provision. Other words and phrases used herein have the following meanings,
unless specifically defined otherwise in another portion of this Code of Ordinances or unless
such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the Council or repugnant to
the context of the provision:
1. “Alley” means a public right-of-way, other than a street, affording secondary
means of access to abutting property.
2. “City” means the City of Sioux Center, Iowa.
3. “Clerk” means the city clerk of Sioux Center, Iowa.
4. “Code” means the specific chapter of this Code of Ordinances in which a
specific subject is covered and bears a descriptive title word (such as the Building Code
and/or a standard code adopted by reference).
5. “Code of Ordinances” means the Code of Ordinances of the City of Sioux
Center, Iowa.
6. “Council” means the city council of Sioux Center, Iowa.
7. “County” means Sioux County, Iowa.
8. “May” confers a power.
9. “Measure” means an ordinance, amendment, resolution or motion.
10. “Must” states a requirement.
11. “Occupant” or “tenant,” applied to a building or land, includes any person who
occupies the whole or a part of such building or land, whether alone or with others.
12. “Ordinances” means the ordinances of the City of Sioux Center, Iowa, as
embodied in this Code of Ordinances, ordinances not repealed by the ordinance
adopting this Code of Ordinances, and those enacted hereafter.
13. “Person” means an individual, firm, partnership, domestic or foreign
corporation, company, association or joint stock association, trust or other legal entity,
CHAPTER 1 CODE OF ORDINANCES
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
- 2 -
and includes a trustee, receiver, assignee, or similar representative thereof, but does not
include a governmental body.
14. “Public way” includes any street, alley, boulevard, parkway, highway,
sidewalk, or other public thoroughfare.
15. “Shall” imposes a duty.
16. “Sidewalk” means that surfaced portion of the street between the edge of the
traveled way, surfacing, or curb line and the adjacent property line, intended for the use
of pedestrians.
17. “State” means the State of Iowa.
18. “Statutes” or “laws” means the latest edition of the Code of Iowa, as amended.
19. “Street” or “highway” means the entire width between property lines of every
way or place of whatever nature when any part thereof is open to the use of the public,
as a matter of right, for purposes of vehicular traffic.
Words that are not defined in this Code of Ordinances or by the Code of Iowa have their ordinary
meaning unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the Council,
or repugnant to the context of the provision.
1.03 CITY POWERS. The City may, except as expressly limited by the Iowa Constitution,
and if not inconsistent with the laws of the Iowa General Assembly, exercise any power and
perform any function it deems appropriate to protect and preserve the rights, privileges, and
property of the City and of its residents, and to preserve and improve the peace, safety, health,
welfare, comfort, and convenience of its residents, and each and every provision of this Code
of Ordinances shall be deemed to be in the exercise of the foregoing powers and the performance
of the foregoing functions.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.1)
1.04 INDEMNITY. The applicant for any permit or license under this Code of Ordinances,
by making such application, assumes and agrees to pay for any injury to or death of any person
or persons whomsoever, and any loss of or damage to property whatsoever, including all costs
and expenses incident thereto, however arising from or related to, directly, indirectly or
remotely, the issuance of the permit or license, or the doing of anything thereunder, or the failure
of such applicant, or the agents, employees or servants of such applicant, to abide by or comply
with any of the provisions of this Code of Ordinances or the terms and conditions of such permit
or license, and such applicant, by making such application, forever agrees to indemnify the City
and its officers, agents and employees, and agrees to save them harmless from any and all
claims, demands, lawsuits or liability whatsoever for any loss, damage, injury or death,
including all costs and expenses incident thereto, by reason of the foregoing. The provisions of
this section shall be deemed to be a part of any permit or license issued under this Code of
Ordinances or any other ordinance of the City whether expressly recited therein or not.
1.05 PERSONAL INJURIES. When action is brought against the City for personal injuries
alleged to have been caused by its negligence, the City may notify in writing any person by
whose negligence it claims the injury was caused. The notice shall state the pendency of the
action, the name of the plaintiff, the name and location of the court where the action is pending,
a brief statement of the alleged facts from which the cause arose, that the City believes that the
person notified is liable to it for any judgment rendered against the City, and asking the person
to appear and defend. A judgment obtained in the suit is conclusive in any action by the City
against any person so notified, as to the existence of the defect or other cause of the injury or
CHAPTER 1 CODE OF ORDINANCES
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
- 3 -
damage, as to the liability of the City to the plaintiff in the first named action, and as to the
amount of the damage or injury. The City may maintain an action against the person notified
to recover the amount of the judgment together with all the expenses incurred by the City in the
suit.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.14)
1.06 RULES OF CONSTRUCTION. In the construction of this Code of Ordinances, the
rules of statutory construction as set forth in Chapter 4 of the Code of Iowa shall be utilized to
ascertain the intent of the Council with the understanding that the term “statute” as used therein
will be deemed to be synonymous with the term “ordinance” when applied to this Code of
Ordinances.
1.07 EXTENSION OF AUTHORITY. Whenever an officer or employee is required or
authorized to do an act by a provision of this Code of Ordinances, the provision shall be
construed as authorizing performance by a regular assistant, subordinate or a duly authorized
designee of said officer or employee, if authorized by such officer or employee.
1.08 AMENDMENTS. All ordinances that amend, repeal or in any manner affect this Code
of Ordinances shall include proper reference to chapter, section, subsection, or paragraph to
maintain an orderly codification of ordinances of the City.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.2)
1.09 CATCHLINES AND NOTES. The catchlines of the several sections of the Code of
Ordinances, titles, headings (chapter, section and subsection), editor’s notes, cross references
and State law references, unless set out in the body of the section itself, contained in the Code
of Ordinances, do not constitute any part of the law, and are intended merely to indicate, explain,
supplement or clarify the contents of a section.
1.10 ALTERING CODE. It is unlawful for any unauthorized person to change or amend
by additions or deletions, any part or portion of the Code of Ordinances, or to insert or delete
pages, or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with the Code of Ordinances in any manner that
will cause the law of the City to be misrepresented thereby.
1.11 SEVERABILITY. If any section, provision, or part of the Code of Ordinances is
adjudged invalid or unconstitutional, such adjudication will not affect the validity of the Code
of Ordinances as a whole or any section, provision or part thereof not adjudged invalid or
unconstitutional.
1.12 WARRANTS. If consent to enter upon or inspect any building, structure or property
pursuant to a municipal ordinance is withheld by any person having the lawful right to exclude,
the City officer or employee having the duty to enter upon or conduct the inspection may apply
to the Iowa District Court in and for the County, pursuant to Section 808.14 of the Code of Iowa,
for an administrative search warrant. No owner, operator or occupant or any other person
having charge, care, or control of any dwelling unit, rooming unit, structure, building, or
premises shall fail or neglect, after presentation of a search warrant, to permit entry therein by
the municipal officer or employee.
1.13 GENERAL STANDARDS FOR ACTION. Whenever this Code of Ordinances
grants any discretionary power to the Council or any commission, board or officer or employee
of the City and does not specify standards to govern the exercise of the power, the power shall
be exercised in light of the following standard: The discretionary power to grant, deny, or
CHAPTER 1 CODE OF ORDINANCES
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
- 4 -
revoke any matter shall be considered in light of the facts and circumstances then existing and
as may be reasonably foreseeable, and due consideration shall be given to the impact upon the
public health, safety and welfare, and the decision shall be that of a reasonably prudent person
under similar circumstances in the exercise of the police power.
1.14 STANDARD PENALTY. Unless another penalty is expressly provided by this Code
of Ordinances for violation of any particular provision, section or chapter, any person failing to
perform a duty required by this Code of Ordinances or otherwise violating any provision of this
Code of Ordinances or any rule or regulation adopted herein by reference shall, upon conviction,
be subject to a fine of at least sixty-five dollars ($65.00) but not to exceed six hundred twentyfive
dollars ($625.00). The court may order imprisonment not to exceed thirty (30) days in lieu
of a fine or in addition to a fine.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.3[2] and 903.1[1a])
[The next page is 9]
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
- 9 -
CHAPTER 2
CHARTER
2.01 Title 2.04 Number and Term of Council
2.02 Form of Government 2.05 Term of Mayor
2.03 Powers and Duties of City Officers 2.06 Copies on File
2.01 TITLE. This chapter may be cited as the charter of the City of Sioux Center, Iowa.†
2.02 FORM OF GOVERNMENT. The form of government of the City is the Mayor-
Council with appointed Manager form of government.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.4)
2.03 POWERS AND DUTIES OF CITY OFFICERS. The Council and Mayor and other
City officers have such powers and shall perform such duties as are authorized or required by
State law and by the ordinances, resolutions, rules, and regulations of the City.
2.04 NUMBER AND TERM OF COUNCIL. The Council consists of five Council
Members elected at large for overlapping terms of four years.
Code of Iowa, Sec. 376.2)
2.05 TERM OF MAYOR. The Mayor is elected for a term of four years.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 376.2)
2.06 COPIES ON FILE. The Clerk shall keep an official copy of the charter on file with
the official records of the Clerk and the Secretary of State, and shall keep copies of the charter
available at the Clerk’s office for public inspection.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.1)
† EDITOR’S NOTE: Ordinance No. SC-0-1-75 adopting a charter for the City was passed and
approved by the Council on June 24, 1975. The charter has been amended twice, by Ordinance No. SC-
0-8-83 on November 25, 1983, and by Ordinance No. SC-0-4-97 on February 5, 1997.
CHAPTER 2 CHARTER
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
- 10 -
° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° °
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
- 11 -
CHAPTER 3
MUNICIPAL INFRACTIONS
3.01 Municipal Infraction 3.04 Civil Citations
3.02 Environmental Violation 3.05 Alternative Relief
3.03 Penalties 3.06 Criminal Penalties
3.01 MUNICIPAL INFRACTION. A violation of this Code of Ordinances or any
ordinance or code herein adopted by reference or the omission or failure to perform any act or
duty required by the same, with the exception of those provisions specifically provided under
State law as a felony, an aggravated misdemeanor, or a serious misdemeanor, or a simple
misdemeanor under Chapters 687 through 747 of the Code of Iowa, is a municipal infraction
punishable by civil penalty as provided herein.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.22[3])
3.02 ENVIRONMENTAL VIOLATION. A municipal infraction that is a violation of
Chapter 455B of the Code of Iowa or of a standard established by the City in consultation with
the Department of Natural Resources, or both, may be classified as an environmental violation.
However, the provisions of this section shall not be applicable until the City has offered to
participate in informal negotiations regarding the violation or to the following specific
violations:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.22[1])
1. A violation arising from noncompliance with a pretreatment standard or
requirement referred to in 40 C.F.R. §403.8.
2. The discharge of airborne residue from grain, created by the handling, drying,
or storing of grain, by a person not engaged in the industrial production or
manufacturing of grain products.
3. The discharge of airborne residue from grain, created by the handling, drying,
or storing of grain, by a person engaged in such industrial production or manufacturing
if such discharge occurs from September 15 to January 15.
3.03 PENALTIES. A municipal infraction is punishable by the following civil penalties:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.22[1])
1. Standard Civil Penalties.
A. First offense – not to exceed $750.00
B. Each repeat offense – not to exceed $1,000.00
Each day that a violation occurs or is permitted to exist constitutes a repeat offense.
2. Special Civil Penalties.
A. A municipal infraction arising from noncompliance with a
pretreatment standard or requirement, referred to in 40 C.F.R. §403.8, by an
industrial user is punishable by a penalty of not more than $1,000.00 for each
day a violation exists or continues.
CHAPTER 3 MUNICIPAL INFRACTIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
- 12 -
B. A municipal infraction classified as an environmental violation is
punishable by a penalty of not more than $1,000.00 for each occurrence.
However, an environmental violation is not subject to such penalty if all of the
following conditions are satisfied:
(1) The violation results solely from conducting an initial startup,
cleaning, repairing, performing scheduled maintenance, testing, or
conducting a shutdown of either equipment causing the violation or the
equipment designed to reduce or eliminate the violation.
(2) The City is notified of the violation within twenty-four (24)
hours from the time that the violation begins.
(3) The violation does not continue in existence for more than
eight (8) hours.
3.04 CIVIL CITATIONS. Any officer authorized by the City to enforce this Code of
Ordinances may issue a civil citation to a person who commits a municipal infraction. A copy
of the citation may be served by personal service as provided in Rule of Civil Procedure 1.305,
by certified mail addressed to the defendant at defendant’s last known mailing address, return
receipt requested, or by publication in the manner as provided in Rule of Civil Procedure 1.310
and subject to the conditions of Rule of Civil Procedure 1.311. A copy of the citation shall be
retained by the issuing officer, and the original citation shall be sent to the Clerk of the District
Court. The citation shall serve as notification that a civil offense has been committed and shall
contain the following information:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.22[4])
1. The name and address of the defendant.
2. The name or description of the infraction attested to by the officer issuing the
citation.
3. The location and time of the infraction.
4. The amount of civil penalty to be assessed or the alternative relief sought, or
both.
5. The manner, location, and time in which the penalty may be paid.
6. The time and place of court appearance.
7. The penalty for failure to appear in court.
8. The legal description of the affected real property, if applicable.
If the citation affects real property and charges a violation relating to the condition of the
property, including a building code violation, a local housing regulation violation, a housing
code violation, or a public health or safety violation, after filing the citation with the Clerk of
the District Court, the City shall also file the citation in the office of the County Treasurer.
3.05 ALTERNATIVE RELIEF. Seeking a civil penalty as authorized in this chapter does not
preclude the City from seeking alternative relief from the court in the same action. Such alternative
relief may include, but is not limited to, an order for abatement or injunctive relief.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.22[8])
3.06 CRIMINAL PENALTIES. This chapter does not preclude a peace officer from issuing
a criminal citation for a violation of this Code of Ordinances or regulation if criminal penalties are
CHAPTER 3 MUNICIPAL INFRACTIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
- 13 -
also provided for the violation. Nor does it preclude or limit the authority of the City to enforce the
provisions of this Code of Ordinances by criminal sanctions or other lawful means.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.22[11])
[The next page is 21]

CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
- 21 -
CHAPTER 5
OPERATING PROCEDURES
5.01 Oaths 5.07 Conflict of Interest
5.02 Bonds 5.08 Resignations
5.03 Powers and Duties 5.09 Removal of Appointed Officers and Employees
5.04 Books and Records 5.10 Vacancies
5.05 Transfer to Successor 5.11 Gifts
5.06 Meetings
5.01 OATHS. The oath of office shall be required and administered in accordance with the
following:
1. Qualify for Office. Each elected or appointed officer shall qualify for office by
taking the prescribed oath and by giving, when required, a bond. The oath shall be
taken, and bond provided, after such officer is certified as elected, no later than noon of
the first day that is not a Sunday or a legal holiday in January of the first year of the
term for which the officer was elected.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 63.1)
2. Prescribed Oath. The prescribed oath is: “I, (name), do solemnly swear that I
will support the Constitution of the United States and the Constitution of the State of
Iowa, and that I will faithfully and impartially, to the best of my ability, discharge all
duties of the office of (name of office) in Sioux Center as now or hereafter required by
law.”
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 63.10)
3. Officers Empowered to Administer Oaths. The following are empowered to
administer oaths and to take affirmations in any matter pertaining to the business of
their respective offices:
A. Mayor
B. City Clerk
C. Members of all boards, commissions, or bodies created by law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 63A.2)
5.02 BONDS. Surety bonds are provided in accordance with the following:
1. Required. The Council shall provide by resolution for a surety bond or blanket
position bond running to the City and covering the Mayor, Clerk, Treasurer, and such
other officers and employees as may be necessary and advisable.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 64.13)
2. Bonds Approved. Bonds shall be approved by the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 64.19)
3. Bonds Filed. All bonds, after approval and proper record, shall be filed with
the Clerk.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 64.23[6])
CHAPTER 5 OPERATING PROCEDURES
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
- 22 -
4. Record. The Clerk shall keep a book, to be known as the “Record of Official
Bonds” in which shall be recorded the official bonds of all City officers, elective or
appointive.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 64.24[3])
5.03 POWERS AND DUTIES. Each municipal officer shall exercise the powers and
perform the duties prescribed by law and this Code of Ordinances, or as otherwise directed by
the Council unless contrary to State law or City charter.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
5.04 BOOKS AND RECORDS. All books and records required to be kept by law or
ordinance shall be open to examination by the public upon request, unless some other provisions
of law expressly limit such right or require such records to be kept confidential. Access to
public records that are combined with data processing software shall be in accordance with
policies and procedures established by the City.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 22.2 & 22.3A)
5.05 TRANSFER TO SUCCESSOR. Each officer shall transfer to his or her successor in
office all books, papers, records, documents and property in the officer’s custody and
appertaining to that office.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
5.06 MEETINGS. All meetings of the Council, any board or commission, or any multimembered
body formally and directly created by any of the foregoing bodies shall be held in
accordance with Chapter 21 of the Code of Iowa.
1. Notice of Meetings. Reasonable notice, as defined by State law, of the time,
date, and place of each meeting and its tentative agenda shall be given.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 21.4)
2. Meetings Open. All meetings shall be held in open session unless closed
sessions are held as expressly permitted by State law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 21.3)
3. Minutes. Minutes shall be kept of all meetings showing the date, time and
place, the members present, and the action taken at each meeting. The minutes shall
show the results of each vote taken and information sufficient to indicate the vote of
each member present. The vote of each member present shall be made public at the
open session. The minutes shall be public records open to public inspection.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 21.3)
4. Closed Session. A closed session may be held only by affirmative vote of either
two-thirds of the body or all of the members present at the meeting and in accordance
with Chapter 21 of the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 21.5)
5. Cameras and Recorders. The public may use cameras or recording devices at
any open session.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 21.7)
6. Electronic Meetings. A meeting may be conducted by electronic means only
in circumstances where such a meeting in person is impossible or impractical and then
only in compliance with the provisions of Chapter 21 of the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 21.8)
CHAPTER 5 OPERATING PROCEDURES
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
- 23 -
5.07 CONFLICT OF INTEREST. A City officer or employee shall not have an interest,
direct or indirect, in any contract or job of work or material or the profits thereof or services to
be furnished or performed for the City, unless expressly permitted by law. A contract entered
into in violation of this section is void. The provisions of this section do not apply to:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5)
1. Compensation of Officers. The payment of lawful compensation of a City
officer or employee holding more than one City office or position, the holding of which
is not incompatible with another public office or is not prohibited by law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5[3a])
2. Investment of Funds. The designation of a bank or trust company as a
depository, paying agent, or for investment of funds.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5[3b])
3. City Treasurer. An employee of a bank or trust company, who serves as
Treasurer of the City.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5[3c])
4. Stock Interests. Contracts in which a City officer or employee has an interest
solely by reason of employment, or a stock interest of the kind described in subsection
8 of this section, or both, if the contracts are made by competitive bid in writing,
publicly invited and opened, or if the remuneration of employment will not be directly
affected as a result of the contract and the duties of employment do not directly involve
the procurement or preparation of any part of the contract. The competitive bid
qualification of this subsection does not apply to a contract for professional services not
customarily awarded by competitive bid.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5[3e])
5. Newspaper. The designation of an official newspaper.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5[3f])
6. Existing Contracts. A contract in which a City officer or employee has an
interest if the contract was made before the time the officer or employee was elected or
appointed, but the contract may not be renewed.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5[3g])
7. Volunteers. Contracts with volunteer firefighters or civil defense volunteers.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5[3h])
8. Corporations. A contract with a corporation in which a City officer or
employee has an interest by reason of stock holdings when less than five percent (5%)
of the outstanding stock of the corporation is owned or controlled directly or indirectly
by the officer or employee or the spouse or immediate family of such officer or
employee.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5[3i])
9. Contracts. Contracts made by the City upon competitive bid in writing,
publicly invited and opened.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5[3d])
10. Cumulative Purchases. Contracts not otherwise permitted by this section, for
the purchase of goods or services that benefit a City officer or employee, if the
purchases benefiting that officer or employee do not exceed a cumulative total purchase
price of fifteen hundred dollars ($1,500.00) in a fiscal year.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5[3j])
CHAPTER 5 OPERATING PROCEDURES
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
- 24 -
11. Franchise Agreements. Franchise agreements between the City and a utility
and contracts entered into by the City for the provision of essential City utility services.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5[3l])
12. Third Party Contracts. A contract that is a bond, note or other obligation of the
City and the contract is not acquired directly from the City but is acquired in a
transaction with a third party who may or may not be the original underwriter,
purchaser, or obligee of the contract.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5[3m])
5.08 RESIGNATIONS. An elected officer who wishes to resign may do so by submitting
a resignation in writing to the Clerk so that it shall be properly recorded and considered. A
person who resigns from an elective office is not eligible for appointment to the same office
during the time for which the person was elected if, during that time, the compensation of the
office has been increased.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[9])
5.09 REMOVAL OF APPOINTED OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES. Except as
otherwise provided by State or City law, all persons appointed to City office or employment
may be removed by the officer or body making the appointment, but every such removal shall
be by written order. The order shall give the reasons, be filed in the office of the Clerk, and a
copy shall be sent by certified mail to the person removed, who, upon request filed with the
Clerk within thirty (30) days after the date of mailing the copy, shall be granted a public hearing
before the Council on all issues connected with the removal. The hearing shall be held within
thirty (30) days after the date the request is filed, unless the person removed requests a later
date.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.15)
5.10 VACANCIES. A vacancy in an elective City office during a term of office shall be
filled, at the Council’s option, by one of the two following procedures:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[2])
1. Appointment. By appointment following public notice by the remaining
members of the Council within forty (40) days after the vacancy occurs, except that if
the remaining members do not constitute a quorum of the full membership, or if a
petition is filed requesting an election, the Council shall call a special election as
provided by law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[2a])
2. Election. By a special election held to fill the office for the remaining balance
of the unexpired term as provided by law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[2b])
5.11 GIFTS. Except as otherwise provided in Chapter 68B of the Code of Iowa, a public
official, public employee or candidate, or that person’s immediate family member, shall not,
directly or indirectly, accept or receive any gift or series of gifts from a “restricted donor” as
defined in Chapter 68B and a restricted donor shall not, directly or indirectly, individually or
jointly with one or more other restricted donors, offer or make a gift or a series of gifts to a
public official, public employee or candidate.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 68B.22)
[The next page is 29]
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
- 29 -
CHAPTER 6
CITY ELECTIONS
6.01 Nominating Method to be Used 6.05 Qualification
6.02 Candidacy 6.06 Time Held
6.03 Run-Off Election in Lieu of Primary 6.07 Candidates Elected
6.04 Run-Off Election Procedure 6.08 Precincts
6.01 NOMINATING METHOD TO BE USED. All candidates for elective municipal
offices shall be nominated under the provisions of Chapter 376 of the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 376.3)
6.02 CANDIDACY. An eligible elector of the City may become a candidate for an elective
City office by filing with the City Clerk a valid petition requesting that the elector’s name be
placed on the ballot for that office. The petition must be signed by eligible electors equal in
number to at least two percent (2%) of those who voted to fill the same office at the last regular
City election, but not less than ten (10) persons.
6.03 RUN-OFF ELECTION IN LIEU OF PRIMARY. A run-off election shall be held
in lieu of a primary election for the choosing of persons for elective offices.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 376.6)
6.04 RUN-OFF ELECTION PROCEDURE. A run-off election shall be held only for
positions unfilled because of failure of a sufficient number of candidates to receive a majority
vote in the regular City election.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 376.9)
6.05 QUALIFICATION. Candidates who do not receive a majority of the votes cast for an
office, but who receive the highest number of votes cast for that office in the regular City
election, to the extent of twice the number of unfilled positions, are candidates in the run-off
elections.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 376.9)
6.06 TIME HELD. Run-off elections shall be held four (4) weeks after the date of the
regular City election and shall be conducted in the same manner as regular City elections.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 376.9)
6.07 CANDIDATES ELECTED. Candidates in the run-off election who receive the
highest number of votes cast for each office on the ballot are elected to the extent necessary to
fill the positions open.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 376.9)
6.08 PRECINCTS. The City of Sioux Center, Iowa, is divided into three (3) election
precincts.
1. The first precinct, known as “Sioux Center North” shall include all that part of
the City lying north of the centerline of 7th Street NW extended and 7th Street NE
extended.
CHAPTER 6 CITY ELECTIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
- 30 -
2. The second precinct, known as “Sioux Center Central” shall include all that
part of the City lying south of the centerline of 7th Street NW extended and 7th Street
NE extended; and that part of the City lying north of the following boundary: 9th Street
SW to the centerline of US Highway No. 75 thence north to 2nd Street SE, thence east
to 4th Avenue SE, thence north to 1st Street East extended to the east.
3. The third precinct, known as “Sioux Center South” shall include all that part of
the City lying south of the following boundary: 9th Street SW to the centerline of US
Highway No. 75 thence north to 2nd Street SE, thence east to 4th Avenue SE, thence
north to 1st Street East extended to the east.
[The next page is 41]
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
- 41 -
CHAPTER 8
INDUSTRIAL PROPERTY TAX EXEMPTIONS
8.01 Purpose 8.06 Applications
8.02 Definitions 8.07 Approval
8.03 Period of Partial Exemption 8.08 Exemption Repealed
8.04 Amounts Eligible for Exemption 8.09 Dual Exemptions Prohibited
8.05 Limitations
8.01 PURPOSE. The purpose of this chapter is to provide for a partial exemption from
property taxation of the actual value added to industrial real estate by the new construction of
industrial real estate, research-service facilities, warehouses, and distribution centers.
8.02 DEFINITIONS. For use in this chapter the following terms are defined:
1. “Actual value added” means the actual value added as of the first year for which
the exemption is received.
2. “Distribution center” means a building or structure used primarily for the
storage of goods that are intended for subsequent shipment to retail outlets. Distribution
center does not mean a building or structure used primarily to store raw agricultural
products, used primarily by a manufacturer to store goods to be used in the
manufacturing process, used primarily for the storage of petroleum products, or used
for the retail sale of goods.
3. “New construction” means new buildings and structures and includes new
buildings and structures that are constructed as additions to existing buildings and
structures. New construction does not include reconstruction of an existing building or
structure that does not constitute complete replacement of an existing building or
structure or refitting of an existing building or structure unless the reconstruction of an
existing building or structure is required due to economic obsolescence and the
reconstruction is necessary to implement recognized industry standards for the
manufacturing and processing of specific products and the reconstruction is required
for the owner of the building or structure to continue competitively to manufacture or
process those products, which determination shall receive prior approval from the City
Council of the City upon the recommendation of the Iowa Department of Economic
Development.
4. “Research-service facilities” means a building or group of buildings devoted
primarily to research and development activities, including, but not limited to, the
design and production or manufacture of prototype products for experimental use, and
corporate research services that do not have a primary purpose of providing on-site
services to the public.
5. “Warehouse” means a building or structure used as a public warehouse for the
storage of goods pursuant to Chapter 554, Article 7, of the Code of Iowa, except that it
does not mean a building or structure used primarily to store raw agricultural products
or from which goods are sold at retail.
8.03 PERIOD OF PARTIAL EXEMPTION. The actual value added to industrial real
estate by the new construction of industrial real estate, research-service facilities, warehouses,
CHAPTER 8 INDUSTRIAL PROPERTY TAX EXEMPTIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
- 42 -
and distribution centers is eligible to receive a partial exemption from taxation for a period of
five (5) years.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 427B.3)
8.04 AMOUNTS ELIGIBLE FOR EXEMPTION. The amount of actual value added
which is eligible to be exempt from taxation shall be as follows:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 427B.3)
1. For the first year, seventy-five percent (75%)
2. For the second year, sixty percent (60%)
3. For the third year, forty-five percent (45%)
4. For the fourth year, thirty percent (30%)
5. For the fifth year, fifteen percent (15%)
8.05 LIMITATIONS. The granting of the exemption under this chapter for new
construction constituting complete replacement of an existing building or structure shall not
result in the assessed value of the industrial real estate being reduced below the assessed value
of the industrial real estate before the start of the new construction added.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 427B.3)
8.06 APPLICATIONS. An application shall be filed for each project resulting in actual
value added for which an exemption is claimed.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 427B.4)
1. The application for exemption shall be filed by the owner of the property with
the local assessor by February 1 of the assessment year in which the value added is first
assessed for taxation.
2. Applications for exemption shall be made on forms prescribed by the Director
of Revenue and shall contain information pertaining to the nature of the improvement,
its cost, and other information deemed necessary by the Director of Revenue.
8.07 APPROVAL. A person may submit a proposal to the City Council to receive prior
approval for eligibility for a tax exemption on new construction. If the City Council resolves to
consider such proposal, it shall publish notice and hold a public hearing thereon. Thereafter, at
least thirty (30) days after such hearing, the City Council, by ordinance, may give its prior
approval of a tax exemption for new construction if the new construction is in conformance with
City zoning. Such prior approval shall not entitle the owner to exemption from taxation until
the new construction has been completed and found to be qualified real estate.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 427B.4)
8.08 EXEMPTION REPEALED. When in the opinion of the City Council continuation
of the exemption granted by this chapter ceases to be of benefit to the City, the City Council
may repeal this chapter, but all existing exemptions shall continue until their expiration.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 427B.5)
8.09 DUAL EXEMPTIONS PROHIBITED. A property tax exemption under this chapter
shall not be granted if the property for which the exemption is claimed has received any other
property tax exemption authorized by law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 427B.6)
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
- 43 -
CHAPTER 9
URBAN RENEWAL
EDITOR’S NOTE
The following ordinances not codified herein, and specifically saved from repeal, have been
adopted establishing Urban Renewal Areas in the City and remain in full force and effect.
ORDINANCE NO. ADOPTED PURPOSE
SC-O-6-79 December 19, 1979 Established Sioux Center Urban Renewal
Redevelopment Project
SC-O-6-88 December 9, 1988 Amending Original Project
SC-O-3-94 December 19, 1994 Established Sioux Center Industrial Park Urban
Renewal Redevelopment Project
SC-O-03-99 September 28, 1999 Amending Industrial Park Project
SC-O-04-00 May 30, 2000 Amending Industrial Park Project
SC-O-03-03 December 17, 2003 Amending Industrial Park Project
SC-O-5-04 October 19, 2004 Amending Original Project
SC-O-01-06 October 4, 2006 Amending Original Project
SC-O-03-06 December 20, 2006 Amending Industrial Park Project
SC-O-05-07 August 21, 2007 Amending Industrial Park Project
SC-O-03-12 March 26, 2012 Amending Original and Industrial Park Project
SC-O-04-14 October 9, 2014 Amendment No. 2 to the Sioux Center Unified
Urban Renewal Area
SC-O-05-15 January 19, 2016 Amendment No. 3 to the Sioux Center Unified
Urban Renewal Plan
SC-O-03-18 March 29, 2018 Amendment No. 5 to the Sioux Center Unified
Urban Renewal Plan
CHAPTER 9 URBAN RENEWAL
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
- 44 -
° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° °
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
- 45 -
CHAPTER 10
LOCAL OPTION SALES AND SERVICES TAX
10.01 Tax Imposed; Exemptions 10.03 Effective Date
10.02 Collection and Enforcement 10.04 Disposition of Proceeds
10.01 TAX IMPOSED; EXEMPTIONS. There shall be a tax at the rate of one percent (1%)
imposed on transactions occurring within the incorporated areas of the City. The tax shall be
collected by all persons required to collect State gross receipts taxes. However, the tax shall not
be imposed on the gross receipts from the sale of motor fuel or special fuel as defined in Chapter
452A of the Code of Iowa, on the gross receipts from the rental of rooms, apartments, or sleeping
quarters which are taxed under Chapter 423A of the Code of Iowa during the period the hotel
and motel tax is imposed, on the gross receipts from the sale of natural gas or electric energy in
a city or county where the gross receipts are subject to a franchise fee or user fee during the
period the franchise or user fee is imposed, on the gross receipts from the sale of a lottery ticket
or share in a lottery game conducted pursuant to Chapter 99G of the Code of Iowa, and on the
sale or rental of tangible personal property described in Chapter 423 of the Code of Iowa.
10.02 COLLECTION AND ENFORCEMENT. The Director of Revenue of the State of
Iowa shall be responsible for the collection and enforcement of all taxes, penalties and interest
imposed by this chapter pursuant to Chapter 423B of the Code of Iowa.
10.03 EFFECTIVE DATE. The tax established by virtue of this chapter shall be imposed
on or after October 1, 1995.
10.04 DISPOSITION OF PROCEEDS. All revenues received by the City pursuant to the
tax imposed in this chapter shall be credited to the General Fund of the City and the revenue
shall be used as follows:
1. Fifty percent (50%) of the revenues derived therefrom shall be spent for
property tax relief.
2. The remaining revenue may be spent by the City for debt reduction, parks and
recreation, community improvements, and capital improvements.
CHAPTER 10 LOCAL OPTION SALES AND SERVICES TAX
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
- 46 -
[The next page is 55]
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
- 55 -
CHAPTER 11
HOTEL AND MOTEL TAX
11.01 Tax Imposed 11.03 Collection and Enforcement
11.02 Definition 11.04 Effective Date
11.01 TAX IMPOSED. There shall be a tax at the rate of five percent (5%) imposed upon
the sales price from the renting of sleeping rooms, apartments, or sleeping quarters in a hotel,
motel, inn, public lodging house, rooming house, manufactured home or mobile home that is
tangible personal property, tourist court, or any place where sleeping accommodations are
furnished to transient guests for rent, whether with or without meals, except the sales price from
the renting of sleeping rooms in dormitories and in memorial unions at all universities and
colleges located in the State of Iowa and the guests of a religious institution if the property is
exempt under Section 427.1, subsection 8, of the Code of Iowa and the purpose of renting is to
provide a place for a religious retreat or function and not a place for transient guests generally.
11.02 DEFINITION. “Renting” and “rent” include any kind of direct or indirect charge for
such sleeping rooms, apartments, or sleeping quarters or their use. However, the tax does not
apply to the sales price from the renting of a sleeping room, apartment, or sleeping quarters
while rented by the same person for a period of more than 31 consecutive days.
11.03 COLLECTION AND ENFORCEMENT. The Director of Revenue of the State of
Iowa shall be responsible for the collection and enforcement of all taxes, penalties, and interest
imposed by this chapter pursuant to Chapter 423A of the Code of Iowa.
11.04 EFFECTIVE DATE. The tax established by virtue of this chapter shall be imposed
on or after January 1, 2011.
CHAPTER 11 HOTEL AND MOTEL TAX
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
- 56 -
[The next page is 75]
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
- 75 -
CHAPTER 15
MAYOR
15.01 Term of Office 15.04 Compensation
15.02 Powers and Duties 15.05 Voting
15.03 Appointments
15.01 TERM OF OFFICE. The Mayor is elected for a term of four years.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 376.2)
15.02 POWERS AND DUTIES. The powers and duties of the Mayor are as follows:
1. Chief Executive Officer. Act as the chief executive officer of the City and
presiding officer of the Council and have the power to examine all functions of the
municipal departments, their records and to call for special reports from department
heads at any time.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.14[1])
2. Proclamation of Emergency. Have authority to take command of the police
and govern the City by proclamation, upon making a determination that a time of
emergency or public danger exists. Within the City limits, the Mayor has all the powers
conferred upon the Police Chief to suppress disorders.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.14[2])
3. Special Meetings. Call special meetings of the Council when the Mayor deems
such meetings necessary to the interests of the City.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.14[1])
4. Mayor’s Veto. Sign, veto, or take no action on an ordinance, amendment, or
resolution passed by the Council. The Mayor may veto an ordinance, amendment, or
resolution within fourteen days after passage. The Mayor shall explain the reasons for
the veto in a written message to the Council at the time of the veto.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.5 & 380.6[2])
5. Reports to Council. Make such oral or written reports to the Council as
required. These reports shall concern municipal affairs generally, the municipal
departments, and recommendations suitable for Council action.
6. Negotiations. Represent the City in all negotiations properly entered into in
accordance with law or ordinance. The Mayor shall not represent the City where this
duty is specifically delegated to another officer by law, ordinance, or Council direction.
7. Contracts. Whenever authorized by the Council, sign contracts on behalf of the
City.
8. Professional Services. Upon order of the Council, secure for the City such
specialized and professional services not already available to the City. In executing the
order of the Council, the Mayor shall act in accordance with the Code of Ordinances
and the laws of the State.
CHAPTER 15 MAYOR
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
- 76 -
9. Licenses and Permits. Sign all licenses and permits that have been granted by
the Council, except those designated by law or ordinance to be issued by another
municipal officer.
10. Absentee Officer. Make appropriate provision that duties of any absentee
officer be carried on during such absence.
15.03 APPOINTMENTS. The Mayor shall appoint the Mayor Pro Tem, and the Mayor also
appoints, with Council approval, the following officials:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.4)
1. Police Chief
2. Park Board
3. Recreation and Arts Council
4. Heritage Board
5. Library Board of Trustees
In addition, the Mayor recommends individuals for appointment by the Council for membership
on the Planning and Zoning Commission.
15.04 COMPENSATION. The salary of the Mayor is $3,600.00 per year, payable annually.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[8])
15.05 VOTING. The Mayor is not a member of the Council and shall not vote as a member
of the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.4)
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
- 77 -
CHAPTER 16
MAYOR PRO TEM
16.01 Vice President of Council 16.03 Voting Rights
16.02 Powers and Duties 16.04 Compensation
16.01 VICE PRESIDENT OF COUNCIL. The Mayor shall appoint a member of the
Council as Mayor Pro Tem, who shall serve as vice president of the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.14[3])
16.02 POWERS AND DUTIES. Except for the limitations otherwise provided herein, the
Mayor Pro Tem shall perform the duties of the Mayor in cases of absence or inability of the
Mayor to perform such duties. In the exercise of the duties of the office the Mayor Pro Tem
shall not have power to appoint, employ, or discharge from employment officers or employees
that the Mayor has the power to appoint, employ, or discharge without the approval of the
Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.14[3])
16.03 VOTING RIGHTS. The Mayor Pro Tem shall have the right to vote as a member of
the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.14[3])
16.04 COMPENSATION. If the Mayor Pro Tem performs the duties of the Mayor during
the Mayor’s absence or disability for a continuous period of fifteen (15) days or more, the Mayor
Pro Tem may be paid for that period the compensation as determined by the Council, based
upon the Mayor Pro Tem’s performance of the Mayor’s duties and upon the compensation of
the Mayor.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[8])
CHAPTER 16 MAYOR PRO TEM
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
- 78 -
° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° °
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
- 79 -
CHAPTER 17
CITY COUNCIL
17.01 Number and Term of Council 17.04 Council Meetings
17.02 Powers and Duties 17.05 Appointments
17.03 Exercise of Power 17.06 Compensation
17.01 NUMBER AND TERM OF COUNCIL. The Council consists of five Council
members elected at large for overlapping terms of four years.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.4 & 376.2)
17.02 POWERS AND DUTIES. The powers and duties of the Council include, but are not
limited to the following:
1. General. All powers of the City are vested in the Council except as otherwise
provided by law or ordinance.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.2[1])
2. Fiscal Authority. The Council shall apportion and appropriate all funds, and
audit and allow all bills, accounts, payrolls and claims, and order payment thereof. It
shall make all assessments for the cost of street improvements, sidewalks, sewers and
other work, improvement, or repairs that may be specially assessed.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.2[1], 384.16 & 384.38[1])
3. Public Improvements. The Council shall make all orders for the construction
of any improvements, bridges, or buildings.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.2[1])
4. Contracts. The Council shall make or authorize the making of all contracts. No
contract shall bind or be obligatory upon the City unless approved by the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 26.10)
5. Employees. The Council shall authorize, by resolution, the number, duties,
term of office and compensation of employees or officers not otherwise provided for by
State law or the Code of Ordinances.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
6. Setting Compensation for Elected Officers. By ordinance, the Council shall
prescribe the compensation of the Mayor, Council members, and other elected City
officers, but a change in the compensation of the Mayor does not become effective
during the term in which the change is adopted, and the Council shall not adopt such an
ordinance changing the compensation of any elected officer during the months of
November and December in the year of a regular City election. A change in the
compensation of Council members becomes effective for all Council members at the
beginning of the term of the Council members elected at the election next following the
change in compensation.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[8])
17.03 EXERCISE OF POWER. The Council shall exercise a power only by the passage of
a motion, a resolution, an amendment, or an ordinance in the following manner:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.3[1])
CHAPTER 17 CITY COUNCIL
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
- 80 -
1. Action by Council. Passage of an ordinance, amendment, or resolution requires
a majority vote of all of the members of the Council. Passage of a motion requires a
majority vote of a quorum of the Council. A resolution must be passed to spend public
funds in excess of one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) on a public improvement
project, or to accept public improvements and facilities upon their completion. Each
Council member’s vote on a measure must be recorded. A measure that fails to receive
sufficient votes for passage shall be considered defeated.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.4)
2. Overriding Mayor’s Veto. Within thirty (30) days after the Mayor’s veto, the
Council may pass the measure again by a vote of not less than two-thirds of all of the
members of the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.6[2])
3. Measures Become Effective. Measures passed by the Council become effective
in one of the following ways:
A. An ordinance or amendment signed by the Mayor becomes effective
when the ordinance or a summary of the ordinance is published, unless a
subsequent effective date is provided within the ordinance or amendment.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.6[1a])
B. A resolution signed by the Mayor becomes effective immediately upon
signing.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.6[1b])
C. A motion becomes effective immediately upon passage of the motion
by the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.6[1c])
D. If the Mayor vetoes an ordinance, amendment or resolution and the
Council repasses the measure after the Mayor’s veto, a resolution becomes
effective immediately upon repassage, and an ordinance or amendment
becomes a law when the ordinance or a summary of the ordinance is published,
unless a subsequent effective date is provided within the ordinance or
amendment.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.6[2])
E. If the Mayor takes no action on an ordinance, amendment or resolution,
a resolution becomes effective fourteen (14) days after the date of passage, and
an ordinance or amendment becomes law when the ordinance or a summary of
the ordinance is published, but not sooner than 14 days after the date of passage,
unless a subsequent effective date is provided within the ordinance or
amendment.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.6[3])
“All of the members of the Council” refers to all of the seats of the Council including a vacant
seat and a seat where the member is absent, but does not include a seat where the Council
member declines to vote by reason of a conflict of interest.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.1[a])
17.04 COUNCIL MEETINGS. Procedures for giving notice of meetings of the Council and
other provisions regarding the conduct of Council meetings are contained in Section 5.06 of this
Code of Ordinances. Additional particulars relating to Council meetings are the following:
CHAPTER 17 CITY COUNCIL
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
- 81 -
1. Regular Meetings. The time and place of the regular meetings of the Council
shall be fixed by the Council.
2. Special Meetings. Special meetings shall be held upon call of the Mayor or
upon the request of a majority of the members of the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[5])
3. Quorum. A majority of all Council members is a quorum.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[1])
4. Rules of Procedure. The Council shall determine its own rules and maintain
records of its proceedings.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[5])
5. Compelling Attendance. Any three members of the Council can compel the
attendance of the absent members at any regular, adjourned, or duly called meeting, by
serving a written notice upon the absent members to attend at once.
17.05 APPOINTMENTS. The Council shall appoint the following officials and prescribe
their powers, duties, compensation, and term of office:
1. City Manager
2. City Clerk
3. Utilities Manager
4. City Attorney
5. City Treasurer
6. Fire Chief
7. Planning and Zoning Commission
8. Board of Adjustment
17.06 COMPENSATION. The salary of each Council member is nine hundred dollars
($900.00) per year, payable annually.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[8])
CHAPTER 17 CITY COUNCIL
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
- 82 -
[The next page is 85]
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
- 85 -
CHAPTER 18
CITY CLERK
18.01 Appointment and Compensation 18.08 Records
18.02 Powers and Duties: General 18.09 Attendance at Meetings
18.03 Publication of Minutes 18.10 Issue Licenses and Permits
18.04 Recording Measures 18.11 Notify Appointees
18.05 Publication 18.12 Elections
18.06 Authentication 18.13 City Seal
18.07 Certify Measures
18.01 APPOINTMENT AND COMPENSATION. The Council shall appoint by majority
vote a City Clerk to serve for an indefinite term. The Clerk shall receive such compensation as
established by resolution of the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[3])
18.02 POWERS AND DUTIES: GENERAL. The Clerk or, in the Clerk’s absence or
inability to act, the Deputy Clerk has the powers and duties as provided in this chapter, this
Code of Ordinances, and the law.
18.03 PUBLICATION OF MINUTES. Within fifteen (15) days following a regular or
special meeting, the Clerk shall cause the minutes of the proceedings thereof to be published.
Such publication shall include a list of all claims allowed and a summary of all receipts and
shall show the gross amount of the claims.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[6])
18.04 RECORDING MEASURES. The Clerk shall promptly record each measure
considered by the Council and record a statement with the measure, where applicable, indicating
whether the Mayor signed, vetoed or took no action on the measure, and whether the measure
was repassed after the Mayor’s veto.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.7[1 & 2])
18.05 PUBLICATION. The Clerk shall cause to be published all ordinances, enactments,
proceedings and official notices requiring publication as follows:
1. Time. If notice of an election, hearing, or other official action is required by
this Code of Ordinances or law, the notice must be published at least once, not less than
four (4) or more than twenty (20) days before the date of the election, hearing, or other
action, unless otherwise provided by law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.3[1])
2. Manner of Publication. A publication required by this Code of Ordinances or
law must be in a newspaper published at least once weekly and having general
circulation in the City.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.3[2])
18.06 AUTHENTICATION. The Clerk shall authenticate all measures except motions with
the Clerk’s signature, certifying the time and manner of publication when required.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.7[4])
CHAPTER 18 CITY CLERK
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
- 86 -
18.07 CERTIFY MEASURES. The Clerk shall certify all measures establishing any zoning
district, building lines, or fire limits and a plat showing the district, lines, or limits to the recorder
of the County containing the affected parts of the City.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.11)
18.08 RECORDS. The Clerk shall maintain the specified City records in the following
manner:
1. Ordinances and Codes. Maintain copies of all effective City ordinances and
codes for public use.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.7[5])
2. Custody. Have custody and be responsible for the safekeeping of all writings
or documents in which the City is a party in interest unless otherwise specifically
directed by law or ordinance.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
3. Maintenance. Maintain all City records and documents, or accurate
reproductions, for at least five (5) years except that ordinances, resolutions, Council
proceedings, records and documents, or accurate reproductions, relating to the issuance,
cancellation, transfer, redemption or replacement of public bonds or obligations shall
be kept for at least eleven (11) years following the final maturity of the bonds or
obligations. Ordinances, resolutions, Council proceedings, records and documents, or
accurate reproductions, relating to real property transactions shall be maintained
permanently.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[3 & 5])
4. Provide Copy. Furnish upon request to any municipal officer a copy of any
record, paper or public document under the Clerk’s control when it may be necessary
to such officer in the discharge of such officer’s duty; furnish a copy to any citizen when
requested upon payment of the fee set by Council resolution; under the direction of the
Mayor or other authorized officer, affix the seal of the City to those public documents
or instruments that by ordinance and Code of Ordinances are required to be attested by
the affixing of the seal.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4 & 5] and 380.7[5])
5. Filing of Communications. Keep and file all communications and petitions
directed to the Council or to the City generally. The Clerk shall endorse thereon the
action of the Council taken upon matters considered in such communications and
petitions.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
18.09 ATTENDANCE AT MEETINGS. The Clerk shall attend all regular and special
Council meetings and, at the direction of the Council, the Clerk shall attend meetings of
committees, boards, and commissions. The Clerk shall record and preserve a correct record of
the proceedings of such meetings.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
18.10 ISSUE LICENSES AND PERMITS. The Clerk shall issue or revoke licenses and
permits when authorized by this Code of Ordinances, and keep a record of licenses and permits
issued which shall show date of issuance, license or permit number, official receipt number,
name of person to whom issued, term of license or permit and purpose for which issued.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
CHAPTER 18 CITY CLERK
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
- 87 -
18.11 NOTIFY APPOINTEES. The Clerk shall inform all persons appointed by the Mayor
or Council to offices in the City government of their positions and the time at which they shall
assume the duties of their offices.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
18.12 ELECTIONS. The Clerk shall perform the duties relating to elections and nominations
in accordance with Chapter 376 of the Code of Iowa.
18.13 CITY SEAL. The City seal is in the custody of the Clerk and shall be attached by the
Clerk to all transcripts, orders, and certificates that it may be necessary or proper to authenticate.
The City seal is circular in form, in the center of which is the word “SEAL” and around the
margin of which are the words “INCORPORATED CITY OF SIOUX CENTER, IOWA.”
CHAPTER 18 CITY CLERK
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
- 88 -
° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° °
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
- 89 -
CHAPTER 19
CITY TREASURER
19.01 Appointment 19.03 Duties of Treasurer
19.02 Compensation
19.01 APPOINTMENT. The Council shall appoint by majority vote a City Treasurer to
serve for an indefinite term.
19.02 COMPENSATION. The Treasurer is paid such compensation as specified by
resolution of the Council.
19.03 DUTIES OF TREASURER. The duties of the Treasurer are as follows:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
1. Custody of Funds. Be responsible for the safe custody of all funds of the City
in the manner provided by law and Council direction.
2. Record of Fund. Keep the record of each fund separate.
3. Record Receipts. Keep an accurate record of all money or securities received
by the Treasurer on behalf of the City and specify the date, from whom, and for what
purpose received.
4. Record Disbursements. Keep an accurate account of all disbursements, money,
or property, specifying date, to whom, and from what fund paid.
5. Special Assessments. Keep an accurate account of all money received by the
Treasurer from special assessments.
6. Deposit Funds. Upon receipt of moneys to be held in the Treasurer’s custody
and belonging to the City, deposit the same in depositories selected by the Council.
7. Reconciliation. Reconcile depository statements with the Treasurer’s books
and certify monthly to the Council the balance of cash and investments of each fund
and amounts received and disbursed.
8. Debt Service. Keep a register of all bonds outstanding and record all payments
of interest and principal.
9. Other Duties. Perform such other duties as specified by the Council by
resolution or ordinance.
CHAPTER 19 CITY TREASURER
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
- 90 -
° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° °
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
- 91 -
CHAPTER 20
CITY ATTORNEY
20.01 Appointment and Compensation 20.06 Provide Legal Opinion
20.02 Attorney for City 20.07 Attendance at Council Meetings
20.03 Power of Attorney 20.08 Prepare Documents
20.04 Ordinance Preparation 20.09 Representation of City Employees
20.05 Review and Comment
20.01 APPOINTMENT AND COMPENSATION. The Council shall appoint by majority
vote a City Attorney to serve for an indefinite term. The City Attorney shall receive such
compensation as established by resolution of the Council.
20.02 ATTORNEY FOR CITY. The City Attorney shall act as attorney for the City in all
matters affecting the City’s interest and appear on behalf of the City before any court, tribunal,
commission, or board. The City Attorney shall prosecute or defend all actions and proceedings
when so requested by the Mayor or Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
20.03 POWER OF ATTORNEY. The City Attorney shall sign the name of the City to all
appeal bonds and to all other bonds or papers of any kind that may be essential to the prosecution
of any cause in court, and when so signed the City shall be bound upon the same.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
20.04 ORDINANCE PREPARATION. The City Attorney shall prepare those ordinances
that the Council may desire and direct to be prepared and report to the Council upon all such
ordinances before their final passage by the Council and publication.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
20.05 REVIEW AND COMMENT. The City Attorney shall, upon request, make a report
to the Council giving an opinion on all contracts, documents, resolutions, or ordinances
submitted to or coming under the City Attorney’s notice.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
20.06 PROVIDE LEGAL OPINION. The City Attorney shall give advice or a written legal
opinion on City contracts and all questions of law relating to City matters submitted by the
Mayor, Council, or City Manager.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
20.07 ATTENDANCE AT COUNCIL MEETINGS. The City Attorney shall attend
meetings of the Council at the request of the Mayor or Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
20.08 PREPARE DOCUMENTS. The City Attorney shall, upon request, formulate drafts
for contracts, forms and other writings that may be required for the use of the City.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
20.09 REPRESENTATION OF CITY EMPLOYEES. The City Attorney shall not appear
on behalf of any City officer or employee before any court or tribunal for the purely private
CHAPTER 20 CITY ATTORNEY
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
- 92 -
benefit of said officer or employee. The City Attorney shall, however, if directed by the
Council, appear to defend any City officer or employee in any cause of action arising out of or
in the course of the performance of the duties of his or her office or employment.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 670.8)
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
- 93 -
CHAPTER 21
CITY MANAGER
21.01 Office Established 21.03 Powers and Duties Generally
21.02 Appointment and Term of Office 21.04 City Manager Acting in Lieu of Appointive Officers
21.01 OFFICE ESTABLISHED. There is hereby created the office of City Manager for the
City.
21.02 APPOINTMENT AND TERM OF OFFICE. The City Manager shall be appointed
by a majority vote of the Council at a regular meeting thereof. The City Manager shall hold
office at the pleasure of the Council and shall be subject to removal by a majority vote thereof.
21.03 POWERS AND DUTIES GENERALLY. The City Manager shall perform the duties
assigned by the Mayor and City Council as listed in the current job description. Generally, the
City Manager will administer and direct the affairs of City government, act as liaison between
the various units of government, and act as an ombudsman for the community at large and its
citizens. The City Manager shall have other duties assigned on an as-needed basis from time to
time by the Mayor and Council.
21.04 CITY MANAGER ACTING IN LIEU OF APPOINTIVE OFFICERS. Whenever
by ordinance or resolution of the Council the powers and duties heretofore vested in any other
appointed City officer are to be wholly performed by the City Manager, no appointment of the
appointive officer shall be made, and any appointment of such an appointive officer made prior
to the adoption of such ordinance or resolution shall be thereby canceled.
CHAPTER 21 CITY MANAGER
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
- 94 -
° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° °
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
- 95 -
CHAPTER 22
LIBRARY BOARD OF TRUSTEES
22.01 Public Library 22.07 Nonresident Use
22.02 Library Trustees 22.08 Expenditures
22.03 Qualifications of Trustees 22.09 Annual Report
22.04 Organization of the Board 22.10 Injury to Books or Property
22.05 Powers and Duties 22.11 Theft
22.06 Contracting with Other Libraries 22.12 Notice Posted
22.01 PUBLIC LIBRARY. The public library for the City is known as the Sioux Center
Public Library. It is referred to in this chapter as the Library.
22.02 LIBRARY TRUSTEES. The Board of Trustees of the Library, hereinafter referred to
as the Board, consists of nine members appointed by the Mayor with the approval of the Council.
One member of the Board may be a rural resident and the remaining members shall be residents
of the City.
22.03 QUALIFICATIONS OF TRUSTEES. All members of the Board shall be eighteen
(18) years of age or older.
22.04 ORGANIZATION OF THE BOARD. The organization of the Board shall be as
follows:
1. Term of Office. All appointments to the Board shall be for six years from
January 1 following the appointment. Terms of trustees shall be so arranged so that not
more than three terms shall expire each two years. Biannual appointments shall be
made before January 31 for trustees retiring on December 31. All trustees shall be
eligible for reappointment for new terms.
2. Vacancies. The position of any Trustee shall be vacated if such member moves
permanently from the area or if such member is absent without due explanation from
six (6) consecutive regular meetings of the Board, except in the case of illness; or if the
trustee is removed for cause by the Mayor with the approval of the Council. Vacancies
in the Board shall be filled in the same manner as an original appointment except that
the new Trustee shall fill out the unexpired term for which the appointment is made.
3. Compensation. Trustees shall receive no compensation for their services.
22.05 POWERS AND DUTIES. The Board shall have and exercise the following powers
and duties:
1. Officers. To meet and elect from its members a President and such other
officers as it deems necessary.
2. Physical Plant. To have charge, control, and supervision of the Library, its
appurtenances, fixtures, and rooms.
3. Charge of Affairs. To direct and control all affairs of the Library and to
delegate authority as deemed necessary.
CHAPTER 22 LIBRARY BOARD OF TRUSTEES
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
- 96 -
4. Hiring of Personnel. To employ a Librarian, assistants, and other employees
necessary for the operation of the Library, within budgetary limits set by the Board and
approved by the Council.
5. Removal of Personnel. To remove the Librarian, by a two-thirds vote of the
Board, and provide procedures for the removal of the assistants or employees for
misdemeanor, incompetence, or inattention to duty, subject however, to the provisions
of Chapter 35C of the Code of Iowa.
6. Purchases. To select, or authorize the Librarian to select, and make purchases
of books, pamphlets, magazines, periodicals, papers, maps, journals, other Library
materials, furniture, fixtures, stationery, and supplies for the Library within budgetary
limits set by the Board.
7. Use by Nonresidents. To authorize the use of the Library by nonresidents and
to fix charges therefor unless a contract for free service exists.
8. Rules and Regulations. To make and adopt, amend, modify, or repeal rules and
regulations, not inconsistent with this Code of Ordinances and the law, for the care, use,
government and management of the Library and the business of the Board, fixing and
enforcing penalties for violations.
9. Expenditures. To have exclusive control of the expenditure of all funds
allocated for Library purposes by the Council, and of all moneys available by gift or
otherwise for the erection of Library buildings, and of all other moneys belonging to
the Library including fines and rentals collected under the rules of the Board.
10. Gifts. To accept gifts of real property, personal property, or mixed property,
and devises and bequests, including trust funds; to take the title to said property in the
name of the Library; to execute deeds and bills of sale for the conveyance of said
property; and to expend the funds received by them from such gifts, for the
improvement of the Library.
11. Enforce the Performance of Conditions on Gifts. To enforce the performance
of conditions on gifts, donations, devises and bequests accepted by the City by action
against the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Ch. 661)
12. Record of Proceedings. To keep a record of its proceedings.
22.06 CONTRACTING WITH OTHER LIBRARIES. The Board has power to contract
with other libraries in accordance with the following:
1. Contracting. The Board may contract with any other boards of trustees of free
public libraries, with any other city, school corporation, private or semiprivate
organization, institution of higher learning, township, or County, or with the trustees of
any County library district for the use of the Library by their respective residents.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.5 & Ch. 28E)
2. Termination. Such a contract may be terminated at any time by mutual consent
of the contracting parties. It also may be terminated by a majority vote of the electors
represented by either of the contracting parties. Such a termination proposition shall be
submitted to the electors by the governing body of a contracting party on a written
petition of not less than five percent (5%) in number of the electors who voted for
governor in the territory of the contracting party at the last general election. The petition
must be presented to the governing body not less than forty (40) days before the
CHAPTER 22 LIBRARY BOARD OF TRUSTEES
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
- 97 -
election. The proposition may be submitted at any election provided by law that is held
in the territory of the party seeking to terminate the contract.
22.07 NONRESIDENT USE. The Board may authorize the use of the Library by persons
not residents of the City or County in any one or more of the following ways:
1. Lending. By lending the books or other materials of the Library to nonresidents
on the same terms and conditions as to residents of the City, or County, or upon payment
of a special nonresident Library fee.
2. Depository. By establishing depositories of Library books or other materials to
be loaned to nonresidents.
3. Bookmobiles. By establishing bookmobiles or a traveling library so that books
or other Library materials may be loaned to nonresidents.
4. Branch Library. By establishing branch libraries for lending books or other
Library materials to nonresidents.
22.08 EXPENDITURES. All money appropriated by the Council for the operation and
maintenance of the Library shall be set aside in an account for the Library. Expenditures shall
be paid for only on orders of the Board, signed by its President and Secretary.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.20 & 392.5)
22.09 ANNUAL REPORT. The Board shall make a report to the Council immediately after
the close of the fiscal year. This report shall contain statements as to the condition of the
Library, the number of books added, the number circulated, the amount of fines collected, and
the amount of money expended in the maintenance of the Library during the year, together with
such further information as may be required by the Council.
22.10 INJURY TO BOOKS OR PROPERTY. It is unlawful for a person willfully,
maliciously or wantonly to tear, deface, mutilate, injure or destroy, in whole or in part, any
newspaper, periodical, book, map, pamphlet, chart, picture or other property belonging to the
Library or reading room.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.1)
22.11 THEFT. No person shall take possession or control of property of the Library with the
intent to deprive the Library thereof.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 714.1)
22.12 NOTICE POSTED. There shall be posted in clear public view within the Library
notices informing the public of the following:
1. Failure to Return. Failure to return Library materials for two months or more
after the date the person agreed to return the Library materials, or failure to return
Library equipment for one month or more after the date the person agreed to return the
Library equipment, is evidence of intent to deprive the owner, provided a reasonable
attempt, including the mailing by restricted certified mail of notice that such material
or equipment is overdue and criminal actions will be taken, has been made to reclaim
the materials or equipment.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 714.5)
CHAPTER 22 LIBRARY BOARD OF TRUSTEES
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
- 98 -
2. Detention and Search. Persons concealing Library materials may be detained
and searched pursuant to law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 808.12)
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
- 99 -
CHAPTER 23
PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION
23.01 Planning and Zoning Commission 23.04 Compensation
23.02 Term of Office 23.05 Powers and Duties
23.03 Vacancies
23.01 PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION. The City Planning and Zoning
Commission, hereinafter referred to as the Commission, consists of 11 members appointed by
the Council. The Mayor shall make recommendations for individual appointments. The
Commission members shall be residents of the City and shall not hold any elective office in the
City government.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 414.6 & 392.1)
23.02 TERM OF OFFICE. The term of office of the members of the Commission shall be
five years. The terms of not more than one-third of the members will expire in any one year.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1)
23.03 VACANCIES. If any vacancy exists on the Commission caused by resignation, or
otherwise, a successor for the residue of the term shall be appointed in the same manner as the
original appointee.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1)
23.04 COMPENSATION. All members of the Commission shall serve without
compensation, except their actual expenses, which shall be subject to the approval of the
Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1)
23.05 POWERS AND DUTIES. The Commission shall have and exercise the following
powers and duties:
1. Selection of Officers. The Commission shall choose annually at its first regular
meeting one of its members to act as Chairperson and another as Vice Chairperson, who
shall perform all the duties of the Chairperson during the Chairperson’s absence or
disability.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1)
2. Adopt Rules and Regulations. The Commission shall adopt such rules and
regulations governing its organization and procedure as it may deem necessary.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1)
3. Zoning. The Commission shall have and exercise all the powers and duties and
privileges in establishing the City zoning regulations and other related matters and may
from time to time recommend to the Council amendments, supplements, changes or
modifications, all as provided by Chapter 414 of the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 414.6)
4. Zoning Amendments. The Planning and Zoning Commission may, from time
to time, recommend to the Council changes in the zoning regulations or districts. When
proposed changes in the zoning regulations or districts are referred to the Planning and
CHAPTER 23 PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
- 100 -
Zoning Commission by the Council, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall file
with the Council, with 30 days thereafter, its recommendations approving,
disapproving, or modifying the proposed changes.
5. Recommendations of Improvements. No statuary, memorial or work of art in
a public place, and no public building, bridge, viaduct, street fixtures, public structure
or appurtenances, shall be located or erected, or site therefor obtained, nor shall any
permit be issued by any department of the City for the erection or location thereof until
and unless the design and proposed location of any such improvement shall have been
submitted to the Commission and its recommendations thereon obtained, except such
requirements and recommendations shall not act as a stay upon action for any such
improvement when the Commission after thirty (30) days’ written notice requesting
such recommendations, shall have failed to file same.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1)
6. Review and Comment on Plats. All plans, plats, or re-plats of subdivision or
re-subdivisions of land embraced in the City or adjacent thereto, laid out in lots or plats
with the streets, alleys, or other portions of the same intended to be dedicated to the
public in the City, shall first be submitted to the Commission and its recommendations
obtained before approval by the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1)
7. Review and Comment of Street and Park Improvements. No plan for any street,
park, parkway, boulevard, traffic-way, river front, or other public improvement
affecting the City plan shall be finally approved by the City or the character or location
thereof determined, unless such proposal shall first have been submitted to the
Commission and the Commission shall have had thirty (30) days within which to file
its recommendations thereon.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1)
8. Fiscal Responsibilities. The Commission shall have full, complete and
exclusive authority to expend for and on behalf of the City all sums of money
appropriated to it, and to use and expend all gifts, donations or payments whatsoever
which are received by the City for City planning and zoning purposes.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1)
9. Limitation on Entering Contracts. The Commission shall have no power to
contract debts beyond the amount of its original or amended appropriation as approved
by the Council for the present year.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1)
10. Annual Report. The Commission shall each year make a report to the Mayor
and Council of its proceedings, with a full statement of its receipts, disbursements and
the progress of its work during the preceding fiscal year.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1)
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
- 101 -
CHAPTER 24
PARK BOARD
24.01 Park Board Created 24.05 Rules
24.02 Board Organization 24.06 Penalties
24.03 Duties of the Board 24.07 Technical Assistance
24.04 Reports
24.01 PARK BOARD CREATED. An advisory Park Board is hereby created to advise the
Council, to plan for the needed facilities to provide open space such as parks, playgrounds, and
facilities/equipment to be used in conjunction with the park system. The park system shall
include but not necessarily be limited to the following: Open-space park, Central Park,
Children’s Park, Sandy Hollow Swimming and Park, Sandy Hollow Recreation Area, Tower
Fields, and neighborhood parks. Further, the Park Board will work cooperatively with officials
of Dordt College, Sioux Center Community Schools, and Sioux Center Christian School in the
overall planning of a park and playground system.
24.02 BOARD ORGANIZATION. The Board shall consist of seven (7) members, all
citizens of the City, appointed by the Mayor with the approval of the City Council for staggered
terms of five years. Members may succeed themselves for appointment. The Mayor shall
designate the first Chairperson and Vice Chairperson, and the Board shall choose its
Chairperson and Vice Chairperson every two years thereafter. Members shall serve without
compensation, but may receive their actual expenses. If any vacancies shall exist on the Park
Board caused by resignation or otherwise, the Mayor shall appoint a successor for the remainder
of the term, subject to the approval of the City Council.
24.03 DUTIES OF THE BOARD. In addition to its duty to make a plan for parks and for
park facilities and to update and revise these plans as required, the Board shall have authority
over the properties and personnel devoted to parks, subject to the limitation of expenditures for
salaries and supplies, contract and capital outlays set forth in the annual budget provided by the
Council for park operations. The Park Supervisor shall order supplies by the procedures
established by the Council for all departments of the City, and payments will be made by warrant
written by the Clerk for invoices submitted and approved by the Board. The Clerk shall have
custody of park monies, which shall be kept in the General Fund.
24.04 REPORTS. The Board shall make written reports to the Council of its activities from
time to time as deemed advisable or upon Council request. Revenues and expenditures shall be
reported monthly by the Clerk in the manner of other departmental expenditures, and a copy
shall be provided to each member of the Board in the Clerk’s report to the Council.
24.05 RULES. The Board shall have power to make rules and regulations for the use of park
facilities, subject to the approval of the rules by the Council. These rules shall either be posted
on the facility or otherwise publicized in a manner to provide adequate notice to the using public.
24.06 PENALTIES. Violation of a Board rule that has been approved by the Council and
adopted by ordinance may be cause for denial of use of a facility, but such denial that extends
more than one day may be appealed to the Board or to the Council for a hearing. The violation
shall be prosecuted.
CHAPTER 24 PARK BOARD
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
- 102 -
24.07 TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE. The City Council may from time to time, as it deems
necessary, appoint an ad hoc committee to assist the Park Board as resource persons to give
technical assistance and advice to the Park Board. Such ad hoc committees may be of a short
or permanent duration and their function will be reviewed annually by the Council.
[The next page is 115]
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
- 115 -
CHAPTER 25
RECREATION AND ARTS COUNCIL
25.01 Recreation and Arts Council Created 25.04 Reports
25.02 Organization 25.05 Rules
25.03 Duties 25.06 Penalties for Violation of Rules
25.01 RECREATION AND ARTS COUNCIL CREATED. The Sioux Center Recreation
and Arts Council is hereby created to advise the City Council on the promotion of all forms of
art and recreation, generally called leisure services, within the City and its immediate environs,
to cooperate with similar organizations in Sioux County, Northwest Iowa, the State of Iowa,
and neighboring states for the delivery of leisure services, and to assume responsibility relating
to the support of the arts.
25.02 ORGANIZATION. The Recreation and Arts Council shall consist of nine members,
all citizens of the City, appointed by the Mayor and approved by the City Council. Members
are appointed to staggered terms of three years. The Mayor shall designate the first Chairperson
and Vice Chairperson, and the Sioux Center Recreation and Arts Council shall choose its
Chairperson and Vice Chairperson annually thereafter. Members shall serve without
compensation, but may receive their actual expenses. If any vacancies shall exist on the Sioux
Center Recreation and Arts Council caused by resignation or otherwise, the Mayor shall appoint
a successor for the remainder of the term, subject to the approval of the City Council.
25.03 DUTIES. The principal duties of the Recreation and Arts Council shall be for the
promotion of all forms of recreation and art, generally called leisure services, within the City
and its immediate environs. These duties shall include but not be limited to the following:
1. Recommend the hiring of and directing the activities of an individual for the
position(s) of Director of Recreation, Arts and Leisure Services and any support staff
thereof.
2. Organize and promote leisure services that involve primarily local residents and
participants.
3. Contract with nonresident performers, artists, exhibitors, and recreational
personnel for the delivery of leisure services.
4. Serve as a calendar-developing agency for the Te Paske Theatre and other
public facilities that may be assumed under its jurisdiction.
5. Provide a vehicle for which funds may be channeled for financing recreation
and arts.
6. Give support to existing organizations that provide leisure services and are
philosophically compatible with the purpose of the Recreation and Arts Council.
7. Solicit grants and other forms of financial assistance to be used in the
programming and promotion of leisure services.
8. Encourage among constituents the appreciation for cultural activity and
recreational outlets.
CHAPTER 25 RECREATION AND ARTS COUNCIL
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
- 116 -
9. The Recreation and Arts Council shall have the authority to make
recommendations concerning the agreements with other associations and/or agencies
such as this.
10. The Recreation and Arts Council shall annually prepare a budget proposing the
expenditures of funds for the purposes stated in this chapter. The City Council shall
give final approval and allocate funds for such purposes.
25.04 REPORTS. The Sioux Center Recreation and Arts Council shall make written reports
to the City Council of its activities from time to time as it deems advisable or upon City Council
request. Its revenues and expenditures shall be reported quarterly by the Clerk in the manner of
other departmental expenditures, and a copy shall be provided to each member of the Recreation
and Arts Council and in the Clerk’s report to the City Council.
25.05 RULES. The Recreational and Arts Council shall have the power to make rules and
regulations for the use of facilities or for the conduct of programs, subject to the approval of the
rules by the City Council.
25.06 PENALTIES FOR VIOLATION OF RULES. Violation of a Sioux Center
Recreation and Arts Council rule that has been approved by the City Council may be cause for
denial of the use of a facility or participation in a program, but such denial that extends more
than one day may be appealed first to the Sioux Center Recreation and Arts Council and then to
the City Council for a hearing.
[The next page is 121]
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
- 121 -
CHAPTER 26
HERITAGE BOARD
26.01 Board Created 26.05 Reports
26.02 Organization 26.06 Rules
26.03 Duties 26.07 Penalties for Violation of Rules
26.04 Contract with Others for Use of Facilities
26.01 BOARD CREATED. A Heritage Board is hereby created to advise the City Council
on the acquisition, display and maintenance of objects of lasting interest or value and for
purposes of promoting and/or maintaining historic values and themes.
26.02 ORGANIZATION. The Board shall consist of 11 members, a majority of whom shall
reside within the City, appointed by the Mayor with the approval of the Council for staggered
terms of five years. Members may succeed themselves for appointment. The Board shall
choose its Chairperson and Vice Chairperson annually and shall appoint a Treasurer from the
Board to provide financial supervision. Members shall serve without compensation, but may
receive their actual expenses. If any vacancies shall exist on the Heritage Board caused by
resignation or otherwise, the Mayor shall appoint a successor for the remainder of the term,
subject to the approval of the City Council.
26.03 DUTIES. The principal duties of the Board will be to make a plan for the acquisition,
display, and maintenance of objects of lasting interest or value and for the purposes of promoting
and/or maintaining historic values and themes.
1. The Board shall have authority to update and to revise these plans as required
and to have advisory authority over the properties and personnel devoted to such
facilities, subject to the limitation of expenditures for salaries and supplies, contract and
capital outlays that are set forth in the annual budget provided by the Council for
Heritage operations. The Board shall also serve as a vehicle to which funds may be
channeled for financing Heritage Board activities.
2. The Board shall have the authority to make recommendations concerning
agreements with other associations and/or agencies, where such exist, and to set apart
the necessary space to care for such articles as may come into their possession. The
Board is further authorized to recommend the purchase of receptacles and materials for
the preservation and protection of said articles that are, in their judgment, of a historical
and educational nature.
3. The Board shall annually prepare a budget proposing the expenditure of funds
for the purposes stated in this chapter. The Council shall give final approval and
allocate funds for historic preservation purposes.
26.04 CONTRACT WITH OTHERS FOR USE OF FACILITIES. The Board may
recommend contracts with other historical boards and/or associations, any other City, school
corporation, private or semi-private organization, institution of higher learning, township, or
county, or with the board of any county historical association for the use of facilities by their
residents.
CHAPTER 26 HERITAGE BOARD
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
- 122 -
26.05 REPORTS. The Board shall make written reports to the City Council of its activities
from time to time as it deems advisable or upon Council request. Its revenues and expenditures
shall be reported monthly by the Clerk in the manner of other departmental expenditures, and a
copy shall be provided to each member of the Board and in the Clerk’s report to the Council.
26.06 RULES. The Board shall have the power to make rules and regulations for the use of
facilities or for the conduct of programs, subject to the approval of the rules by the Council.
Such rules shall either be posted on the facilities or otherwise publicized in a manner to provide
adequate notice to the using public.
26.07 PENALTIES FOR VIOLATION OF RULES. Violation of a Board rule that has
been approved by the Council and adopted by ordinance may be cause for denial of the use of
a facility or participation in a program, but such denial that extends more than one day may be
appealed first to the Board or to the Council for a hearing.
[The next page is 151]
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
- 151 -
CHAPTER 30
POLICE DEPARTMENT
30.01 Department Established 30.06 Peace Officers Appointed
30.02 Organization 30.07 Police Chief: Duties
30.03 Peace Officer Qualifications 30.08 Departmental Rules
30.04 Required Training 30.09 Summoning Aid
30.05 Compensation 30.10 Taking Weapons
30.01 DEPARTMENT ESTABLISHED. The police department of the City is established
to provide for the preservation of peace and enforcement of law and ordinances within the
corporate limits of the City.
30.02 ORGANIZATION. The department consists of the Police Chief and such other law
enforcement officers and personnel, whether full or part time, as may be authorized by the
Council.
30.03 PEACE OFFICER QUALIFICATIONS. In no case shall any person be selected or
appointed as a law enforcement officer unless such person meets the minimum qualification
standards established by the Iowa Law Enforcement Academy.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 80B.11)
30.04 REQUIRED TRAINING. All peace officers shall have received the minimum
training required by law at an approved law enforcement training school within one year of
employment. Peace officers shall also meet the minimum in-service training as required by law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 80B.11[2])
(IAC, 501-3 and 501-8)
30.05 COMPENSATION. Members of the department are designated by rank and receive
such compensation as shall be determined by resolution of the Council.
30.06 PEACE OFFICERS APPOINTED. The Mayor shall appoint and dismiss the Police
Chief subject to the consent of a majority of the Council. The Police Chief shall select, subject
to the approval of the Mayor, the other members of the department.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.4)
30.07 POLICE CHIEF: DUTIES. The Police Chief has the following powers and duties
subject to the approval of the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
1. General. Perform all duties required of the Police Chief by law or ordinance.
2. Enforce Laws. Enforce all laws, ordinances, and regulations and bring all
persons committing any offense before the proper court.
3. Writs. Execute and return all writs and other processes directed to the Police
Chief.
4. Accident Reports. Report all motor vehicle accidents investigated to the State
Department of Transportation.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.266)
CHAPTER 30 POLICE DEPARTMENT
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
- 152 -
5. Prisoners. Be responsible for the custody of prisoners, including conveyance
to detention facilities as may be required.
6. Assist Officials. When requested, provide aid to other City officers, boards,
and commissions in the execution of their official duties.
7. Investigations. Provide for such investigation as may be necessary for the
prosecution of any person alleged to have violated any law or ordinance.
8. Record of Arrests. Keep a record of all arrests made in the City by showing
whether said arrests were made under provisions of State law or City ordinance, the
offense charged, who made the arrest and the disposition of the charge.
9. Reports. Compile and submit to the Mayor and Council an annual report as
well as such other reports as may be requested by the Mayor or Council.
10. Command. Be in command of all officers appointed for police work and be
responsible for the care, maintenance, and use of all vehicles, equipment, and materials
of the department.
30.08 DEPARTMENTAL RULES. The Police Chief shall establish such rules, not in
conflict with the Code of Ordinances, and subject to the approval of the Council, as may be
necessary for the operation of the department.
30.09 SUMMONING AID. Any peace officer making a legal arrest may orally summon as
many persons as the officer reasonably finds necessary to aid the officer in making the arrest.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 804.17)
30.10 TAKING WEAPONS. Any person who makes an arrest may take from the person
arrested all items that are capable of causing bodily harm which the arrested person may have
within such person’s control to be disposed of according to law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 804.18)
[The next page is 161]
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
- 161 -
CHAPTER 35
FIRE DEPARTMENT
35.01 Establishment and Purpose 35.07 Accidental Injury Insurance
35.02 Organization 35.08 Liability Insurance
35.03 Training 35.09 Calls Outside Fire District
35.04 Election of Fire Chief 35.10 Mutual Aid
35.05 Fire Chief: Duties 35.11 Authority to Cite Violations
35.06 Obedience to Fire Chief
35.01 ESTABLISHMENT AND PURPOSE. A volunteer fire department is hereby
established to prevent and extinguish fires and to protect lives and property against fires, to
promote fire prevention and fire safety, and to answer all emergency calls for which there is no
other established agency.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.16)
35.02 ORGANIZATION. The department consists of the Fire Chief and such other officers
and personnel as may be authorized by the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
35.03 TRAINING. All members of the department shall meet the minimum training
standards established by the State Fire Marshal and attend and actively participate in regular or
special training drills or programs as directed by the Fire Chief.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 100B.2[4])
35.04 ELECTION OF FIRE CHIEF. The Chief shall be elected annually by the members
of the department and then appointed as such by the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
35.05 FIRE CHIEF: DUTIES. The Fire Chief shall perform all duties required of the Fire
Chief by law or ordinance, including but not limited to the following:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
1. Enforce Laws. Enforce ordinances and laws regulating fire prevention and the
investigation of the cause, origin, and circumstances of fires.
2. Technical Assistance. Upon request, give advice concerning private fire alarm
systems, fire extinguishing equipment, fire escapes and exits, and development of fire
emergency plans.
3. Authority at Fires. When in charge of a fire scene, direct an operation as
necessary to extinguish or control a fire, perform a rescue operation, investigate the
existence of a suspected or reported fire, gas leak, or other hazardous condition, or take
any other action deemed necessary in the reasonable performance of the department’s
duties.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 102.2)
4. Control of Scenes. Prohibit an individual, vehicle or vessel from approaching
a fire scene and remove from the scene any object, vehicle, vessel or individual that
may impede or interfere with the operation of the Fire Department.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 102.2)
CHAPTER 35 FIRE DEPARTMENT
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
- 162 -
5. Authority to Barricade. When in charge of a fire scene, place or erect ropes,
guards, barricades or other obstructions across a street, alley, right-of-way, or private
property near the location of the fire or emergency so as to prevent accidents or
interference with the firefighting efforts of the Fire Department, to control the scene
until any required investigation is complete, or to preserve evidence related to the fire
or other emergency.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 102.3)
6. Command. Be charged with the duty of maintaining the efficiency, discipline,
and control of the Fire Department. The members of the Fire Department shall, at all
times, be subject to the direction of the Fire Chief.
7. Property. Exercise and have full control over the disposition of all fire
apparatus, tools, equipment, and other property used by or belonging to the Fire
Department.
8. Notification. Whenever death, serious bodily injury, or property damage in
excess of two hundred thousand dollars ($200,000) has occurred as a result of a fire, or
if arson is suspected, notify the State Fire Marshal’s Division immediately. For all other
fires causing an estimated damage of fifty dollars ($50.00) or more or emergency
responses by the Fire Department, file a report with the Fire Marshal’s Division within
ten (10) days following the end of the month. The report shall indicate all fire incidents
occurring and state the name of the owners and occupants of the property at the time of
the fire, the value of the property, the estimated total loss to the property, origin of the
fire as determined by investigation, and other facts, statistics, and circumstances
concerning the fire incidents.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 100.2 & 100.3)
9. Right of Entry. Have the right, during reasonable hours, to enter any building
or premises within the Fire Chief’s jurisdiction for the purpose of making such
investigation or inspection that under law or ordinance may be necessary to be made
and is reasonably necessary to protect the public health, safety, and welfare.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 100.12)
10. Recommendation. Make such recommendations to owners, occupants,
caretakers, or managers of buildings necessary to eliminate fire hazards.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 100.13)
11. Assist State Fire Marshal. At the request of the State Fire Marshal, and as
provided by law, aid said marshal in the performance of duties by investigating,
preventing and reporting data pertaining to fires.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 100.4)
12. Records. Cause to be kept records of the Fire Department personnel,
firefighting equipment, depreciation of all equipment and apparatus, the number of
responses to alarms, their cause, and location, and an analysis of losses by value, type
and location of buildings.
13. Reports. Compile and submit to the Mayor and Council an annual report of the
status and activities of the department as well as such other reports as may be requested
by the Mayor or Council.
35.06 OBEDIENCE TO FIRE CHIEF. No person shall willfully fail or refuse to comply
with any lawful order or direction of the Fire Chief.
CHAPTER 35 FIRE DEPARTMENT
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
- 163 -
35.07 ACCIDENTAL INJURY INSURANCE. The Council shall contract to insure the
City against liability for worker’s compensation and against statutory liability for the costs of
hospitalization, nursing, and medical attention for volunteer firefighters injured in the
performance of their duties as firefighters whether within or outside the corporate limits of the
City. All volunteer firefighters shall be covered by the contract.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 85.2, 85.61 and Sec. 410.18)
35.08 LIABILITY INSURANCE. The Council shall contract to insure against liability of
the City or members of the department for injuries, death or property damage arising out of and
resulting from the performance of departmental duties within or outside the corporate limits of
the City.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 670.2 & 517A.1)
35.09 CALLS OUTSIDE FIRE DISTRICT. The department shall answer calls to fires and
other emergencies outside the Fire District if the Fire Chief determines that such emergency
exists and that such action will not endanger persons and property within the Fire District.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.4[2 & 3])
35.10 MUTUAL AID. Subject to approval by resolution of the Council, the department may
enter into mutual aid agreements with other legally constituted fire departments. Copies of any
such agreements shall be filed with the Clerk.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.4[2 & 3])
35.11 AUTHORITY TO CITE VIOLATIONS. Fire officials acting under the authority of
Chapter 100 of the Code of Iowa may issue citations in accordance to Chapter 805 of the Code
of Iowa, for violations of State and/or local fire safety regulations.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 100.41)
CHAPTER 35 FIRE DEPARTMENT
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
- 164 -
[The next page is 171]
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
- 171 -
CHAPTER 36
HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCE SPILLS
36.01 Purpose 36.05 Notifications
36.02 Definitions 36.06 Police Authority
36.03 Cleanup Required 36.07 Liability
36.04 Liability for Cleanup Costs
36.01 PURPOSE. In order to reduce the danger to the public health, safety, and welfare from
the leaks and spills of hazardous substances, these regulations are promulgated to establish
responsibility for the treatment, removal and cleanup of hazardous substance spills within the
City limits.
36.02 DEFINITIONS. For purposes of this chapter the following terms are defined:
1. “Cleanup” means actions necessary to contain, collect, control, identify,
analyze, clean up, treat, disperse, remove, or dispose of a hazardous substance.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 455B.381[1])
2. “Hazardous condition” means any situation involving the actual, imminent, or
probable spillage, leakage, or release of a hazardous substance onto the land, into a
water of the State, or into the atmosphere, which creates an immediate or potential
danger to the public health or safety or to the environment.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 455B.381[4])
3. “Hazardous substance” means any substance or mixture of substances that
presents a danger to the public health or safety and includes, but is not limited to, a
substance that is toxic, corrosive, or flammable, or that is an irritant or that generates
pressure through decomposition, heat, or other means. “Hazardous substance” may
include any hazardous waste identified or listed by the administrator of the United
States Environmental Protection Agency under the Solid Waste Disposal Act as
amended by the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act of 1976, or any toxic
pollutant listed under section 307 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act as
amended to January 1, 1977, or any hazardous substance designated under Section 311
of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act as amended to January 1, 1977, or any
hazardous material designated by the Secretary of Transportation under the Hazardous
Materials Transportation Act.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 455B.381[5])
4. “Responsible person” means a person who at any time produces, handles,
stores, uses, transports, refines, or disposes of a hazardous substance, the release of
which creates a hazardous condition, including bailees, carriers, and any other person
in control of a hazardous substance when a hazardous condition occurs, whether the
person owns the hazardous substance or is operating under a lease, contract, or other
agreement with the legal owner of the hazardous substance.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 455B.381[7])
36.03 CLEANUP REQUIRED. Whenever a hazardous condition is created by the deposit,
injection, dumping, spilling, leaking or placing of a hazardous substance, so that the hazardous
substance or a constituent of the hazardous substance may enter the environment or be emitted
CHAPTER 36 HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCE SPILLS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
- 172 -
into the air or discharged into any waters, including ground waters, the responsible person shall
cause the condition to be remedied by a cleanup, as defined in the preceding section, as rapidly
as feasible to an acceptable, safe condition. The costs of cleanup shall be borne by the
responsible person. If the responsible person does not cause the cleanup to begin in a reasonable
time in relation to the hazard and circumstances of the incident, the City may, by an authorized
officer, give reasonable notice, based on the character of the hazardous condition, said notice
setting a deadline for accomplishing the cleanup and stating that the City will proceed to procure
cleanup services and bill the responsible person for all costs associated with the cleanup if the
cleanup is not accomplished within the deadline. In the event that it is determined that
immediate cleanup is necessary as a result of the present danger to the public health, safety and
welfare, then no notice shall be required and the City may proceed to procure the cleanup and
bill the responsible person for all costs associated with the cleanup. If the bill for those services
is not paid within thirty (30) days, the City Attorney shall proceed to obtain payment by all legal
means. If the cost of the cleanup is beyond the capacity of the City to finance it, the authorized
officer shall report to the Council and immediately seek any State or Federal funds available for
said cleanup.
36.04 LIABILITY FOR CLEANUP COSTS. The responsible person shall be strictly liable
to the City for all of the following:
1. The reasonable cleanup costs incurred by the City or the agents of the City as a
result of the failure of the responsible person to clean up a hazardous substance involved
in a hazardous condition.
2. The reasonable costs incurred by the City or the agents of the City to evacuate
people from the area threatened by a hazardous condition caused by the person.
3. The reasonable damages to the City for the injury to, destruction of, or loss of
City property, including parks and roads, resulting from a hazardous condition caused
by that person, including the costs of assessing the injury, destruction or loss.
4. The excessive and extraordinary cost incurred by the City or the agents of the
City in responding at and to the scene of a hazardous condition caused by that person.
36.05 NOTIFICATIONS.
1. A person manufacturing, storing, handling, transporting, or disposing of a
hazardous substance shall notify the State Department of Natural Resources and the
Police Chief of the occurrence of a hazardous condition as soon as possible but not later
than six (6) hours after the onset of the hazardous condition or discovery of the
hazardous condition. The Police Chief shall immediately notify the Department of
Natural Resources.
2. Any other person who discovers a hazardous condition shall notify the Police
Department, which shall then notify the Department of Natural Resources.
36.06 POLICE AUTHORITY. If the circumstances reasonably so require, the law
enforcement officer or an authorized representative may:
1. Evacuate persons from their homes to areas away from the site of a hazardous
condition, and
2. Establish perimeters or other boundaries at or near the site of a hazardous
condition and limit access to cleanup personnel.
CHAPTER 36 HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCE SPILLS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
- 173 -
No person shall disobey an order of any law enforcement officer issued under this section.
36.07 LIABILITY. The City shall not be liable to any person for claims of damages, injuries,
or losses resulting from any hazardous condition, unless the City is the responsible person as
defined in Section 36.02(4).
CHAPTER 36 HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCE SPILLS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
- 174 -
° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° °
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
- 175 -
CHAPTER 37
DISASTER SERVICES
37.01 Disaster Services Organization 37.03 Authority
37.02 Definitions 37.04 Liability
37.01 DISASTER SERVICES ORGANIZATION. There is hereby created a disaster
services organization for carrying out the responsibility of the City in times of disaster. The
Mayor shall be Executive Director of the disaster services organization and shall be responsible
for the direction of all operations for the protection of the health, safety, and welfare of the
citizens of the City. Said organization shall function in accordance with City disaster plans,
which shall be coordinated with the plans adopted by Sioux County and the State, in accordance
with State law.
37.02 DEFINITIONS. For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and terms have
the meanings ascribed thereto:
1. “Disaster” means manmade catastrophes and natural occurrences such as fire,
flood, earthquake, tornado, and windstorm, which threaten the public peace, health, and
safety of the people or which damage and destroy public or private property. The term
includes enemy attack, sabotage, or other hostile action from without the State.
2. “Disaster services” means preparations for, operations during, and recovery
from, natural or man-made disasters. These actions are broad in scope and include, but
are not limited to: disaster plans, mitigation, warning, emergency operations, training,
exercising, research, rehabilitation, and recovery.
3. “City disaster plans” means plans developed to describe City emergency
operations and which emphasize the responsibilities of City government forces, other
emergency response organizations, and individuals. City plans are developed under the
direction of the Mayor, and as approved by resolution of the Council.
37.03 AUTHORITY. The Mayor may delegate such portions of the details of operation as
will best serve the carrying out of the City disaster plans. The Mayor shall designate the order
of succession, subject to approval by the Council, to serve in the Mayor’s place in the event the
Mayor is unable to act due to absence or disability.
37.04 LIABILITY. Insofar as permitted by State law, the City, when acting in consonance
with City disaster plans, shall not be liable for failure to provide protection or to prevent
damages to persons or property, the purpose of such plans being to improve conditions arising
from the disaster by organized effort. The City shall carry such insurance on voluntary disaster
workers as deemed advisable by the Council upon recommendation of the City Attorney.
CHAPTER 37 DISASTER SERVICES
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
- 176 -
° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° °
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
- 177 -
CHAPTER 38
EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES DEPARTMENT
38.01 Establishment and Purpose 38.06 Worker’s Compensation and Hospitalization
38.02 Election of President Insurance
38.03 Duties of EMS President 38.07 Liability Insurance
38.04 Emergency Medical Services Personnel 38.08 Medical Emergencies Outside of City Limits
38.05 Emergency Medical Services Personnel Duties 38.09 Emergency Medical Services Personnel Association
38.01 ESTABLISHMENT AND PURPOSE. An Emergency Medical Services Department,
hereinafter known as the EMS Department, is hereby established to respond to medical
emergencies.
38.02 ELECTION OF PRESIDENT. The Emergency Medical Services Department may
elect the department President subject to the approval of the City Council for a term of one year
or as required to fill a vacancy. The City Council may remove, suspend, or demote the EMS
President for neglect of duty, disobedience, misconduct, or failure to properly perform the duties
of President by written order setting out the reasons for removal, which shall be filed with the
City Clerk, and shall, upon request in writing filed with the City Clerk by the president, hold a
public hearing on the proposed action.
38.03 DUTIES OF EMS PRESIDENT. The President shall manage the EMS Department.
The President shall command all operations of the department, ensure training and be
responsible for the care, maintenance, and use of all vehicles and equipment of the department.
Subject to City Council approval, the President shall establish and maintain departmental rules
and standard operating procedures to carry out the requirements of this chapter. The President
shall provide all personnel with a written copy of these rules and procedures. The President
shall appoint personnel, fill vacancies among them, and may discharge them. The President
shall keep a record of the names, ages, and residences of personnel and shall be responsible for
their training and supervision, and shall maintain attendance records for activities and training.
38.04 EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES PERSONNEL. The EMS President shall
appoint EMS personnel per established criteria.
38.05 EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES PERSONNEL DUTIES. When dispatched,
personnel shall report for duty immediately in the manner established by the squad. Personnel are
to be considered on call at any time they have signed up for scheduled shift on the master call
schedule. All responding personnel shall respond and perform emergency medical services within
their scope of practice. The highest ranking senior responder shall assume command of an
incident unless consent is given to another responder. Personnel shall complete the required
number of training hours as established for their level of certification.
38.06 WORKER’S COMPENSATION AND HOSPITALIZATION INSURANCE. The
City Council shall contract to insure the City against liability for worker’s compensation and
against statutory liability for the cost of hospitalization, nursing, and medical attention for
emergency responders injured in the performance of their duties. All department personnel shall
be covered by the contract.
CHAPTER 38 EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES DEPARTMENT
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
- 178 -
38.07 LIABILITY INSURANCE. The City Council shall contract to insure the City against
liability of the personnel of the department for injuries, death, or property damage arising out
of and resulting from the performance of their departmental duties.
38.08 MEDICAL EMERGENCIES OUTSIDE OF CITY LIMITS. The department shall
answer calls to medical emergencies outside the City limits per the department’s standard
operating procedures, contracts, mutual aid agreements, and other agreements.
38.09 EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES PERSONNEL ASSOCIATION. EMS
personnel may form an association and non-profit corporation to promote the welfare of EMS
personnel, emergency medical response capabilities, and other civic and social duties as
specified in the association’s articles of incorporation and by-laws.
[The next page is 201]
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
- 201 -
CHAPTER 40
PUBLIC PEACE
40.01 Assault 40.04 Unlawful Assembly
40.02 Harassment 40.05 Failure to Disperse
40.03 Disorderly Conduct
40.01 ASSAULT. No person shall, without justification, commit any of the following:
1. Pain or Injury. Any act that is intended to cause pain or injury to, or that is
intended to result in physical contact that will be insulting or offensive to another,
coupled with the apparent ability to execute the act.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 708.1[1])
2. Threat of Pain or Injury. Any act that is intended to place another in fear of
immediate physical contact that will be painful, injurious, insulting, or offensive,
coupled with the apparent ability to execute the act.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 708.1[2])
However, where the person doing any of the above enumerated acts, and such other person, are
voluntary participants in a sport, social or other activity, not in itself criminal, and such act is a
reasonably foreseeable incident of such sport or activity, and does not create an unreasonable
risk or serious injury or breach of the peace, the act is not an assault. Provided, where the person
doing any of the above enumerated acts is employed by a school district or accredited nonpublic
school, or is an area education agency staff member who provides services to a school or school
district, and intervenes in a fight or physical struggle, or other disruptive situation that takes
place in the presence of the employee or staff member performing employment duties in a
school building, on school grounds or at an official school function regardless of the location,
the act is not an assault, whether the fight or physical struggle or other disruptive situation is
between students or other individuals if the degree and the force of the intervention is reasonably
necessary to restore order and to protect the safety of those assembled.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 708.1)
40.02 HARASSMENT. No person shall commit harassment.
1. A person commits harassment when, with intent to intimidate, annoy, or alarm
another person, the person does any of the following:
A. Communicates with another by telephone, telegraph, writing, or via
electronic communication without legitimate purpose and in a manner likely to
cause the other person annoyance or harm.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 708.7)
B. Places any simulated explosive or simulated incendiary device in or
near any building, vehicle, airplane, railroad engine or railroad car, or boat
occupied by the other person.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 708.7)
C. Orders merchandise or services in the name of another, or to be
delivered to another, without such other person’s knowledge or consent.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 708.7)
CHAPTER 40 PUBLIC PEACE
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
- 202 -
D. Reports or causes to be reported false information to a law enforcement
authority implicating another in some criminal activity, knowing that the
information is false, or reports the alleged occurrence of a criminal act, knowing
the same did not occur.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 708.7)
2. A person commits harassment when the person, purposefully and without
legitimate purpose, has personal contact with another person, with the intent to threaten,
intimidate or alarm that other person. As used in this section, unless the context
otherwise requires, “personal contact” means an encounter in which two or more people
are in visual or physical proximity to each other. “Personal contact” does not require a
physical touching or oral communication, although it may include these types of
contacts.
40.03 DISORDERLY CONDUCT. No person shall do any of the following:
1. Fighting. Engage in fighting or violent behavior in any public place or in or
near any lawful assembly of persons, provided that participants in athletic contests may
engage in such conduct that is reasonably related to that sport.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 723.4[1])
2. Noise. Make loud and raucous noise in the vicinity of any residence or public
building which causes unreasonable distress to the occupants thereof.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 723.4[2])
3. Abusive Language. Direct abusive epithets or make any threatening gesture
that the person knows or reasonably should know is likely to provoke a violent reaction
by another.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 723.4[3])
4. Disrupt Lawful Assembly. Without lawful authority or color of authority,
disturb any lawful assembly or meeting of persons by conduct intended to disrupt the
meeting or assembly.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 723.4[4])
5. False Report of Catastrophe. By words or action, initiate or circulate a report
or warning of fire, epidemic, or other catastrophe, knowing such report to be false or
such warning to be baseless.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 723.4[5])
6. Disrespect of Flag. Knowingly and publicly use the flag of the United States
in such a manner as to show disrespect for the flag as a symbol of the United States,
with the intent or reasonable expectation that such use will provoke or encourage
another to commit trespass or assault. As used in this subsection:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 723.4[6])
A. “Deface” means to intentionally mar the external appearance.
B. “Defile” means to intentionally make physically unclean.
C. “Flag” means a piece of woven cloth or other material designed to be
flown from a pole or mast.
D. “Mutilate” means to intentionally cut up or alter so as to make
imperfect.
E. “Show disrespect” means to deface, defile, mutilate, or trample.
CHAPTER 40 PUBLIC PEACE
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
- 203 -
F. “Trample” means to intentionally tread upon or intentionally cause a
machine, vehicle, or animal to tread upon.
7. Obstruct Use of Street. Without authority or justification, obstruct any street,
sidewalk, highway, or other public way, with the intent to prevent or hinder its lawful
use by others.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 723.4[7])
8. Funeral or Memorial Service. Within 500 feet of the building or other location
where a funeral or memorial service is being conducted, or within 500 feet of a funeral
procession or burial:
A. Make loud and raucous noise that causes unreasonable distress to the
persons attending the funeral or memorial service or participating in the funeral
procession.
B. Direct abusive epithets or make any threatening gesture that the person
knows or reasonably should know is likely to provoke a violent reaction by
another.
C. Disturb or disrupt the funeral, memorial service, funeral procession or
burial by conduct intended to disturb or disrupt the funeral, memorial service,
funeral procession or burial.
This subsection applies to conduct within 60 minutes preceding, during, and within 60
minutes after a funeral, memorial service, funeral procession, or burial.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 723.5)
40.04 UNLAWFUL ASSEMBLY. It is unlawful for three or more persons to assemble
together, with them or any of them acting in a violent manner, and with intent that they or any
of them will commit a public offense. No person shall willingly join in or remain part of an
unlawful assembly, knowing or having reasonable grounds to believe it is such.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 723.2)
40.05 FAILURE TO DISPERSE. A peace officer may order the participants in a riot or
unlawful assembly or persons in the immediate vicinity of a riot or unlawful assembly to
disperse. No person within hearing distance of such command shall refuse to obey.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 723.3)
CHAPTER 40 PUBLIC PEACE
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
- 204 -
° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° °
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
- 205 -
CHAPTER 41
PUBLIC HEALTH AND SAFETY
41.01 Distributing Dangerous Substances 41.08 Antenna and Radio Wires
41.02 False Reports to or Communications with Public 41.09 Barbed Wire and Electric Fences
Safety Entities 41.10 Discharging Weapons
41.03 Providing False Identification Information 41.11 Throwing and Shooting
41.04 Refusing to Assist Officer 41.12 Urinating and Defecating
41.05 Harassment of Public Officers and Employees 41.13 Fireworks
41.06 Interference with Official Acts 41.14 Drug Paraphernalia
41.07 Abandoned or Unattended Refrigerators
41.01 DISTRIBUTING DANGEROUS SUBSTANCES. No person shall distribute
samples of any drugs or medicine, or any corrosive, caustic, poisonous or other injurious
substance unless the person delivers such into the hands of a competent person, or otherwise
takes reasonable precautions that the substance will not be taken by children or animals from
the place where the substance is deposited.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 727.1)
41.02 FALSE REPORTS TO OR COMMUNICATIONS WITH PUBLIC SAFETY
ENTITIES. No person shall do any of the following:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 718.6)
1. Report or cause to be reported false information to a fire department, a law
enforcement authority or other public safety entity, knowing that the information is
false, or report the alleged occurrence of a criminal act knowing the act did not occur.
2. Telephone an emergency 911 communications center, knowing that he or she
is not reporting an emergency or otherwise needing emergency information or
assistance.
3. Knowingly provide false information to a law enforcement officer who enters
the information on a citation.
41.03 PROVIDING FALSE IDENTIFICATION INFORMATION. No person shall
knowingly provide false identification information to anyone known by the person to be a peace
officer, emergency medical care provider, or firefighter, whether paid or volunteer, in the
performance of any act that is within the scope of the lawful duty or authority of that officer,
emergency medical care provider, or firefighter.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 719.1A)
41.04 REFUSING TO ASSIST OFFICER. Any person who is requested or ordered by any
magistrate or peace officer to render the magistrate or officer assistance in making or attempting
to make an arrest, or to prevent the commission of any criminal act, shall render assistance as
required. No person shall unreasonably and without lawful cause, refuse or neglect to render
assistance when so requested.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 719.2)
CHAPTER 41 PUBLIC HEALTH AND SAFETY
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
- 206 -
41.05 HARASSMENT OF PUBLIC OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES. No person shall
willfully prevent or attempt to prevent any public officer or employee from performing the
officer’s or employee’s duty.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 718.4)
41.06 INTERFERENCE WITH OFFICIAL ACTS. No person shall knowingly resist or
obstruct anyone known by the person to be a peace officer, emergency medical care provider or
firefighter, whether paid or volunteer, in the performance of any act that is within the scope of
the lawful duty or authority of that officer, emergency medical care provider or firefighter, or
shall knowingly resist or obstruct the service or execution by any authorized person of any civil
or criminal process or order of any court. The terms “resist” and “obstruct” as used in this
section do not include verbal harassment unless the verbal harassment is accompanied by a
present ability and apparent intention to execute a verbal threat physically.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 719.1)
41.07 ABANDONED OR UNATTENDED REFRIGERATORS. No person shall abandon
or otherwise leave unattended any refrigerator, ice box, or similar container, with doors that
may become locked, outside of buildings and accessible to children, nor shall any person allow
any such refrigerator, ice box, or similar container, to remain outside of buildings on premises
in the person’s possession or control, abandoned or unattended and so accessible to children.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 727.3)
41.08 ANTENNA AND RADIO WIRES. It is unlawful for a person to allow antenna wires,
antenna supports, radio wires, or television wires to exist over any street, alley, highway,
sidewalk, public way, public ground, or public building without written consent of the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[2])
41.09 BARBED WIRE AND ELECTRIC FENCES. It is unlawful for a person to use
barbed wire or electric fences to enclose land within the City limits without the written consent
of the Council.
41.10 DISCHARGING WEAPONS.
1. It is unlawful for a person to discharge rifles, shotguns, revolvers, pistols, guns,
or other firearms of any kind within the City limits except by consent of the Police
Chief.
2. No person shall intentionally discharge a firearm in a reckless manner.
41.11 THROWING AND SHOOTING. It is unlawful for a person to throw stones, bricks,
or missiles of any kind or to shoot arrows, paintballs, rubber guns, slingshots, air rifles, BB
guns, or other dangerous instruments or toys on or into any street, alley, highway, sidewalk,
public way, public ground, or public building, without written consent of the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[2])
41.12 URINATING AND DEFECATING. It is unlawful for any person to urinate or
defecate onto any sidewalk, street, alley, or other public way, or onto any public or private
building, including but not limited to the wall, floor, hallway, steps, stairway, doorway, or
window thereof, or onto any public or private land.
41.13 FIREWORKS. The sale, use or exploding of fireworks with the City is subject to the
following:
CHAPTER 41 PUBLIC HEALTH AND SAFETY
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
- 207 -
1. Definition. For purposes of this section, definitions are enumerated in the Iowa
Code Section 727.2, which definitions are incorporated herein by reference.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 727.2)
2. Sales – General Requirements. Prior to any person engaging in the sale of
consumer fireworks, the following shall be provided to the Code Enforcement Officer:
A. License: Proof of valid license issued from the State Fire Marshal.
B. Liability Insurance: Proof of liability insurance separate from the
building property insurance specifically showing coverage of fireworks sales
for an aggregate amount of $2,000,000.
C. Fire Inspection: Any property, building, or premise whether it be
permanent or temporary, intended for the sale of consumer fireworks shall have
an initial fire inspection completed by the Code Enforcement official prior to
engaging in the sale of consumer fireworks. The Code Enforcement official or
their designee shall cause an annual inspection to occur meeting the
requirements of the National Fire Protection Code 1124 (2006 Edition) and the
current fire code adopted by the City of Sioux Center. Inspection costs shall be
assessed as follows:
Permanent or temporary structure where fireworks
are sold – Annual inspection fee of $100.
3. Use or Exploding of Fireworks. No fireworks shall be used or exploded within
the City limits of the City of Sioux Center on any days other than June 13 through July
8.
4. Violations. All violations of any provisions of this chapter are hereby declared
simple misdemeanors and/or municipal infractions. Violations may be prosecuted as
either a misdemeanor criminal offense or a municipal infraction at the sole discretion
of the Code Enforcement Officer or peace officer. A person who uses or explodes
consumer fireworks or novelties while the use of such devices is prohibited or limited
commits a simple misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not less than two hundred fifty
dollars. Fines for all other violations shall be set by resolution of the City Council.
Violations of this chapter shall be reported to the State Fire Marshal.
5. Exceptions. This section does not prohibit the sale by a resident, dealer,
manufacturer or jobber of such fireworks as are not prohibited; or the sale of any kind
of fireworks if they are to be shipped out of State; or the sale or use of blank cartridges
for a show or theatre, or for signal purposes in athletic sports or by railroads or trucks
for signal purposes, or by a recognized military organization. This section does not
apply to any substance or composition prepared and sold for medicinal or fumigation
purposes.
(Section 41.13 – Ord. SC-O-03-17 – Jan. 19 Supp.)
41.14 DRUG PARAPHERNALIA.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 124.414)
1. As used in this section “drug paraphernalia” means all equipment, products or
materials of any kind used or attempted to be used in combination with a controlled
substance, except those items used in combination with the lawful use of a controlled
substance, to knowingly or intentionally and primarily do any of the following:
A. Manufacture a controlled substance.
CHAPTER 41 PUBLIC HEALTH AND SAFETY
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
- 208 -
B. Inject, ingest, inhale, or otherwise introduce into the human body a
controlled substance.
C. Test the strength, effectiveness, or purity of a controlled substance.
D. Enhance the effect of a controlled substance.
Drug paraphernalia does not include hypodermic needles or syringes if manufactured,
delivered, sold, or possessed for a lawful purpose.
2. It is unlawful for any person to knowingly or intentionally manufacture, deliver,
sell, or possess drug paraphernalia.
[The next page is 215]
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
- 215 -
CHAPTER 42
PUBLIC AND PRIVATE PROPERTY
42.01 Trespassing 42.05 Fraud
42.02 Criminal Mischief 42.06 Theft
42.03 Defacing Proclamations or Notices 42.07 Open Burning
42.04 Unauthorized Entry 42.08 Other Public Property Offenses
42.01 TRESPASSING. It is unlawful for a person to knowingly trespass upon the property
of another. As used in this section, the term “property” includes any land, dwelling, building,
conveyance, vehicle, or other temporary or permanent structure whether publicly or privately
owned. The term “trespass” means one or more of the following acts:
(Code of Iowa Sec. 716.7 and 716.8)
1. Entering Property without Permission. Entering upon or in property without
the express permission of the owner, lessee, or person in lawful possession with the
intent to commit a public offense or to use, remove therefrom, alter, damage, harass, or
place thereon or therein anything animate or inanimate.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.7[2a])
2. Entering or Remaining on Property. Entering or remaining upon or in property
without justification after being notified or requested to abstain from entering or to
remove or vacate therefrom by the owner, lessee, or person in lawful possession, or by
any peace officer, magistrate, or public employee whose duty it is to supervise the use
or maintenance of the property.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.7[2b])
3. Interfering with Lawful Use of Property. Entering upon or in property for the
purpose or with the effect of unduly interfering with the lawful use of the property by
others.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.7[2c])
4. Using Property without Permission. Being upon or in property and wrongfully
using, removing therefrom, altering, damaging, harassing, or placing thereon or therein
anything animate or inanimate, without the implied or actual permission of the owner,
lessee, or person in lawful possession.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.7[2d])
None of the above shall be construed to prohibit entering upon the property of another for the
sole purpose of retrieving personal property that has accidentally or inadvertently been thrown,
fallen, strayed, or blown onto the property of another, provided that the person retrieving the
property takes the most direct and accessible route to and from the property to be retrieved, quits
the property as quickly as is possible, and does not unduly interfere with the lawful use of the
property.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.7[3])
42.02 CRIMINAL MISCHIEF. It is unlawful, for any person who has no right to do so, to
intentionally damage, deface, alter, or destroy property.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.1)
CHAPTER 42 PUBLIC AND PRIVATE PROPERTY
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
- 216 -
42.03 DEFACING PROCLAMATIONS OR NOTICES. It is unlawful for a person
intentionally to deface, obliterate, tear down, or destroy in whole or in part, any transcript or
extract from or of any law of the United States or the State, or any proclamation, advertisement
or notification, set up at any place within the City by authority of the law or by order of any
court, during the time for which the same is to remain set up.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.1)
42.04 UNAUTHORIZED ENTRY. No unauthorized person shall enter or remain in or upon
any public building, premises, or grounds in violation of any notice posted thereon or when said
building, premises or grounds are closed and not open to the public. When open to the public,
a failure to pay any required admission fee also constitutes an unauthorized entry.
42.05 FRAUD. It is unlawful for any person to commit a fraudulent practice as defined in
Section 714.8 of the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 714.8)
42.06 THEFT. It is unlawful for any person to commit theft as defined in Section 714.1 of
the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 714.1)
42.07 OPEN BURNING. A person shall not kindle or maintain or authorize to be kindled or
maintained any open burning unless conducted and approved in accordance with this section,
other than bonfires, recreational fires, or fires in portable outdoor fireplaces conducted in
accordance with the regulations below.†
1. Prohibited Open Burning. Open burning that is offensive or objectionable
because of smoke emissions or when atmospheric conditions or local circumstances
make such fires hazardous are prohibited. Open burning of yard waste debris such as
grass clippings, leaves, garden waste, brush, and trees is prohibited.
2. Permit Required; Authorization. A permit shall be obtained from the fire code
official in accordance with Section 105.6 of the International Fire Code prior to
kindling a fire for recognized silvicultural or range or wildlife management practices,
prevention or control of disease or pests, or a bonfire. Application for such approval
shall only be presented by and permits issued to the owner of the land upon which the
fire is to be kindled. Where required by State or local law or regulations, open burning
shall only be permitted with prior approval from the State or local air and water quality
management authority, provided that all conditions specified in the authorization are
followed.
3. Extinguishment Authority. The fire code official is authorized to order the
extinguishment by the permit holder, another person responsible, or the Fire
Department of open burning that creates or adds to a hazardous or objectionable
situation.
4. Location. The location for open burning shall not be less than 50 feet from any
structure, and provisions shall be made to prevent the fire from spreading to within 50
feet of any structure. Exceptions to this are: (i) fires in approved containers that are
not less than 15 feet from a structure; and (ii) the minimum required distance from a
† EDITOR’S NOTE: Terms used in this section are defined in Section 302 of the International Fire
Code.
CHAPTER 42 PUBLIC AND PRIVATE PROPERTY
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
- 217 -
structure shall be 25 feet where the pile size is 3 feet or less in diameter and 2 feet or
less in height.
5. Bonfires. A bonfire shall not be conducted within 50 feet of a structure or
combustible material unless the fire is contained in a barbeque pit. Conditions which
could cause a fire to spread within 50 feet of a structure shall be eliminated prior to
ignition.
6. Recreational Fires. Recreational fires shall not be conducted within 25 feet of
a structure or combustible material. Conditions which could cause a fire to spread
within 25 feet of a structure shall be eliminated prior to ignition.
7. Portable Outdoor Fireplaces. Portable outdoor fireplaces shall be used in
accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions and shall not be operated within 15 feet
of a structure or combustible material. An exception to this is portable outdoor
fireplaces used at one- and two-family dwellings.
8. Attendance. Open burning, bonfires, recreational fires and use of portable
outdoor fireplaces shall be constantly attended until the fire is extinguished. A
minimum of one portable fire extinguisher complying with Section 906 of the
International Fire Code with a minimum of 4-A rating or other approved on-site fireextinguishing
equipment, such as dirt, sand, water barrel, garden hose, or water truck,
shall be available for immediate utilization.
42.08 OTHER PUBLIC PROPERTY OFFENSES. The following chapters of this Code of
Ordinances contain regulations prohibiting or restricting other activities or conditions that are
also deemed to be public property offenses:
1. Chapter 22 – Library
A. Section 22.10 – Injury to Books or Property
B. Section 22.11 – Theft of Library Property
2. Chapter 105 – Solid Waste Control and Recycling
A. Section 105.06 – Littering Prohibited
B. Section 105.07 – Open Dumping Prohibited
3. Chapter 135 – Street Use and Maintenance
A. Section 135.01 – Removal of Warning Devices
B. Section 135.02 – Obstructing or Defacing
C. Section 135.03 – Placing Debris On
D. Section 135.04 – Playing In
E. Section 135.05 – Traveling on Barricaded Street or Alley
F. Section 135.08 – Burning Prohibited
G. Section 135.12 – Dumping of Snow
4. Chapter 136 – Sidewalk Regulations
A. Section 136.11 – Interference with Sidewalk Improvements
B. Section 136.14 – Fires or Fuel on Sidewalks
CHAPTER 42 PUBLIC AND PRIVATE PROPERTY
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
- 218 -
C. Section 136.15 – Defacing
D. Section 136.16 – Debris on Sidewalks
E. Section 136.17 – Merchandise Display
F. Section 136.18 – Sales Stands
[The next page is 245]
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
- 245 -
CHAPTER 45
ALCOHOL CONSUMPTION AND INTOXICATION
45.01 Persons Under Legal Age 45.03 Open Containers in Motor Vehicles
45.02 Public Consumption or Intoxication
45.01 PERSONS UNDER LEGAL AGE. As used in this section, “legal age” means twentyone
(21) years of age or more.
1. A person or persons under legal age shall not purchase or attempt to purchase
or individually or jointly have alcoholic liquor, wine or beer in their possession or
control; except in the case of liquor, wine or beer given or dispensed to a person under
legal age within a private home and with the knowledge, presence and consent of the
parent or guardian, for beverage or medicinal purposes or as administered to the person
by either a physician or dentist for medicinal purposes and except to the extent that a
person under legal age may handle alcoholic beverages, wine, and beer during the
regular course of the person’s employment by a liquor control licensee, or wine or beer
permittee under State laws.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.47[2])
2. A person under legal age shall not misrepresent the person’s age for the purpose
of purchasing or attempting to purchase any alcoholic beverage, wine, or beer from any
licensee or permittee.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49[3])
45.02 PUBLIC CONSUMPTION OR INTOXICATION.
1. As used in this section unless the context otherwise requires:
A. “Arrest” means the same as defined in Section 804.5 of the Code of
Iowa and includes taking into custody pursuant to Section 232.19 of the Code
of Iowa.
B. “Chemical test” means a test of a person’s blood, breath, or urine to
determine the percentage of alcohol present by a qualified person using devices
and methods approved by the Commissioner of Public Safety.
C. “Peace officer” means the same as defined in Section 801.4 of the Code
of Iowa.
D. “School” means a public or private school or that portion of a public or
private school that provides teaching for any grade from kindergarten through
grade twelve.
2. A person shall not use or consume alcoholic liquor, wine or beer upon the
public streets or highways. A person shall not use or consume alcoholic liquor in any
public place, except premises covered by a liquor control license. A person shall not
possess or consume alcoholic liquors, wine, or beer on public school property or while
attending any public or private school-related function. A person shall not be
intoxicated in a public place.
3. A person shall not simulate intoxication in a public place.
CHAPTER 45 ALCOHOL CONSUMPTION AND INTOXICATION
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
- 246 -
4. When a peace officer arrests a person on a charge of public intoxication under
this section, the peace officer shall inform the person that the person may have a
chemical test administered at the person’s own expense. If a device approved by the
Commissioner of Public Safety for testing a sample of a person’s breath to determine
the person’s blood alcohol concentration is available, that is the only test that need be
offered the person arrested. In a prosecution for public intoxication, evidence of the
results of a chemical test performed under this subsection is admissible upon proof of a
proper foundation. The percentage of alcohol present in a person’s blood, breath, or
urine established by the results of a chemical test performed within two hours after the
person’s arrest on a charge of public intoxication is presumed to be the percentage of
alcohol present at the time of arrest.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.46)
45.03 OPEN CONTAINERS IN MOTOR VEHICLES. [See Section 62.01(47) and (48)
of this Code of Ordinances.]
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
- 247 -
CHAPTER 46
MINORS
46.01 Curfew 46.03 Contributing to Delinquency
46.02 Cigarettes and Tobacco
46.01 CURFEW. The Council has determined that a curfew for minors is necessary to
promote the public health, safety, morals and general welfare of the City and specifically to
reinforce the primary authority and responsibility of adults responsible for minors; to protect
the public from the illegal acts of minors committed after the curfew hour; and to protect minors
from improper influences and criminal activity that prevail in public places after the curfew
hour.
1. Definitions. For use in this section, the following terms are defined:
A. “Emergency errand” means, but is not limited to, an errand relating to
a fire, a natural disaster, an automobile accident or any other situation requiring
immediate action to prevent serious illness, bodily injury, or loss of life.
B. “Knowingly” means knowledge that a responsible adult should
reasonably be expected to have concerning the whereabouts of a minor in that
responsible adult’s custody. It is intended to continue to hold the neglectful or
careless adult responsible for a minor to a reasonable standard of adult
responsibility through an objective test. It is therefore no defense that an adult
responsible for a minor was completely indifferent to the activities or conduct
or whereabouts of the minor.
C. “Minor” means any unemancipated person under the age of eighteen
(18) years.
D. “Nonsecured custody” means custody in an unlocked multipurpose
area, such as a lobby, office or interrogation room that is not designed, set aside
or used as a secure detention area, and the person arrested is not physically
secured during the period of custody in the area; the person is physically
accompanied by a law enforcement officer or a person employed by the facility
where the person arrested is being held; and the use of the area is limited to
providing nonsecured custody only while awaiting transfer to an appropriate
juvenile facility or to court, for contacting of and release to the person’s parents
or other responsible adult or for other administrative purposes; but not for
longer than six (6) hours without the oral or written order of a judge or
magistrate authorizing the detention. A judge shall not extend the period of
time in excess of six hours beyond the initial six-hour period.
E. “Public place” includes stores, parking lots, parks, playgrounds, streets,
alleys and sidewalks dedicated to public use; and also includes such parts of
buildings and other premises, whether publicly or privately owned, which are
used by the general public or to which the general public is invited
commercially for a fee or otherwise; or in or on which the general public is
permitted without specific invitation; or to which the general public has access.
For purposes of this section, a vehicle or other conveyance is considered to be
a public place when in the areas defined above.
CHAPTER 46 MINORS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
- 248 -
F. “Responsible adult” means a parent, guardian or other adult
specifically authorized by law or authorized by a parent or guardian to have
custody or control of a minor.
2. Curfew Established. It is unlawful for any minor to be or remain upon any of
the alleys, streets or public places or to be in places of business and amusement in the
City between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 6:00 a.m.
3. Exceptions. The following are exceptions to the curfew:
A. The minor is accompanied by a responsible adult.
B. The minor is on the sidewalk or property where the minor resides or on
either side of the place where the minor resides and the adult responsible for
the minor has given permission for the minor to be there.
C. The minor is present at or is traveling between home and one of the
following:
(1) Minor’s place of employment in a business, trade or
occupation in which the minor is permitted by law to be engaged or, if
traveling, within one hour after the end or before the beginning of
work;
(2) Minor’s place of religious activity or, if traveling, within one
hour after the end or before the beginning of the religious activity;
(3) Governmental or political activity or, if traveling, within one
hour after the end or before the beginning of the activity;
(4) School activity or, if traveling, within one hour after the end or
before the beginning of the activity;
(5) Assembly such as a march, protest, demonstration, sit-in or
meeting of an association for the advancement of economic, political,
religious or cultural matters, or for any other activity protected by the
First Amendment of the U.S. Constitution guarantees of free exercise
of religion, freedom of speech, freedom of assembly or, if traveling,
within one hour after the end or before the beginning of the activity.
D. The minor is on an emergency errand for a responsible adult;
E. The minor is engaged in interstate travel through the City beginning,
ending or passing through the City when such travel is by direct route.
4. Responsibility of Adults. It is unlawful for any responsible adult knowingly to
permit or to allow a minor to be in any public place in the City within the time periods
prohibited by this section unless the minor’s presence falls within one of the above
exceptions.
5. Enforcement Procedures.
A. Determination of Age. In determining the age of the juvenile and in
the absence of convincing evidence such as a birth certificate or driver’s
license, a law enforcement officer on the street shall, in the first instance, use
his or her best judgment in determining age.
B. Grounds for Arrest; Conditions of Custody. Grounds for arrest are that
the person refuses to sign the citation without qualification; persists in violating
CHAPTER 46 MINORS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
- 249 -
the ordinance; refuses to provide proper identification or to identify himself or
herself; or constitutes an immediate threat to the person’s own safety or to the
safety of the public. A law enforcement officer who arrests a minor for a curfew
violation may keep the minor in custody either in a shelter care facility or in
any nonsecured setting. The officer shall not place bodily restraints, such as
handcuffs, on the minor unless the minor physically resists or threatens physical
violence when being taken into custody. A minor shall not be placed in
detention following a curfew violation.
C. Notification of Responsible Adult. After a minor is taken into custody,
the law enforcement officer shall notify the adult responsible for the minor as
soon as possible. The minor shall be released to the adult responsible for the
minor upon the promise of such person to produce the child in court at such
time as the court may direct.
D. Minor Without Adult Supervision. If a law enforcement officer
determines that a minor does not have adult supervision because the law
enforcement officer cannot locate the minor’s parent, guardian or other person
legally responsible for the care of the minor, within a reasonable time, the law
enforcement officer shall attempt to place the minor with an adult relative of
the minor, an adult person who cares for the child or another adult person who
is known to the child.
6. Penalties.
A. Responsible Adult’s First Violation. In the case of a first violation by
a minor, the law enforcement officer shall, by certified mail, send to the adult
responsible for the minor, written notice of the violation with a warning that
any subsequent violation will result in full enforcement of the curfew ordinance
against both the responsible adult and minor, with applicable penalties.
B. Responsible Adult’s Second Violation. Any responsible adult as
defined in this section who, following receipt of a warning, knowingly allows
the minor to violate any of the provisions of this section is guilty of a municipal
infraction.
C. Minor’s First Violation. In the case of a first violation by a minor, the
law enforcement officer shall give the minor a written warning, which states
that any subsequent violation will result in full enforcement of the curfew
ordinance against the responsible adult and the minor, with applicable
penalties, or, at the law enforcement officer’s discretion, may issue the minor a
citation for a first violation.
D. Minor’s Second Violation. For the minor’s second and subsequent
violations of any of the provisions of this section, the minor is guilty of a
municipal infraction.
46.02 CIGARETTES AND TOBACCO. It is unlawful for any person under eighteen (18)
years of age to smoke, use, possess, purchase, or attempt to purchase any tobacco, tobacco
products, or cigarettes. Possession of cigarettes or tobacco products by a person under eighteen
years of age shall not constitute a violation of this section if said person possesses the cigarettes
or tobacco products as part of the person’s employment and said person is employed by a person
who holds a valid permit under Chapter 453A of the Code of Iowa and lawfully offers for sale
or sells cigarettes or tobacco products.
CHAPTER 46 MINORS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
- 250 -
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 453A.2)
46.03 CONTRIBUTING TO DELINQUENCY. It is unlawful for any person to encourage
any child under eighteen (18) years of age to commit any act of delinquency.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 709A.1)
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
- 251 -
CHAPTER 47
PARK REGULATIONS
47.01 Purpose 47.05 Parks Closed
47.02 Use of Drives Required 47.06 Camping
47.03 Fires 47.07 Alcoholic Beverages
47.04 Littering
47.01 PURPOSE. The purpose of this chapter is to facilitate the enjoyment of park facilities
by the general public by establishing rules and regulations governing the use of park facilities.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12)
47.02 USE OF DRIVES REQUIRED. No person shall drive any car, cycle or other vehicle,
or ride or lead any horse, in any portion of a park except upon the established drives or roadways
therein or such other places as may be officially designated by the City.
47.03 FIRES. No fires shall be built, except in a place provided therefor, and such fire shall
be extinguished before leaving the area unless it is to be immediately used by some other party.
47.04 LITTERING. No person shall place, deposit, or throw any waste, refuse, litter or
foreign substance in any area or receptacle except those provided for that purpose.
47.05 PARKS CLOSED. No person, except those camping in designated areas, shall enter
or remain within any park between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.
47.06 CAMPING. No person shall camp in any portion of a park except in portions
prescribed or designated by the Council, and the City may refuse camping privileges or rescind
any and all camping privileges for cause.
47.07 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES. No person shall bring into, use, consume, or have in
his or her possession any alcohol, wine, or beer in any City park at any time, except in the
designated campground area of Children’s Park.
CHAPTER 47 PARK REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
- 252 -
[The next page is 271]
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
- 271 -
CHAPTER 50
NUISANCE ABATEMENT PROCEDURE
50.01 Definition of Nuisance 50.05 Nuisance Abatement
50.02 Nuisances Enumerated 50.06 Abatement of Nuisance by Written Notice
50.03 Other Conditions 50.07 Municipal Infraction Abatement Procedure
50.04 Nuisances Prohibited
50.01 DEFINITION OF NUISANCE. Whatever is injurious to health, indecent, or
unreasonably offensive to the senses, or an obstruction to the free use of property so as
essentially to interfere unreasonably with the comfortable enjoyment of life or property is a
nuisance.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 657.1)
50.02 NUISANCES ENUMERATED. The following subsections include, but do not limit,
the conditions that are deemed to be nuisances in the City:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 657.2)
1. Offensive Smells. Erecting, continuing or using any building or other place for
the exercise of any trade, employment, or manufacture that, by occasioning noxious
exhalations, unreasonably offensive smells, or other annoyances, becomes injurious and
dangerous to the health, comfort or property of individuals or the public.
2. Filth or Noisome Substance. Causing or suffering any offal, filth, or noisome
substance to be collected or to remain in any place to the prejudice of others.
3. Water Pollution. Corrupting or rendering unwholesome or impure the water of
any river, stream, or pond, or unlawfully diverting the same from its natural course or
state, to the injury or prejudice of others.
4. Blocking Public and Private Ways. Obstructing or encumbering, by fences,
buildings or otherwise, the public roads, private ways, streets, alleys, commons, landing
places, or burying grounds.
5. Billboards. Billboards, signboards and advertising signs, whether erected and
constructed on public or private property, which so obstruct and impair the view of any
portion or part of a public street, avenue, highway, boulevard or alley or of a railroad
or street railway track as to render dangerous the use thereof. (See also Section 62.06)
6. Storing of Flammable Junk. Depositing or storing of flammable junk, such as
old rags, rope, cordage, rubber, bones and paper, by dealers in such articles within the
fire limits of the City, unless in a building of fireproof construction. (See also Chapter
51)
7. Air Pollution. Emission of dense smoke, noxious fumes, or fly ash.
8. Weeds, Brush. Dense growth of all weeds, vines, brush, or other vegetation in
the City so as to constitute a health, safety, or fire hazard.
9. Dutch Elm Disease. Trees infected with Dutch elm disease. (See also Chapter
151)
CHAPTER 50 NUISANCE ABATEMENT PROCEDURE
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
- 272 -
10. Airport Air Space. Any object or structure hereafter erected within one
thousand (1,000) feet of the limits of any municipal or regularly established airport or
landing place, which may endanger or obstruct aerial navigation including take-off and
landing, unless such object or structure constitutes a proper use or enjoyment of the land
on which the same is located.
11. Houses of Ill Fame. Houses of ill fame, kept for the purpose of prostitution and
lewdness; gambling houses; places resorted to by persons participating in criminal gang
activity prohibited by Chapter 723A of the Code of Iowa or places resorted to by persons
using controlled substances, as defined in Section 124.101 of the Code of Iowa, in
violation of law, or houses where drunkenness, quarreling, fighting or breaches of the
peace are carried on or permitted to the disturbance of others.
12. Sound Equipment. The operation of any sound equipment, machine, or
amplifier amplifying sound, music, or talking of any kind within the City, whether the
device is located upon mobile equipment or permanently located. (The City Manager
may issue a permit upon the payment of $1.00 under such reasonable restrictions as the
City Manager may prescribe to permit and limit the use of such equipment.)
50.03 OTHER CONDITIONS. The following chapters of this Code of Ordinances contain
regulations prohibiting or restricting other conditions that are deemed to be nuisances:
1. Junk and Junk Vehicles (See Chapter 51)
2. Dangerous Buildings (See Chapter 145)
3. Storage and Disposal of Solid Waste (See Chapter 105)
4. Trees (See Chapter 151)
50.04 NUISANCES PROHIBITED. The creation or maintenance of a nuisance is
prohibited, and a nuisance, public or private, may be abated in the manner provided for in this
chapter or State law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 657.3)
50.05 NUISANCE ABATEMENT. Whenever any authorized municipal officer finds that a
nuisance exists, such officer has the authority to determine on a case-by-case basis whether to
utilize the nuisance abatement procedure described in Section 50.06 of this chapter or the
municipal infraction procedure referred to in Section 50.07.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3h])
50.06 ABATEMENT OF NUISANCE BY WRITTEN NOTICE. Any nuisance, public or
private, may be abated in the manner provided for in this section:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3h])
1. Contents of Notice to Property Owner. The notice to abate shall contain: †
† EDITOR’S NOTE: A suggested form of notice for the abatement of nuisances is included in the
Appendix of this Code of Ordinances. Caution is urged in the use of this administrative abatement
procedure, particularly where cost of abatement is more than minimal or where there is doubt as to
whether or not a nuisance does in fact exist. If compliance is not secured following notice and hearings,
we recommend you review the situation with your attorney before proceeding with abatement and
assessment of costs. Your attorney may recommend proceedings in court under Chapter 657 of the Code
of Iowa rather than this procedure.
CHAPTER 50 NUISANCE ABATEMENT PROCEDURE
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
- 273 -
A. Description of Nuisance. A description of what constitutes the
nuisance.
B. Location of Nuisance. The location of the nuisance.
C. Acts Necessary to Abate. A statement of the act or acts necessary to
abate the nuisance.
D. Reasonable Time. A reasonable time within which to complete the
abatement.
E. Assessment of City Costs. A statement that if the nuisance or condition
is not abated as directed and no request for hearing is made within the time
prescribed, the City will abate it and assess the costs against the property owner.
2. Method of Service. The notice may be in the form of an ordinance or sent by
certified mail to the property owner.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3h])
3. Request for Hearing. Any person ordered to abate a nuisance may have a
hearing with the Council as to whether a nuisance exists. A request for a hearing must
be made in writing and delivered to the Clerk within the time stated in the notice, or it
will be conclusively presumed that a nuisance exists and it must be abated as ordered.
The hearing will be before the Council at a time and place fixed by the Council. The
findings of the Council shall be conclusive and, if a nuisance is found to exist, it shall
be ordered abated within a reasonable time under the circumstances.
4. Abatement in Emergency. If it is determined that an emergency exists by
reason of the continuing maintenance of the nuisance or condition, the City may
perform any action that may be required under this chapter without prior notice. The
City shall assess the costs as provided in subsection 6 of this section after notice to the
property owner under the applicable provisions of subsection 1 and 2, and the hearing
as provided in subsection 3.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3h])
5. Abatement by City. If the person notified to abate a nuisance or condition
neglects or fails to abate as directed, the City may perform the required action to abate,
keeping an accurate account of the expense incurred. The itemized expense account
shall be filed with the Clerk, who shall pay such expenses on behalf of the City.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3h])
6. Collection of Costs. The Clerk shall send a statement of the total expense
incurred by certified mail to the property owner who has failed to abide by the notice to
abate, and if the amount shown by the statement has not been paid within one month,
the Clerk shall certify the costs to the County Treasurer and such costs shall then be
collected with, and in the same manner as, general property taxes.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3h])
7. Installment Payment of Cost of Abatement. If the amount expended to abate
the nuisance or condition exceeds one hundred dollars ($100.00), the City may permit
the assessment to be paid in up to ten (10) annual installments, to be paid in the same
manner and with the same interest rates provided for assessments against benefited
property under State law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.13)
CHAPTER 50 NUISANCE ABATEMENT PROCEDURE
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
- 274 -
8. Failure to Abate. Any person causing or maintaining a nuisance who shall fail
or refuse to abate or remove the same within the reasonable time required and specified
in the notice to abate is in violation of this Code of Ordinances.
50.07 MUNICIPAL INFRACTION ABATEMENT PROCEDURE. In lieu of the
abatement procedures set forth in Section 50.06, the requirements of this chapter may be
enforced under the procedures applicable to municipal infractions as set forth in Chapter 3 of
this Code of Ordinances.
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
- 275 -
CHAPTER 51
JUNK AND JUNK VEHICLES
51.01 Definitions 51.04 Exceptions
51.02 Junk and Junk Vehicles Prohibited 51.05 Notice to Abate
51.03 Junk and Junk Vehicles a Nuisance
51.01 DEFINITIONS. For use in this chapter, the following terms are defined:
1. “Junk” means all old or scrap copper, brass, lead, or any other non-ferrous
metal; old or discarded rope, rags, batteries, paper, trash, rubber, debris, waste or used
lumber, or salvaged wood; dismantled vehicles, machinery and appliances or parts of
such vehicles, machinery or appliances; iron, steel or other old or scrap ferrous
materials; old or discarded glass, tinware, plastic or old or discarded household goods
or hardware. Neatly stacked firewood located on a side yard or a rear yard is not
considered junk.
2. “Junk vehicle” means any motor vehicle stored within the corporate limits of
the City, not licensed for the current year as required by law, and which, because of any
one of the following characteristics, constitutes a threat to the public health and safety:
A. Has a broken or cracked windshield, window, headlight, or tail light,
or any other cracked or broken glass.
B. Has a broken or loose fender, door, bumper, hood, hood ornament, door
handle, window handle, running board, steering wheel, trunk top, trunk handle,
radio aerial, tail pipe or decorative piece.
C. Has become the habitat for rats, mice, snakes, or any other vermin or
insects.
D. Contains gasoline or any other flammable fuel.
E. Because of its defective or obsolete condition, constitutes a threat to
the public health and safety in any other way.
Mere licensing of such vehicle shall not constitute a defense to the finding that the
vehicle is a junk vehicle.
3. “Vehicle” means every device in, upon, or by which a person or property is or
may be transported or drawn upon a highway or street, except devices moved by human
power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks, and includes without
limitation a motor vehicle, automobile, truck, motorcycle, tractor, buggy, wagon, farm
machinery, or any combination thereof.
51.02 JUNK AND JUNK VEHICLES PROHIBITED. It is unlawful for any person to
store, accumulate, or allow to remain on any private property within the corporate limits of the
City any junk or junk vehicle. As used herein, “store” means leaving a motor vehicle or
machinery upon private property for more than one month.
51.03 JUNK AND JUNK VEHICLES A NUISANCE. It is hereby declared that any junk
or junk vehicle located upon private property, unless excepted by Section 51.04, constitutes a
threat to the health and safety of the citizens and is a nuisance within the meaning of Section
CHAPTER 51 JUNK AND JUNK VEHICLES
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
- 276 -
657.1 of the Code of Iowa. If any junk or junk vehicle is kept upon private property in violation
hereof, the owner of or person occupying the property upon which it is located shall be prima
facie liable for said violation.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3a])
51.04 EXCEPTIONS. The provisions of this chapter do not apply to any junk or a junk
vehicle stored within:
1. Structure. A garage or other enclosed structure; or
2. Salvage Yard. An auto salvage yard or junk yard lawfully operated within the
City.
3. Fenced Area. A fully enclosed fence or wall six (6) feet in height, constructed
so as to prevent unauthorized entrance and access to motor vehicles therein.
51.05 NOTICE TO ABATE. Upon discovery of any junk or junk vehicle located upon
private property in violation of Section 51.03, the City shall within five (5) days initiate
abatement procedures as outlined in Chapter 50 of this Code of Ordinances.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3a])
[The next page is 301]
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
- 301 -
CHAPTER 55
ANIMAL PROTECTION AND CONTROL
55.01 Definitions 55.08 Annoyance or Disturbance
55.02 Animal Neglect 55.09 Vicious Dogs
55.03 Livestock Neglect 55.10 Rabies Vaccination
55.04 Abandonment of Cats and Dogs 55.11 Owner’s Duty
55.05 Livestock 55.12 Confinement
55.06 At Large Prohibited 55.13 At Large: Impoundment
55.07 Damage or Interference 55.14 Disposition of Animals
55.01 DEFINITIONS. The following terms are defined for use in this chapter.
1. “Animal” means a nonhuman vertebrate.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 717B.1)
2. “At large” means off the premises of the owner and not under the control of a
competent person, restrained within a motor vehicle, or housed in a veterinary hospital
or kennel.
3. “Livestock” means an animal belonging to the bovine, caprine, equine, ovine
or porcine species, ostriches, rheas and emus; farm deer as defined in Section 170.1 of
the Code of Iowa; or poultry.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 717.1)
4. “Owner” means any person owning, keeping, sheltering or harboring an animal.
55.02 ANIMAL NEGLECT. It is unlawful for a person who impounds or confines, in any
place, an animal, excluding livestock, to fail to supply the animal during confinement with a
sufficient quantity of food or water, or to fail to provide a confined dog or cat with adequate
shelter, or to torture, deprive of necessary sustenance, mutilate, beat, or kill such animal by any
means that causes unjustified pain, distress or suffering.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 717B.3)
55.03 LIVESTOCK NEGLECT. It is unlawful for a person who impounds or confines
livestock in any place to fail to provide the livestock with care consistent with customary animal
husbandry practices or to deprive the livestock of necessary sustenance or to injure or destroy
livestock by any means that causes pain or suffering in a manner inconsistent with customary
animal husbandry practices.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 717.2)
55.04 ABANDONMENT OF CATS AND DOGS. A person who has ownership or custody
of a cat or dog shall not abandon the cat or dog, except the person may deliver the cat or dog to
another person who will accept ownership and custody or the person may deliver the cat or dog
to an animal shelter or pound.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 717B.8)
55.05 LIVESTOCK. It is unlawful for a person to keep livestock within the City except by
written consent of the Council or except in compliance with the City’s zoning regulations.
CHAPTER 55 ANIMAL PROTECTION AND CONTROL
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
- 302 -
55.06 AT LARGE PROHIBITED. It is unlawful for any owner to allow an animal to run at
large within the corporate limits of the City.
55.07 DAMAGE OR INTERFERENCE. It is unlawful for the owner of an animal to allow
or permit such animal to pass upon the premises of another thereby causing damage to, or
interference with, the premises.
55.08 ANNOYANCE OR DISTURBANCE. It is unlawful for the owner of a dog to allow
or permit such dog to cause serious annoyance or disturbance to any person by frequent and
habitual howling, yelping, barking, or otherwise, or by running after or chasing persons,
bicycles, automobiles or other vehicles.
55.09 VICIOUS DOGS. It is unlawful for any person to harbor or keep a vicious dog within
the City. A dog is deemed to be vicious when it has attacked or bitten any person without
provocation, or when propensity to attack or bite persons exists and is known or ought
reasonably to be known to the owner.
55.10 RABIES VACCINATION. Every owner of a dog shall obtain a rabies vaccination for
such animal. It is unlawful for any person to own or have a dog in said person’s possession, six
months of age or over, which has not been vaccinated against rabies. Dogs kept in State or
Federally licensed kennels and not allowed to run at large are not subject to these vaccination
requirements.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 351.33)
55.11 OWNER’S DUTY. It is the duty of the owner of any dog, cat, or other animal that has
bitten or attacked a person or any person having knowledge of such bite or attack to report this
act to a local health or law enforcement official. It is the duty of physicians and veterinarians
to report to the local board of health the existence of any animal known or suspected to be
suffering from rabies.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 351.38)
55.12 CONFINEMENT. If a local board of health receives information that an animal has
bitten a person or that a dog or animal is suspected of having rabies, the board shall order the
owner to confine such animal in the manner it directs. If the owner fails to confine such animal
in the manner directed, the animal shall be apprehended and impounded by such board, and after
ten (10) days the board may humanely destroy the animal. If such animal is returned to its
owner, the owner shall pay the cost of impoundment. This section does not apply if a police
service dog or a horse used by a law enforcement agency and acting in the performance of its
duties has bitten a person.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 351.39)
55.13 AT LARGE: IMPOUNDMENT. Animals found at large in violation of this chapter
shall be seized and impounded at the impoundment facilities utilized by the City, or at the
discretion of the peace officer, the owner may be served a summons to appear before a proper
court to answer charges made thereunder.
55.14 DISPOSITION OF ANIMALS. When an animal has been apprehended and
impounded, written notice shall be provided to the owner within two (2) days after
impoundment, if the owner’s name and current address can reasonably be determined by
accessing a tag or other device that is on or part of the animal. Impounded animals may be
recovered by the owner upon payment of impounding costs, and if an unvaccinated dog, by
CHAPTER 55 ANIMAL PROTECTION AND CONTROL
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
- 303 -
having it immediately vaccinated. If the owner fails to redeem the animal within seven (7) days
from the date that the notice is mailed, or if the owner cannot be located within seven days, the
animal shall be disposed of in accordance with law or destroyed by euthanasia.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 351.37, 351.41)
CHAPTER 55 ANIMAL PROTECTION AND CONTROL
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
- 304 -
[The next page is 331]
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
- 331 -
CHAPTER 60
ADMINISTRATION OF TRAFFIC CODE
60.01 Title 60.05 Traffic Accidents: Reports
60.02 Definitions 60.06 Peace Officer’s Authority
60.03 Administration and Enforcement 60.07 Obedience to Peace Officers
60.04 Power to Direct Traffic 60.08 Parades Regulated
60.01 TITLE. Chapters 60 through 70 of this Code of Ordinances may be known and cited
as the “Sioux Center Traffic Code.”
60.02 DEFINITIONS. Where words and phrases used in the Traffic Code are defined by
State law, such definitions apply to their use in said Traffic Code and are adopted by reference.
Those definitions so adopted that need further definition or are reiterated, and other words and
phrases used herein, have the following meanings:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.1)
1. “Business District” means the territory contiguous to and including a highway
when fifty percent (50%) or more of the frontage thereon for a distance of three hundred
(300) feet or more is occupied by buildings in use for business.
2. “Park” or “parking” means the standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not,
otherwise than temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or
unloading merchandise or passengers.
3. “Peace officer” means every officer authorized to direct or regulate traffic or to
make arrests for violations of traffic regulations.
4. “Residence district” means the territory contiguous to and including a highway
not comprising a business, suburban or school district, where forty percent (40%) or
more of the frontage on such a highway for a distance of three hundred (300) feet or
more is occupied by dwellings or by dwellings and buildings in use for business.
5. “School district” means the territory contiguous to and including a highway for
a distance of two hundred (200) feet in either direction from a school house.
6. “Stand” or “standing” means the halting of a vehicle, whether occupied or not,
otherwise than for the purpose of and while actually engaged in receiving or discharging
passengers.
7. “Stop” means when required, the complete cessation of movement.
8. “Stop” or “stopping” means when prohibited, any halting of a vehicle, even
momentarily, whether occupied or not, except when necessary to avoid conflict with
other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a peace officer or traffic control
sign or signal.
9. “Suburban district” means all other parts of the City not included in the
business, school or residence districts.
10. “Traffic control device” means all signs, signals, markings, and devices not
inconsistent with this chapter, lawfully placed or erected for the purpose of regulating,
warning, or guiding traffic.
CHAPTER 60 ADMINISTRATION OF TRAFFIC CODE
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
- 332 -
11. “Vehicle” means every device in, upon or by which any person or property is
or may be transported or drawn upon a public highway, street, or alley.
60.03 ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT. Provisions of this chapter and State
law relating to motor vehicles and law of the road are enforced by the Police Chief.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
60.04 POWER TO DIRECT TRAFFIC. A peace officer, and, in the absence of a peace
officer, any officer of the fire department when at the scene of a fire, is authorized to direct all
traffic by voice, hand or signal in conformance with traffic laws. In the event of an emergency,
traffic may be directed as conditions require, notwithstanding the provisions of the traffic laws.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 102.4 & 321.236[2])
60.05 TRAFFIC ACCIDENTS: REPORTS. The driver of a vehicle involved in an
accident within the limits of the City shall file a report as and when required by the Iowa
Department of Transportation. A copy of this report shall be filed with the City for the
confidential use of peace officers and shall be subject to the provisions of Section 321.271 of
the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.273)
60.06 PEACE OFFICER’S AUTHORITY. A peace officer is authorized to stop a vehicle
to require exhibition of the driver’s license of the driver, to serve a summons or memorandum
of traffic violation, to inspect the condition of the vehicle, to inspect the vehicle with reference
to size, weight, cargo, log book, bills of lading or other manifest of employment, tires and safety
equipment, or to inspect the registration certificate, the compensation certificate, travel order,
or permit of such vehicle. A peace officer having probable cause to stop a vehicle may require
exhibition of the proof of financial liability coverage card issued for the vehicle.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.492)
60.07 OBEDIENCE TO PEACE OFFICERS. No person shall willfully fail or refuse to
comply with any lawful order or direction of any peace officer invested by law with authority
to direct, control, or regulate traffic.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.229)
60.08 PARADES REGULATED. No person shall conduct or cause any parade on any street
except as provided herein:
1. Definition. “Parade” means any march or procession of persons or vehicles
organized for marching or moving on the streets in an organized fashion or manner or
any march or procession of persons or vehicles represented or advertised to the public
as a parade.
2. Approval Required. No parade shall be conducted without first obtaining
approval from the Chief of Police. The person organizing or sponsoring the parade
shall provide information concerning the time and date for the parade and the streets or
general route therefor, and any approval given to such person includes all participants
in the parade, provided they have been invited to participate.
3. Parade Not A Street Obstruction. Any parade for which approval has been
given and the persons lawfully participating therein shall not be deemed an obstruction
of the streets, notwithstanding the provisions of any other ordinance to the contrary.
CHAPTER 60 ADMINISTRATION OF TRAFFIC CODE
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
- 333 -
4. Control by Peace Officers and Firefighters. Persons participating in any parade
shall at all times be subject to the lawful orders and directions in the performance of
their duties of law enforcement personnel and members of the Fire Department.
CHAPTER 60 ADMINISTRATION OF TRAFFIC CODE
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
- 334 -
° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° °
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
- 335 -
CHAPTER 61
TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES
61.01 Traffic Control Devices 61.04 Crosswalks
61.02 Installation 61.05 Traffic Lanes
61.03 Compliance 61.06 Standards
61.01 TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES. The Police Chief shall establish and cause to be
placed and maintained, appropriate traffic control devices to indicate parking spaces and zones,
no parking zones, limited parking zones, reserved parking zones, loading zones, safety zones,
school zones, hospital zones, quiet zones, traffic zones other than the above, truck routes, school
stops, stop intersections, yield right-of-way intersections, one-way streets, streets to be laned
for traffic and play streets. The Police Chief shall also have the power to designate and indicate
intersections at which traffic shall be controlled by traffic signals; intersections at which left
turns, right turns and U-turns shall be prohibited; and intersections at which markers, buttons or
other indications shall be placed to indicate the course to be traveled by vehicles traversing or
turning at such intersections.
61.02 INSTALLATION. The Police Chief shall cause to be placed and maintained traffic
control devices to carry out the provisions of the Traffic Code of the City under State law or to
regulate, guide or warn traffic.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.254 & 321.255)
61.03 COMPLIANCE. No driver of a vehicle shall disobey the instructions of any official
traffic control device placed in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, unless at the time
otherwise directed by a peace officer, subject to the exceptions granted the driver of an
authorized emergency vehicle under Section 321.231 of the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.256)
61.04 CROSSWALKS. The Police Chief is hereby authorized to designate and maintain
crosswalks by appropriate traffic control devices at intersections where, due to traffic
conditions, there is particular danger to pedestrians crossing the street or road-way, and at such
other places as traffic conditions require.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4] & 321.255)
61.05 TRAFFIC LANES. Where traffic lanes have been marked on street pavements at such
places as traffic conditions require, it is unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to fail or refuse
to keep such vehicle within the boundaries of any such lane except when lawfully passing
another vehicle or preparatory to making a lawful turning movement.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4] & 321.255)
61.06 STANDARDS. Traffic control devices shall comply with standards established by The
Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices for Streets and Highways.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.255)
CHAPTER 61 TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
- 336 -
° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° °
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
- 337 -
CHAPTER 62
GENERAL TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
62.01 Violation of Regulations 62.05 Quiet Zones
62.02 Play Streets Designated 62.06 Obstructing View at Intersections
62.03 Vehicles on Sidewalks 62.07 Engine Brakes and Compression Brakes
62.04 Clinging to Vehicle
62.01 VIOLATION OF REGULATIONS. Any person who willfully fails or refuses to
comply with any lawful order of a peace officer or direction of a Fire Department officer during
a fire, or who fails to abide by the applicable provisions of the following Iowa statutory laws
relating to motor vehicles and the statutory law of the road is in violation of this section. These
sections of the Code of Iowa are adopted by reference and are as follows:
1. Section 321.17 – Misdemeanor to violate registration provisions.
2. Section 321.32 – Registration card, carried and exhibited.
3. Section 321.37 – Display of plates.
4. Section 321.38 – Plates, method of attaching, imitations prohibited.
5. Section 321.57 – Operation under special plates.
6. Section 321.67 – Certificate of title must be executed.
7. Section 321.78 – Injuring or tampering with vehicle.
8. Section 321.79 – Intent to injure.
9. Section 321.91 – Penalty for abandonment.
10. Section 321.98 – Operation without registration.
11. Section 321.99 – Fraudulent use of registration.
12. Section 321.104 – Penal offenses again title law.
13. Section 321.115 – Antique vehicles; model year plates permitted.
14. Section 321.174 – Operators licensed.
15. Section 321.174A – Operation of motor vehicles with expired license.
16. Section 321.180 – Instruction permits.
17. Section 321.180B – Graduated driver’s licenses for persons aged fourteen
through seventeen.
18. Section 321.193 – Restricted licenses.
19. Section 321.194 – Special minor’s licenses.
20. Section 321.208A – Operation in violation of out-of-service order.
21. Section 321.216 – Unlawful use of license and nonoperator’s identification
card.
22. Section 321.216B – Use of driver’s license or nonoperator’s identification card
by underage person to obtain alcohol.
CHAPTER 62 GENERAL TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
- 338 -
23. Section 321.216C – Use of driver’s license or nonoperator’s identification card
by underage person to obtain cigarettes or tobacco products.
24. Section 321.218 – Operating without valid driver’s license or when
disqualified.
25. Section 321.219 – Permitting unauthorized minor to drive.
26. Section 321.220 – Permitting unauthorized person to drive.
27. Section 321.221 – Employing unlicensed chauffeur.
28. Section 321.222 – Renting motor vehicle to another.
29. Section 321.223 – License inspected.
30. Section 321.224 – Record kept.
31. Section 321.232 – Radar jamming devices; penalty.
32. Section 321.235A – Electric personal assistive mobility devices.
33. Section 321.247 – Golf cart operation on City streets.
34. Section 321.259 – Unauthorized signs, signals or markings.
35. Section 321.260 – Interference with devices, signs or signals; unlawful
possession.
36. Section 321.262 – Damage to vehicle.
37. Section 321.263 – Information and aid.
38. Section 321.264 – Striking unattended vehicle.
39. Section 321.265 – Striking fixtures upon a highway.
40. Section 321.266 – Reporting accidents.
41. Section 321.275 – Operation of motorcycles and motorized bicycles.
42. Section 321.276 – Use of electronic communication device while driving; textmessaging.
43. Section 321.277 – Reckless driving.
44. Section 321.277A – Careless driving.
45. Section 321.278 – Drag racing prohibited.
46. Section 321.281 – Actions against bicyclists.
47. Section 321.284 – Open container; drivers.
48. Section 321.284A – Open container; passengers.
49. Section 321.288 – Control of vehicle; reduced speed.
50. Section 321.295 – Limitation on bridge or elevated structures.
51. Section 321.297 – Driving on right-hand side of roadways; exceptions.
52. Section 321.298 – Meeting and turning to right.
53. Section 321.299 – Overtaking a vehicle.
54. Section 321.302 – Overtaking and passing.
CHAPTER 62 GENERAL TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
- 339 -
55. Section 321.303 – Limitations on overtaking on the left.
56. Section 321.304 – Prohibited passing.
57. Section 321.306 – Roadways laned for traffic.
58. Section 321.307 – Following too closely.
59. Section 321.308 – Motor trucks and towed vehicles; distance requirements.
60. Section 321.309 – Towing; convoys; drawbars.
61. Section 321.310 – Towing four-wheel trailers.
62. Section 321.312 – Turning on curve or crest of grade.
63. Section 321.313 – Starting parked vehicle.
64. Section 321.314 – When signal required.
65. Section 321.315 – Signal continuous.
66. Section 321.316 – Stopping.
67. Section 321.317 – Signals by hand and arm or signal device.
68. Section 321.318 – Method of giving hand and arm signals.
69. Section 321.319 – Entering intersections from different highways.
70. Section 321.320 – Left turns; yielding.
71. Section 321.321 – Entering through highways.
72. Section 321.322 – Vehicles entering stop or yield intersection.
73. Section 321.323 – Moving vehicle backward on highway.
74. Section 321.323A – Approaching certain stationary vehicles.
75. Section 321.324 – Operation on approach of emergency vehicles.
76. Section 321.324A – Funeral processions.
77. Section 321.329 – Duty of driver; pedestrians crossing or working on highways.
78. Section 321.330 – Use of crosswalks.
79. Section 321.332 – White canes restricted to blind persons.
80. Section 321.333 – Duty of drivers approaching blind persons.
81. Section 321.340 – Driving through safety zone.
82. Section 321.341 – Obedience to signal of train.
83. Section 321.342 – Stop at certain railroad crossings; posting warning.
84. Section 321.343 – Certain vehicles must stop.
85. Section 321.344 – Heavy equipment at crossing.
86. Section 321.344B – Immediate safety threat; penalty.
87. Section 321.354 – Stopping on traveled way.
88. Section 321.359 – Moving other vehicle.
89. Section 321.362 – Unattended motor vehicle.
CHAPTER 62 GENERAL TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
- 340 -
90. Section 321.363 – Obstruction to driver’s view.
91. Section 321.364 – Vehicles shipping food; preventing contamination by
hazardous material.
92. Section 321.365 – Coasting prohibited.
93. Section 321.367 – Following fire apparatus.
94. Section 321.368 – Crossing fire hose.
95. Section 321.369 – Putting debris on highway.
96. Section 321.370 – Removing injurious material.
97. Section 321.371 – Clearing up wrecks.
98. Section 321.372 – School buses.
99. Section 321.381 – Movement of unsafe or improperly equipped vehicles.
100. Section 321.381A – Operation of low-speed vehicles.
101. Section 321.382 – Upgrade pulls; minimum speed.
102. Section 321.383 – Exceptions; slow vehicles identified.
103. Section 321.384 – When lighted lamps required.
104. Section 321.385 – Head lamps on motor vehicles.
105. Section 321.386 – Head lamps on motorcycles and motorized bicycles.
106. Section 321.387 – Rear lamps.
107. Section 321.388 – Illuminating plates.
108. Section 321.389 – Reflector requirement.
109. Section 321.390 – Reflector requirements.
110. Section 321.392 – Clearance and identification lights.
111. Section 321.393 – Color and mounting.
112. Section 321.394 – Lamp or flag on projecting load.
113. Section 321.395 – Lamps on parked vehicles.
114. Section 321.398 – Lamps on other vehicles and equipment.
115. Section 321.402 – Spot lamps.
116. Section 321.403 – Auxiliary driving lamps.
117. Section 321.404 – Signal lamps and signal devices.
118. Section 321.404A – Light-restricting devices prohibited.
119. Section 321.405 – Self-illumination.
120. Section 321.408 – Back-up lamps.
121. Section 321.409 – Mandatory lighting equipment.
122. Section 321.415 – Required usage of lighting devices.
123. Section 321.417 – Single-beam road-lighting equipment.
CHAPTER 62 GENERAL TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
- 341 -
124. Section 321.418 – Alternate road-lighting equipment.
125. Section 321.419 – Number of driving lamps required or permitted.
126. Section 321.420 – Number of lamps lighted.
127. Section 321.421 – Special restrictions on lamps.
128. Section 321.422 – Red light in front.
129. Section 321.423 – Flashing lights.
130. Section 321.430 – Brake, hitch, and control requirements.
131. Section 321.431 – Performance ability.
132. Section 321.432 – Horns and warning devices.
133. Section 321.433 – Sirens, whistles, and bells prohibited.
134. Section 321.434 – Bicycle sirens or whistles.
135. Section 321.436 – Mufflers, prevention of noise.
136. Section 321.437 – Mirrors.
137. Section 321.438 – Windshields and windows.
138. Section 321.439 – Windshield wipers.
139. Section 321.440 – Restrictions as to tire equipment.
140. Section 321.441 – Metal tires prohibited.
141. Section 321.442 – Projections on wheels.
142. Section 321.444 – Safety glass.
143. Section 321.445 – Safety belts and safety harnesses; use required.
144. Section 321.446 – Child restraint devices.
145. Section 321.449 – Motor carrier safety regulations.
146. Section 321.450 – Hazardous materials transportation.
147. Section 321.454 – Width of vehicles.
148. Section 321.455 – Projecting loads on passenger vehicles.
149. Section 321.456 – Height of vehicles; permits.
150. Section 321.457 – Maximum length.
151. Section 321.458 – Loading beyond front.
152. Section 321.460 – Spilling loads on highways.
153. Section 321.461 – Trailers and towed vehicles.
154. Section 321.462 – Drawbars and safety chains.
155. Section 321.463 – Maximum gross weight.
156. Section 321.465 – Weighing vehicles and removal of excess.
157. Section 321.466 – Increased loading capacity; reregistration.
CHAPTER 62 GENERAL TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
- 342 -
62.02 PLAY STREETS DESIGNATED. The Police Chief shall have authority to declare
any street or part thereof a play street and cause to be placed appropriate signs or devices in the
roadway indicating and helping to protect the same. Whenever authorized signs are erected
indicating any street or part thereof as a play street, no person shall drive a vehicle upon any
such street or portion thereof except drivers of vehicles having business or whose residences are
within such closed area, and then any said driver shall exercise the greatest care in driving upon
any such street or portion thereof.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.255)
62.03 VEHICLES ON SIDEWALKS. The driver of a vehicle shall not drive upon or within
any sidewalk area except at a driveway.
62.04 CLINGING TO VEHICLE. No person shall drive a motor vehicle on the streets of
the City unless all passengers of said vehicle are inside the vehicle in the place intended for their
accommodation. No person riding upon any bicycle, coaster, roller skates, in-line skates, sled,
or toy vehicle shall attach the same or himself or herself to any vehicle upon a roadway.
62.05 QUIET ZONES. Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating a quiet zone, no
person operating a motor vehicle within any such zone shall sound the horn or other warning
device of such vehicle except in an emergency.
62.06 OBSTRUCTING VIEW AT INTERSECTIONS. It is unlawful to allow any tree,
hedge, billboard, or other object to obstruct the view of an intersection by preventing persons
from having a clear view of traffic approaching the intersection from cross streets. Any such
obstruction is deemed a nuisance and in addition to the standard penalty may be abated in the
manner provided by Chapter 50 of this Code of Ordinances.
62.07 ENGINE BRAKES AND COMPRESSION BRAKES.
1. It is unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to use or operate or cause to be used
or operated within the City any engine brake, compression brake, or mechanical exhaust
device designed to aid in the braking or deceleration of any vehicle that results in
excessive, loud, unusual, or explosive noise from such vehicle.
2. The usage of an engine brake, compression brake, or mechanical exhaust device
designed to aid in braking or deceleration in such a manner so as to be audible at a
distance of 300 feet from the motor vehicle shall constitute evidence of a prima facie
violation of this section.
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
- 343 -
CHAPTER 63
SPEED REGULATIONS
63.01 General 63.04 Special Speed Zones
63.02 State Code Speed Limits 63.05 Minimum Speed
63.03 Parks, Cemeteries, and Parking Lots
63.01 GENERAL. Every driver of a motor vehicle on a street shall drive the same at a careful
and prudent speed not greater than nor less than is reasonable and proper, having due regard to
the traffic, surface and width of the street and of any other conditions then existing, and no
person shall drive a vehicle on any street at a speed greater than will permit said driver to bring
it to a stop within the assured clear distance ahead, such driver having the right to assume,
however, that all persons using said street will observe the law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.285)
63.02 STATE CODE SPEED LIMITS. The following speed limits are established in
Section 321.285 of the Code of Iowa and any speed in excess thereof is unlawful unless
specifically designated otherwise in this chapter as a special speed zone.
1. Business District – twenty (20) miles per hour.
2. Residence or School District – twenty-five (25) miles per hour.
3. Suburban District – forty-five (45) miles per hour.
63.03 PARKS, CEMETERIES, AND PARKING LOTS. A speed in excess of fifteen (15)
miles per hour in any public park, cemetery, or parking lot, unless specifically designated
otherwise in this chapter, is unlawful.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[5])
63.04 SPECIAL SPEED ZONES. In accordance with requirements of the Iowa Department
of Transportation, or whenever the Council shall determine upon the basis of an engineering
and traffic investigation that any speed limit listed in Section 63.02 is greater or less than is
reasonable or safe under the conditions found to exist at any intersection or other place or upon
any part of the City street system, the Council shall determine and adopt by ordinance such
higher or lower speed limit as it deems reasonable and safe at such location. The following
special speed zones have been established:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.290)
1. Special 15 MPH Speed Zones. A speed in excess of fifteen (15) miles per hour
is unlawful on any of the following designated streets or parts thereof:
A. On 1st Avenue SE from 7th Street SE to 9th Street SE.
2. Special 25 MPH Speed Zones. A speed in excess of twenty-five (25) miles per
hour is unlawful on any of the following designated streets or parts thereof.
A. On all streets in the Business District.
3. Special 30 MPH Speed Zones. A speed in excess of thirty (30) miles per hour
is unlawful on any of the following designated streets or parts thereof.
CHAPTER 63 SPEED REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
- 344 -
A. On Highway 75 from the 400 block north of 4th Street NW to the 200
block south of 2nd Street SW.
4. Special 35 MPH Speed Zones. A speed in excess of thirty-five (35) miles per
hour is unlawful on any of the following designated streets or parts thereof.
A. On Highway 75 North from the 400 block north of 4th Street NE to the
1300 block north.
B. On Highway 75 South from the 200 block south of 2nd Street SW to the
1200 block south.
5. Special 45 MPH Speed Zones. A speed in excess of forty-five (45) miles per
hour is unlawful on any of the following designated streets or parts thereof.
A. On Highway 75 North from the 1300 block north to the 1800 block
north.
B. On Highway 75 South from the 1200 block south to the 1600 block
south.
6. Special 50 MPH Speed Zones. A speed in excess of fifty (50) miles per hour
is unlawful on any of the following designated streets or parts thereof.
A. On Highway 75 South from the 1600 block south to the 2100 block
south.
63.05 MINIMUM SPEED. A person shall not drive a motor vehicle at such a slow speed as
to impede or block the normal and reasonable movement of traffic, except when reduced speed
is necessary for safe operation, or in compliance with law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.294)
[The next page is 351]
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
- 351 -
CHAPTER 64
TURNING REGULATIONS
64.01 Turning at Intersections 64.03 Left Turn for Parking
64.02 U-Turns
64.01 TURNING AT INTERSECTIONS. The driver of a vehicle intending to turn at an
intersection shall do so as follows:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.311)
1. Both the approach for a right turn and a right turn shall be made as close as
practical to the right-hand curb or edge of the roadway.
2. Approach for a left turn shall be made in that portion of the right half of the
roadway nearest the centerline thereof and after entering the intersection the left turn
shall be made so as to depart from the intersection to the right of the centerline of the
roadway being entered.
3. Approach for a left turn from a two-way street into a one-way street shall be
made in that portion of the right half of the roadway nearest the centerline thereof and
by passing to the right of such centerline where it enters the intersection. A left turn
from a one-way street into a two-way street shall be made by passing to the right of the
centerline of the street being entered upon leaving the intersection.
The Police Chief may cause markers, buttons or signs to be placed within or adjacent to
intersections and thereby require and direct, as traffic conditions require, that a different course
from that specified above be traveled by vehicles turning at intersections, and when markers,
buttons or signs are so placed, no driver of a vehicle shall turn a vehicle at an intersection other
than as directed and required by such markers, buttons or signs.
64.02 U-TURNS. It is unlawful for a driver to make a U-turn except at an intersection;
however, U-turns are prohibited within the Business District and at any intersection where a
sign prohibiting U-turns is posted in accordance with Chapter 61 of this Traffic Code.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[9])
64.03 LEFT TURN FOR PARKING. No person shall make a left hand turn, crossing the
centerline of the street, for the purpose of parking on said street.
CHAPTER 64 TURNING REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
- 352 -
° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° °
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
- 353 -
CHAPTER 65
STOP OR YIELD REQUIRED
65.01 Stop or Yield 65.04 Stop When Traffic is Obstructed
65.02 School Stops 65.05 Yield to Pedestrians in Crosswalks
65.03 Stop Before Crossing Sidewalk
65.01 STOP OR YIELD. Every driver of a vehicle shall stop or yield as directed by traffic
control devices posted in accordance with Chapter 61 of this Traffic Code.
65.02 SCHOOL STOPS. At any school crossing zone, every driver of a vehicle approaching
said zone shall bring the vehicle to a full stop at a point ten (10) feet from the approach side of
the crosswalk marked by an authorized school stop sign and thereafter proceed in a careful and
prudent manner until the vehicle shall have passed through such school crossing zone.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.249)
65.03 STOP BEFORE CROSSING SIDEWALK. The driver of a vehicle emerging from
a private roadway, alley, driveway, or building shall stop such vehicle immediately prior to
driving onto the sidewalk area and thereafter shall proceed into the sidewalk area only when
able to do so without danger to pedestrian traffic and shall yield the right-of-way to any
vehicular traffic on the street into which the vehicle is entering.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.353)
65.04 STOP WHEN TRAFFIC IS OBSTRUCTED. Notwithstanding any traffic control
signal indication to proceed, no driver shall enter an intersection or a marked crosswalk unless
there is sufficient space on the other side of the intersection or crosswalk to accommodate the
vehicle.
65.05 YIELD TO PEDESTRIANS IN CROSSWALKS. Where traffic control signals are
not in place or in operation, the driver of a vehicle shall yield the right-of-way, slowing down
or stopping, if need be, to yield to a pedestrian crossing the roadway within any marked
crosswalk or within any unmarked crosswalk at an intersection.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.327)
CHAPTER 65 STOP OR YIELD REQUIRED
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
- 354 -
° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° °
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
- 355 -
CHAPTER 66
LOAD AND WEIGHT RESTRICTIONS
66.01 Temporary Embargo 66.03 Load Limits Upon Certain Streets
66.02 Permits for Excess Size and Weight 66.04 Truck Route
66.01 TEMPORARY EMBARGO. If the Council declares an embargo when it appears by
reason of deterioration, rain, snow or other climatic conditions that certain streets will be
seriously damaged or destroyed by vehicles weighing in excess of an amount specified by the
signs, no such vehicles shall be operated on streets so designated by such signs.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.471 & 472)
66.02 PERMITS FOR EXCESS SIZE AND WEIGHT. The Police Chief may, upon
application and good cause being shown therefor, issue a special permit in writing authorizing
the applicant to operate or move a vehicle or combination of vehicles of a size or weight or load
exceeding the maximum specified by State law or the City over those streets or bridges named
in the permit which are under the jurisdiction of the City and for which the City is responsible
for maintenance.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.473 & 321E.1)
66.03 LOAD LIMITS UPON CERTAIN STREETS. When signs are erected giving notice
thereof, no person shall operate any vehicle with a gross weight in excess of the amounts
specified on such signs at any time upon any of the streets or parts of streets for which said signs
are erected in accordance with Chapter 61 of this Traffic Code.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.473 & 475)
66.04 TRUCK ROUTE. When truck routes have been designated in accordance with
Chapter 61, any motor vehicle exceeding established weight limits shall comply with the
following:
1. Use of Established Routes. Every such motor vehicle having no fixed terminal
within the City or making no scheduled or definite stops within the City for the purpose
of loading or unloading shall travel over or upon those streets within the City designated
as truck routes and none other.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.473)
2. Deliveries Off Truck Route. Any such motor vehicle, when loaded or empty,
having a fixed terminal, making a scheduled or definite stop within the City for the
purpose of loading or unloading shall proceed over or upon the designated routes to the
nearest point of its scheduled or definite stop and shall proceed thereto, load or unload
and return, by the most direct route to its point of departure from said designated route.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.473)
3. Employer’s Responsibility. The owner, or any other person, employing or
otherwise directing the driver of any vehicle shall not require or knowingly permit the
operation of such vehicle upon a street in any manner contrary to this section.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.473)
CHAPTER 66 LOAD AND WEIGHT RESTRICTIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
- 356 -
° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° °
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
- 357 -
CHAPTER 67
PEDESTRIANS
67.01 Walking in Street 67.03 Pedestrian Crossing
67.02 Hitchhiking
67.01 WALKING IN STREET. Pedestrians shall at all times when walking on or along a
street, walk on the left side of the street.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.326)
67.02 HITCHHIKING. No person shall stand in the traveled portion of a street for the
purpose of soliciting a ride from the driver of any private vehicle.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.331)
67.03 PEDESTRIAN CROSSING. Every pedestrian crossing a roadway at any point other
than within a marked crosswalk or within an unmarked crosswalk at an intersection shall yield
the right-of-way to all vehicles upon the roadway.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.328)
CHAPTER 67 PEDESTRIANS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
- 358 -
° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° °
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
- 359 -
CHAPTER 68
ONE-WAY TRAFFIC
(Reserved for Future Use)
CHAPTER 68 ONE-WAY TRAFFIC
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
- 360 -
° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° °
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
- 361 -
CHAPTER 69
PARKING REGULATIONS
69.01 Parking Limited or Controlled 69.07 Parking Prohibited
69.02 Park Adjacent to Curb 69.08 Persons With Disabilities Parking
69.03 Park Adjacent to Curb – One-Way Street 69.09 Truck Parking Limited
69.04 Angle Parking 69.10 Overnight Parking
69.05 Angle Parking – Manner 69.11 Snow Emergency
69.06 Parking for Certain Purposes Illegal
69.01 PARKING LIMITED OR CONTROLLED. Parking of vehicles shall be controlled
or limited where so indicated by designated traffic control devices in accordance with Chapter
61 of this Traffic Code. No person shall stop, park or stand a vehicle in violation of any such
posted parking regulations unless in compliance with the directions of a peace officer.
69.02 PARK ADJACENT TO CURB. No person shall stand or park a vehicle in a roadway
other than parallel with the edge of the roadway headed in the direction of lawful traffic
movement and with the right-hand wheels of the vehicle within eighteen (18) inches of the curb
or edge of the roadway except as hereinafter provided in the case of angle parking and vehicles
parked on the left-hand side of one-way streets.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.361)
69.03 PARK ADJACENT TO CURB – ONE-WAY STREET. No person shall stand or
park a vehicle on the left-hand side of a one-way street other than parallel with the edge of the
roadway headed in the direction of lawful traffic movement and with the left-hand wheels of
the vehicle within eighteen (18) inches of the curb or edge of the roadway except as hereinafter
provided in the case of angle parking.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.361)
69.04 ANGLE PARKING. Angle or diagonal parking is permitted only in the following
locations:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.361)
1. 2nd Avenue NW from 4th Street NW to 3rd Street NW (both sides of road);
2. 3rd Street NE from Highway 75 to 1st Avenue NE (north side of road);
3. 1st Avenue NE from 3rd Street NE to 4th Street NE (west side of road);
4. 1st Avenue NE from 3rd Street NE to 2nd Street NE (both sides of road);
5. 2nd Street NE from Highway 75 to 1st Avenue NE (both sides of road);
6. 2nd Street NW from Highway 75 to 1st Avenue NW (north side of road);
7. West 1st Street from Highway 75 to 1st Avenue NW (both sides of road);
8. Designated spaces in front of:
A. Hope Lutheran Church – 7 16th Street SE;
B. Christ the King Church – 501 2nd Avenue SW;
CHAPTER 69 PARKING REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
- 362 -
C. American State Bank – Highway 75 and 6th Street NW and 1st Avenue
NW;
D. Kroese & Kroese – 6th Street NE;
E. Bethel Christian Reformed Church – 341 South Main and 3rd and 4th
Street SW;
F. First Reformed Church – 10th Street SE and 1st Avenue SE and 2nd
Avenue SE;
G. Vos Motors – 1460 North Main Avenue;
H. First Christian Reformed Church – 3rd Avenue SE.
69.05 ANGLE PARKING – MANNER. Upon those streets or portions of streets that have
been signed or marked for angle parking, no person shall park or stand a vehicle other than at
an angle to the curb or edge of the roadway or in the center of the roadway as indicated by such
signs and markings. No part of any vehicle, or the load thereon, when parked within a diagonal
parking district, shall extend into the roadway more than a distance of sixteen (16) feet when
measured at right angles to the adjacent curb or edge of roadway.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.361)
69.06 PARKING FOR CERTAIN PURPOSES ILLEGAL. No person shall park a vehicle
upon public property for any of the following principal purposes:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[1])
1. Sale. Displaying such vehicle for sale.
2. Repairing. For lubricating, repairing or for commercial washing of such
vehicle except such repairs as are necessitated by an emergency.
3. Advertising. Displaying advertising.
4. Merchandise Sales. Selling merchandise from such vehicle except in a duly
established market place or when so authorized or licensed under the Code of
Ordinances.
5. Extended Parking. No vehicle shall be parked on public property for more than
24 hours (or other posted time limit under the provisions of Section 69.01 of this
chapter).
69.07 PARKING PROHIBITED. No one shall stop, stand or park a vehicle except when
necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a peace
officer or traffic control device, in any of the following places:
1. Crosswalk. On a crosswalk.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358 [5])
2. Center Parkway. On the center parkway or dividing area of any divided street.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236 [1])
3. Mailboxes. Within twenty (20) feet on either side of a mailbox that is so placed
and so equipped as to permit the depositing of mail from vehicles on the roadway.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236 [1])
4. Sidewalks. On or across a sidewalk.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358 [1])
CHAPTER 69 PARKING REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
- 363 -
5. Driveway. In front of a public or private driveway.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358 [2])
6. Intersection. Within an intersection or within ten (10) feet of an intersection of
any street or alley.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358[3])
7. Fire Hydrant. Within five (5) feet of a fire hydrant.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358 [4])
8. Stop Sign or Signal. Within ten (10) feet upon the approach to any flashing
beacon, stop or yield sign, or traffic control signal located at the side of a roadway.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358 [6])
9. Railroad Crossing. Within fifty (50) feet of the nearest rail of a railroad
crossing, except when parked parallel with such rail and not exhibiting a red light.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358 [8])
10. Fire Station. Within twenty (20) feet of the driveway entrance to any fire
station and on the side of a street opposite the entrance to any fire station within seventyfive
(75) feet of said entrance when properly sign posted.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358 [9])
11. Excavations. Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when
such stopping, standing or parking would obstruct traffic.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358 [10])
12. Double Parking. On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the
edge or curb of a street.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358 [11])
13. Hazardous Locations. When, because of restricted visibility or when standing
or parked vehicles would constitute a hazard to moving traffic, or when other traffic
conditions require, the Council may cause curbs to be painted with a yellow color and
erect no parking or standing signs.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358 [13])
14. Churches, Nursing Homes and Other Buildings. A space of fifty (50) feet is
hereby reserved at the side of the street in front of any theatre, auditorium, hotel having
more than twenty-five (25) sleeping rooms, hospital, nursing home, taxicab stand, bus
depot, church, or other building where large assemblages of people are being held,
within which space, when clearly marked as such, no motor vehicle shall be left
standing, parked or stopped except in taking on or discharging passengers or freight,
and then only for such length of time as is necessary for such purpose.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.360)
15. Alleys. No person shall park a vehicle within an alley in such a manner or
under such conditions as to leave available less than ten (10) feet of the width of the
roadway for the free movement of vehicular traffic, and no person shall stop, stand or
park a vehicle within an alley in such a position as to block the driveway entrance to
any abutting property. The provisions of this subsection shall not apply to a vehicle
parked in any alley that is eighteen (18) feet wide or less; provided said vehicle is parked
to deliver goods or services.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[1])
CHAPTER 69 PARKING REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
- 364 -
16. Ramps. In front of a curb cut or ramp that is located on public or private
property in a manner that blocks access to the curb cut or ramp.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358[15])
17. Area Between Lot Line and Curb Line. That area of the public way not covered
by sidewalk and lying between the lot line and the curb line.
18. In More Than One Space. In any designated parking space so that any part of
the vehicle occupies more than one such space or protrudes beyond the markings
designating such space.
69.08 PERSONS WITH DISABILITIES PARKING. The following regulations shall
apply to the establishment and use of persons with disabilities parking spaces:
1. Establishment. Persons with disabilities parking spaces shall be established and
designated in accordance with Chapter 321L of the Code of Iowa and Iowa
Administrative Code, 661-18. No unauthorized person shall establish any on-street
persons with disabilities parking space without first obtaining Council approval.
2. Improper Use. The following uses of a persons with disabilities parking space,
located on either public or private property, constitute improper use of a persons with
disabilities parking permit, which is a violation of this Code of Ordinances:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321L.4[2])
A. Use by an operator of a vehicle not displaying a persons with
disabilities parking permit;
B. Use by an operator of a vehicle displaying a persons with disabilities
parking permit but not being used by a person issued a permit or being
transported in accordance with Section 321L.2[1b] of the Code of Iowa;
C. Use by a vehicle in violation of the rules adopted under Section 321L.8
of the Code of Iowa.
3. Wheelchair Parking Cones. No person shall use or interfere with a wheelchair
parking cone in violation of the following:
A. A person issued a persons with disabilities parking permit must comply
with the requirements of Section 321L.2A (1) of the Code of Iowa when
utilizing a wheelchair parking cone.
B. A person shall not interfere with a wheelchair parking cone that is
properly placed under the provisions of Section 321L.2A (1) of the Code of
Iowa.
69.09 TRUCK PARKING LIMITED. No person shall park a motor truck, semi-trailer, or
other motor vehicle with trailer attached in violation of the following regulations. The
provisions of this section shall not apply to pickup, light delivery or panel delivery trucks.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236 [1])
1. Business District. Excepting only when such vehicles are actually engaged in
the delivery or receiving of merchandise or cargo, no person shall park or leave
unattended such vehicle on any streets within the business district. When actually
receiving or delivering merchandise or cargo such vehicle shall be stopped or parked in
a manner that will not interfere with other traffic.
CHAPTER 69 PARKING REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
- 365 -
2. Livestock. No such vehicle containing livestock shall be parked on any street,
alley or highway for a period of time of more than thirty (30) minutes.
69.10 OVERNIGHT PARKING. Parking of any kind of vehicle, trailer, or apparatus of any
nature will not be allowed on any of the streets or avenues within the City between the hours of
2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m.
69.11 SNOW EMERGENCY. Upon the order of the Police Chief or the City Manager, a
snow emergency shall be declared. A declared snow emergency shall have the effect of
extending or modifying the hours of restricted parking as stated in 69.10 as necessary for the
expedient removal of snow and ice accumulations.
CHAPTER 69 PARKING REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
- 366 -
[The next page is 375]
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
- 375 -
CHAPTER 70
TRAFFIC CODE ENFORCEMENT PROCEDURES
70.01 Arrest or Citation 70.04 Parking Violations: Vehicle Unattended
70.02 Scheduled Violations 70.05 Presumption in Reference to Illegal Parking
70.03 Parking Violations: Alternate 70.06 Impounding Vehicles
70.01 ARREST OR CITATION. Whenever a peace officer has reasonable cause to believe
that a person has violated any provision of the Traffic Code, such officer may:
1. Immediate Arrest. Immediately arrest such person and take such person before
a local magistrate, or
2. Issue Citation. Without arresting the person, prepare in quintuplicate a
combined traffic citation and complaint as adopted by the Iowa Commissioner of Public
Safety, or issue a uniform citation and complaint utilizing a State-approved
computerized device.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 805.6 & 321.485)
70.02 SCHEDULED VIOLATIONS. For violations of the Traffic Code which are
designated by Section 805.8A of the Code of Iowa to be scheduled violations, the scheduled
fine for each of those violations shall be as specified in Section 805.8A of the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 805.8 & 805.8A)
70.03 PARKING VIOLATIONS: ALTERNATE. Uncontested violations of parking
restrictions imposed by this Code of Ordinances shall be charged upon a simple notice of a fine
payable at the office of the City Clerk. The simple notice of a fine shall be in the amount of ten
dollars ($10.00) for all violations except improper use of a persons with disabilities parking
permit. If such fine is not paid within thirty (30) days, it shall be increased by five dollars
($5.00). The simple notice of a fine for improper use of a persons with disabilities parking
permit is one hundred dollars ($100.00).
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236 [1b] & 321L.4[2])
70.04 PARKING VIOLATIONS: VEHICLE UNATTENDED. When a vehicle is parked
in violation of any provision of the Traffic Code, and the driver is not present, the notice of fine
or citation as herein provided shall be attached to the vehicle in a conspicuous place.
70.05 PRESUMPTION IN REFERENCE TO ILLEGAL PARKING. In any proceeding
charging a standing or parking violation, a prima facie presumption that the registered owner
was the person who parked or placed such vehicle at the point where, and for the time during
which, such violation occurred shall be raised by proof that:
1. Described Vehicle. The particular vehicle described in the information was
parked in violation of the Traffic Code, and
2. Registered Owner. The defendant named in the information was the registered
owner at the time in question.
70.06 IMPOUNDING VEHICLES. A peace officer is hereby authorized to remove, or
cause to be removed, a vehicle from a street, public alley, public parking lot or highway to the
CHAPTER 70 TRAFFIC CODE ENFORCEMENT PROCEDURES
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
- 376 -
nearest garage or other place of safety, or to a garage designated or maintained by the City,
under the circumstances hereinafter enumerated:
1. Disabled Vehicle. When a vehicle is so disabled as to constitute an obstruction
to traffic and the person or persons in charge of the vehicle are by reason of physical
injury incapacitated to such an extent as to be unable to provide for its custody or
removal.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236 [1])
2. Illegally Parked Vehicle. When any vehicle is left unattended and is so illegally
parked as to constitute a definite hazard or obstruction to the normal movement of
traffic.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236 [1])
3. Snow Removal. When any vehicle is left parked in violation of a ban on
parking during snow removal operations.
4. Parked Over Limited Time Period. When any vehicle is left parked for a
continuous period in violation of any limited parking time. If the owner can be located,
the owner shall be given an opportunity to remove the vehicle.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236 [1])
5. Costs. In addition to the standard penalties provided, the owner or driver of
any vehicle impounded for the violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall be
required to pay the reasonable cost of towing and storage.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236 [1])
[The next page is 385]
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
- 385 -
CHAPTER 75
ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLES AND SNOWMOBILES
75.01 Purpose 75.05 Operation of All-Terrain Vehicles
75.02 Definitions 75.06 Negligence
75.03 General Regulations 75.07 Accident Reports
75.04 Operation of Snowmobiles
75.01 PURPOSE. The purpose of this chapter is to regulate the operation of all-terrain
vehicles and snowmobiles within the City.
75.02 DEFINITIONS. For use in this chapter the following terms are defined:
1. “All-terrain vehicle” or “ATV” means a motorized flotation-tire vehicle, with
not less than three and not more than six low pressure tires, that is limited in engine
displacement to less than one thousand (1,000) cubic centimeters and in total dry weight
to less than one thousand (1,000) pounds and that has a seat or saddle designed to be
straddled by the operator and handlebars for steering control.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321I.1)
2. “Off-road motorcycle” means a two-wheeled motor vehicle that has a seat or
saddle designed to be straddled by the operator and handlebars for steering control and
that is intended by the manufacturer for use on natural terrain. “Off-road motorcycle”
includes a motorcycle that was originally issued a certificate of title and registered for
highway use under Chapter 321 of the Code of Iowa, but which contains design features
that enable operation over natural terrain. An operator of an off-road motorcycle is also
subject to the provisions of this chapter governing the operation of all-terrain vehicles.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321I.1)
3. “Off-road utility vehicle” means a motorized flotation-tire vehicle, with not less
than four and not more than eight low-pressure tires, that is limited in engine
displacement to less than one thousand five hundred (1,500) cubic centimeters and in
total dry weight to not more than one thousand eight hundred (1,800) pounds and that
has a seat that is of bucket or bench design, not intended to be straddled by the operator,
and a steering wheel or control levers for control. An operator of an off-road utility
vehicle is also subject to the provisions of this chapter governing the operation of allterrain
vehicles.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321I.1)
4. “Snowmobile” means a motorized vehicle weighing less than one thousand
(1,000) pounds which uses sled-type runners or skis, endless belt-type tread with a
width of forty-eight (48) inches or less, or any combination of runners, skis, or tread,
and is designed for travel on snow or ice. “Snowmobile” does not include an all-terrain
vehicle that has been altered or equipped with runners, skis, belt-type tracks, or treads.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321G.1)
75.03 GENERAL REGULATIONS. No person shall operate an ATV, off-road motorcycle
or off-road utility vehicle within the City in violation of Chapter 321I of the Code of Iowa or a
snowmobile within the City in violation of the provisions of Chapter 321G of the Code of Iowa
CHAPTER 75 ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLES AND SNOWMOBILES
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
- 386 -
or in violation of rules established by the Natural Resource Commission of the Department of
Natural Resources governing their registration, equipment and manner of operation.
(Code of Iowa, Ch. 321G & Ch. 321I)
75.04 OPERATION OF SNOWMOBILES. The operators of snowmobiles shall comply
with the following restrictions as to where snowmobiles may be operated within the City:
1. Streets. Snowmobiles shall be operated only upon streets that have not been
plowed during the snow season and on such other streets as may be designated by
resolution of the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321G.9[4a])
2. Exceptions. Snowmobiles may be operated on prohibited streets only under the
following circumstances:
A. Emergencies. Snowmobiles may be operated on any street in an
emergency during the period of time when and at locations where snow upon
the roadway renders travel by conventional motor vehicles impractical.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321G.9[4c])
B. Direct Crossing. Snowmobiles may make a direct crossing of a
prohibited street provided all of the following occur:
(1) The crossing is made at an angle of approximately ninety
degrees (90°) to the direction of the street and at a place where no
obstruction prevents a quick and safe crossing;
(2) The snowmobile is brought to a complete stop before crossing
the street;
(3) The driver yields the right-of-way to all on-coming traffic that
constitutes an immediate hazard; and
(4) In crossing a divided street, the crossing is made only at an
intersection of such street with another street.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321G.9[2])
3. Railroad Right-of-Way. Snowmobiles shall not be operated on an operating
railroad right-of-way. A snowmobile may be driven directly across a railroad right-ofway
only at an established crossing and notwithstanding any other provisions of law
may, if necessary, use the improved portion of the established crossing after yielding to
all oncoming traffic.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321G.13[1h])
4. Parks and Other City Land. Snowmobiles shall not be operated in any park,
playground or upon any other City-owned property without the express permission of
the City. A snowmobile shall not be operated on any City land without a snow cover
of at least one-tenth of one inch.
5. Sidewalk or Parking. Snowmobiles shall not be operated upon the public
sidewalk or that portion of the street located between the curb line and the sidewalk or
property line commonly referred to as the “right-of-way parking” except for purposes
of crossing the same to a public street upon which operation is authorized by this
chapter.
75.05 OPERATION OF ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLES. The operators of ATVs shall
comply with the following restrictions as to where ATVs may be operated within the City:
CHAPTER 75 ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLES AND SNOWMOBILES
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
- 387 -
1. Streets. ATVs and off-road utility vehicles may be operated on streets only in
accordance with Section 321.234A of the Code of Iowa or on such streets as may be
designated by resolution of the Council for the operation of registered ATVs or
registered off-road utility vehicles. In designating such streets, the Council may
authorize ATVs and off-road utility vehicles to stop at service stations or convenience
stores along a designated street. The Council designates all streets, with the exception
of Main Avenue/US Highway #75, within the City limits for the operation of registered
ATVs and off-road utility vehicles.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321I.10[1 & 3])
2. Trails. ATVs shall not be operated on snowmobile trails except where
designated.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321I.10[4])
3. Railroad Right-of-Way. ATVs shall not be operated on an operating railroad
right-of-way. An ATV may be driven directly across a railroad right-of-way only at an
established crossing and notwithstanding any other provisions of law may, if necessary,
use the improved portion of the established crossing after yielding to all oncoming
traffic.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321I.14[1h])
4. Parks and Other City Land. ATVs shall not be operated in any park, upon any
recreation trail or playground, or upon any other City-owned property without the
express permission of the City.
5. Sidewalk or Parking. ATVs shall not be operated upon the public sidewalk or
that portion of the street located between the curb line and the sidewalk or property line
commonly referred to as the “right-of-way parking” except for the purpose of snow
removal, maintenance, or landscaping activities.
6. Permits. Operators of ATVs may apply at the Sioux Center City Clerk’s office
for a permit to allow such operator to operate an ATV on the City streets. Each
individual operator of an ATV is required to have a permit. The fee for the permit shall
be $75.00 for three years and shall be issued by the Police Chief. A copy of the permit
shall be carried by the operator named in the permit while operating the ATV. A permit
decal shall be displayed next to the registration decal in the manner prescribed by rules
of the National Resource Commission. A permit may be issued for the following
purposes:
A. Going to and from place of employment;
B. Going to and from personal or business properties;
C. Snow plowing/blading;
D. Gardening/lawn work;
E. Individuals having persons with disabilities parking privileges
authorized by the Iowa State Department of Transportation; and
F. Special events authorized by the City Council.
7. License. No person shall operate an ATV on a public street of the City without
a valid motor vehicle operator’s license.
8. Equipment. All ATVs shall be equipped with mufflers, headlights and tail
lights, and brakes according to the provisions of Sections 321I.12 and 321I.13 of the
Code of Iowa.
CHAPTER 75 ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLES AND SNOWMOBILES
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
- 388 -
9. Traffic Code Observed. Any operator of any ATV must observe all State and
local traffic control regulations and devices and shall not operate an ATV at a speed in
excess of that posted, or at any time at a speed greater than is reasonable and proper
under the existing conditions, and never in excess of 35 mph.
10. Unattended ATVs and Parking. No owner or operator of an ATV shall leave
an ATV unattended on public property while the motor is running or with keys in the
ignition switch. Owners and operators of ATVs must obey all parking regulations in
the City.
11. Registration; Inspection. The owner or operator of an ATV must maintain
current vehicle registration as required by Iowa law. ATVs shall be subject to
inspection and have adequate insurance.
12. Hours of Operation. No ATV shall be operated in the City between the hours
of 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. except for emergency situations or for loading or unloading
from a transport trailer, except that an ATV may be operated during prohibited hours
for snow removal purposes.
75.06 NEGLIGENCE. The owner and operator of an ATV or snowmobile are liable for any
injury or damage occasioned by the negligent operation of the ATV or snowmobile. The owner
of an ATV or snowmobile shall be liable for any such injury or damage only if the owner was
the operator of the ATV or snowmobile at the time the injury or damage occurred or if the
operator had the owner’s consent to operate the ATV or snowmobile at the time the injury or
damage occurred. The owner or operator of an ATV must maintain and provide current proof
of financial responsibility in accordance with Section 321.20B of the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321G.18 & 321I.19)
75.07 ACCIDENT REPORTS. Whenever an ATV or snowmobile is involved in an accident
resulting in injury or death to anyone or property damage amounting to one thousand five
hundred dollars ($1,500.00) or more, either the operator or someone acting for the operator shall
immediately notify a law enforcement officer and shall file an accident report, in accordance
with State law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321G.10 & 321I.11)
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
- 389 -
CHAPTER 76
BICYCLE REGULATIONS
76.01 Scope of Regulations 76.08 Carrying Articles
76.02 Traffic Code Applies 76.09 Riding on Sidewalks
76.03 Double Riding Restricted 76.10 Towing
76.04 Two Abreast Limit 76.11 Improper Riding
76.05 Bicycle Paths 76.12 Parking
76.06 Speed 76.13 Equipment Requirements
76.07 Emerging from Alley or Driveway
76.01 SCOPE OF REGULATIONS. These regulations shall apply whenever a bicycle is
operated upon any street or upon any public path set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles,
subject to those exceptions stated herein.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[10])
76.02 TRAFFIC CODE APPLIES. Every person riding a bicycle upon a roadway shall be
granted all of the rights and shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to the driver of a
vehicle by the laws of the State declaring rules of the road applicable to vehicles or by the traffic
code of the City applicable to the driver of a vehicle, except as to those provisions that by their
nature can have no application. Whenever such person dismounts from a bicycle the person
shall be subject to all regulations applicable to pedestrians.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.234)
76.03 DOUBLE RIDING RESTRICTED. A person propelling a bicycle shall not ride other
than astride a permanent and regular seat attached thereto. No bicycle shall be used to carry
more persons at one time than the number for which it is designed and equipped.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.234[3 and 4])
76.04 TWO ABREAST LIMIT. Persons riding bicycles upon a roadway shall not ride more
than two abreast except on paths or parts of roadways set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles.
All bicycles ridden on the roadway shall be kept to the right and shall be operated as near as
practicable to the right-hand edge of the roadway.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[10])
76.05 BICYCLE PATHS. Whenever a usable path for bicycles has been provided adjacent
to a roadway or a painted area is designated upon a roadway, bicycle riders shall use such path
or area and shall not use the roadway.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[10])
76.06 SPEED. No person shall operate a bicycle at a speed greater than is reasonable and
prudent under the conditions then existing.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[10])
76.07 EMERGING FROM ALLEY OR DRIVEWAY. The operator of a bicycle emerging
from an alley, driveway or building shall, upon approaching a sidewalk or the sidewalk area
extending across any alleyway, yield the right-of-way to all pedestrians
CHAPTER 76 BICYCLE REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
- 390 -
approaching on said sidewalk or sidewalk area, and upon entering the roadway shall yield the
right-of-way to all vehicles approaching on said roadway.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[10])
76.08 CARRYING ARTICLES. No person operating a bicycle shall carry any package,
bundle or article that prevents the rider from keeping at least one hand upon the handlebars.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[10])
76.09 RIDING ON SIDEWALKS. The following shall apply to riding bicycles on
sidewalks:
1. When signs are erected on any sidewalk or roadway prohibiting the riding of
bicycles thereon by any person, no person shall disobey the signs.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[10])
2. Whenever any person is riding a bicycle upon a sidewalk, such person shall
yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian and shall give audible signal before overtaking
and passing.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[10])
76.10 TOWING. It is unlawful for any person riding a bicycle to be towed or to tow any
other vehicle upon the streets of the City unless the vehicle is manufactured for such use.
76.11 IMPROPER RIDING. No person shall ride a bicycle in an irregular or reckless
manner such as zigzagging, stunting, speeding, or otherwise so as to disregard the safety of the
operator or others.
76.12 PARKING. No person shall park a bicycle upon a street other than upon the roadway
against the curb or upon the sidewalk in a rack to support the bicycle or against a building or at
the curb, in such a manner as to afford the least obstruction to pedestrian traffic.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[10])
76.13 EQUIPMENT REQUIREMENTS. Every person riding a bicycle shall be responsible
for providing and using equipment as provided herein:
1. Lamps Required. Every bicycle when in use at nighttime shall be equipped
with a lamp on the front which shall emit a white light visible from a distance of at least
three hundred (300) feet to the front and with a lamp on the rear exhibiting a red light
visible from a distance of 300 feet to the rear except that a red reflector on the rear, of
a type that shall be visible from all distances from fifty (50) feet to 300 feet to the rear
when directly in front of lawful upper beams of headlamps on a motor vehicle, may be
used in lieu of a rear light.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.397)
2. Brakes Required. Every bicycle shall be equipped with a brake that will enable
the operator to make the braked wheel skid on dry, level, clean pavement.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[10])
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
- 391 -
CHAPTER 77
GOLF CARTS
77.01 Definition 77.02 Operation of Golf Carts
77.01 DEFINITION. As used in this chapter, “golf cart” means any vehicle with three (3)
or more wheels, powered either by electricity or an internal combustion engine, which is used
and designed primarily for the transportation of golfers and golf clubs upon golf courses.
77.02 OPERATION OF GOLF CARTS.
1. No person who does not possess a valid motor vehicle driver’s license shall
operate a golf cart upon the City streets and alleys.
2. All golf carts when in operation shall be equipped with a slow-moving vehicle
sign or bicycle flag at least 60 inches in height and shall be operated between sunrise
and sunset.
3. Any golf cart operated on the City streets shall have insurance and be equipped
with adequate brakes, head lights and tail lights, and shall be operated in accordance
with all motor vehicle laws.
4. Golf carts may only be operated on City streets in accordance with State Code.
5. Golf carts are required to be registered locally and the City shall collect a fee
for such registration in the amount of $75.00 for three years.
6. Any violation of this chapter shall be deemed a simple misdemeanor.
CHAPTER 77 GOLF CARTS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
- 392 -
[The next page is 405]
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
- 405 -
CHAPTER 80
ABANDONED VEHICLES
80.01 Definitions 80.06 Disposal of Abandoned Vehicles
80.02 Authority to Take Possession of Abandoned Vehicles 80.07 Disposal of Totally Inoperable Vehicles
80.03 Notice by Mail 80.08 Proceeds from Sales
80.04 Notification in Newspaper 80.09 Duties of Demolisher
80.05 Fees for Impoundment
80.01 DEFINITIONS. For use in this chapter, the following terms are defined:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.89[1])
1. “Abandoned vehicle” means any of the following:
A. A vehicle that has been left unattended on public property for more
than twenty-four (24) hours and lacks current registration plates or two or more
wheels or other parts which renders the vehicle totally inoperable.
B. A vehicle that has remained illegally on public property for more than
24 hours.
C. A vehicle that has been unlawfully parked or placed on private property
without the consent of the owner or person in control of the property for more
than 24 hours.
D. A vehicle that has been legally impounded by order of a police
authority and has not been reclaimed for a period of ten (10) days. However, a
police authority may declare the vehicle abandoned within the ten-day period
by commencing the notification process.
E. Any vehicle parked on the highway determined by a police authority
to create a hazard to other vehicle traffic.
F. A vehicle that has been impounded pursuant to Section 321J.4B of the
Code of Iowa by order of the court and whose owner has not paid the
impoundment fees after notification by the person or agency responsible for
carrying out the impoundment order.
2. “Demolisher” means a person licensed under Chapter 321H of the Code of Iowa
whose business it is to convert a vehicle to junk, processed scrap or scrap metal, or
otherwise to wreck, or dismantle vehicles.
3. “Garage keeper” means any operator of a parking place or establishment, motor
vehicle storage facility, or establishment for the servicing, repair, or maintenance of
motor vehicles.
4. “Police authority” means the Iowa state patrol or any law enforcement agency
of a county or city.
80.02 AUTHORITY TO TAKE POSSESSION OF ABANDONED VEHICLES. A
police authority, upon the authority’s own initiative or upon the request of any other authority
having the duties of control of highways or traffic, shall take into custody an abandoned vehicle
on public property and may take into custody any abandoned vehicle on private property. The
police authority may employ its own personnel, equipment, and facilities or hire a private entity,
CHAPTER 80 ABANDONED VEHICLES
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
- 406 -
equipment, and facilities for the purpose of removing, preserving, storing, or disposing of
abandoned vehicles. A property owner or other person in control of private property may
employ a private entity that is a garage keeper to dispose of an abandoned vehicle, and the
private entity may take into custody the abandoned vehicle without a police authority’s
initiative. If a police authority employs a private entity to dispose of abandoned vehicles, the
police authority shall provide the private entity with the names and addresses of the registered
owners, all lienholders of record, and any other known claimant to the vehicle or the personal
property found in the vehicle.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.89[2])
80.03 NOTICE BY MAIL. The police authority or private entity that takes into custody an
abandoned vehicle shall notify, within twenty (20) days, by certified mail, the last known
registered owner of the vehicle, all lienholders of record, and any other known claimant to the
vehicle or to personal property found in the vehicle, addressed to the parties’ last known
addresses of record, that the abandoned vehicle has been taken into custody. Notice shall be
deemed given when mailed. The notice shall describe the year, make, model and vehicle
identification number of the vehicle, describe the personal property found in the vehicle, set
forth the location of the facility where the vehicle is being held, and inform the persons receiving
the notice of their right to reclaim the vehicle and personal property within ten (10) days after
the effective date of the notice upon payment of all towing, preservation, and storage charges
resulting from placing the vehicle in custody and upon payment of the costs of the notice. The
notice shall also state that the failure of the owner, lienholders or claimants to exercise their
right to reclaim the vehicle or personal property within the time provided shall be deemed a
waiver by the owner, lienholders and claimants of all right, title, claim and interest in the vehicle
or personal property and that failure to reclaim the vehicle or personal property is deemed
consent to the sale of the vehicle at a public auction or disposal of the vehicle to a demolisher
and to disposal of the personal property by sale or destruction. If the abandoned vehicle was
taken into custody by a private entity without a police authority’s initiative, the notice shall state
that the private entity may claim a garage keeper’s lien as described in Section 321.90 of the
Code of Iowa, and may proceed to sell or dispose of the vehicle. If the abandoned vehicle was
taken into custody by a police authority or by a private entity hired by a police authority, the
notice shall state that any person claiming rightful possession of the vehicle or personal property
who disputes the planned disposition of the vehicle or property by the police authority or private
entity or of the assessment of fees and charges provided by this section may ask for an
evidentiary hearing before the police authority to contest those matters. If the persons receiving
notice do not ask for a hearing or exercise their right to reclaim the vehicle or personal property
within the ten-day reclaiming period, the owner, lienholders or claimants shall no longer have
any right, title, claim, or interest in or to the vehicle or the personal property. A court in any
case in law or equity shall not recognize any right, title, claim, or interest of the owner,
lienholders or claimants after the expiration of the ten-day reclaiming period.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.89[3a])
80.04 NOTIFICATION IN NEWSPAPER. If it is impossible to determine with reasonable
certainty the identity and addresses of the last registered owner and all lienholders, notice by
one publication in one newspaper of general circulation in the area where the vehicle was
abandoned shall be sufficient to meet all requirements of notice under Section 80.03. The
published notice may contain multiple listings of abandoned vehicles and personal property but
shall be published within the same time requirements and contain the same information as
prescribed for mailed notice in Section 80.03.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.89[3b])
CHAPTER 80 ABANDONED VEHICLES
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
- 407 -
80.05 FEES FOR IMPOUNDMENT. The owner, lienholder, or claimant shall pay all
towing and storage fees as established by the storage facility, whereupon the vehicle shall be
released.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.89[3a])
80.06 DISPOSAL OF ABANDONED VEHICLES. If an abandoned vehicle has not been
reclaimed as provided herein, the police authority or private entity shall make a determination
as to whether or not the motor vehicle should be sold for use upon the highways, and shall
dispose of the motor vehicle in accordance with State law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.89[4])
80.07 DISPOSAL OF TOTALLY INOPERABLE VEHICLES. The City or any person
upon whose property or in whose possession is found any abandoned motor vehicle, or any
person being the owner of a motor vehicle whose title certificate is faulty, lost or destroyed,
may dispose of such motor vehicle to a demolisher for junk, without a title and without
notification procedures, if such motor vehicle lacks an engine or two or more wheels or other
structural part that renders the vehicle totally inoperable. The police authority shall give the
applicant a certificate of authority. The applicant shall then apply to the County Treasurer for
a junking certificate and shall surrender the certificate of authority in lieu of the certificate of
title.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.90[2e])
80.08 PROCEEDS FROM SALES. Proceeds from the sale of any abandoned vehicle shall
be applied to the expense of auction, cost of towing, preserving, storing, and notification
required, in accordance with State law. Any balance shall be held for the owner of the motor
vehicle or entitled lienholder for ninety (90) days, and then shall be deposited in the State Road
Use Tax Fund. Where the sale of any vehicle fails to realize the amount necessary to meet costs
the police authority shall apply for reimbursement from the Department of Transportation.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.89[4])
80.09 DUTIES OF DEMOLISHER. Any demolisher who purchases or otherwise acquires
an abandoned motor vehicle for junk shall junk, scrap, wreck, dismantle, or otherwise demolish
such motor vehicle. A demolisher shall not junk, scrap, wreck, dismantle, or demolish a vehicle
until the demolisher has obtained the junking certificate issued for the vehicle.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.90[3a])
CHAPTER 80 ABANDONED VEHICLES
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
- 408 -
[The next page is 431]
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
- 431 -
CHAPTER 90
WATER SERVICE SYSTEM
90.01 Definitions 90.12 Responsibility for Water Service Pipe
90.02 Utilities Manager Duties 90.13 Failure to Maintain
90.03 Use of Public Water 90.14 Curb Valve
90.04 Mandatory Connections 90.15 Interior Valve
90.05 Abandoned Connections 90.16 Completion by the City
90.06 Permission 90.17 Shutting off Water Supply
90.07 Connection Charge 90.18 Operation of Curb Valve
90.08 Compliance with Plumbing Code 90.19 Fire Hydrants
90.09 Excavations 90.20 Protection from Damage
90.10 Tapping Mains 90.21 Powers and Authority
90.11 Installation of Water Service Pipe 90.22 Special Penalties
90.01 DEFINITIONS. The following terms are defined for use in the chapters in this Code
of Ordinances pertaining to the Water Service System:
1. “Combined service account” means a customer service account for the
provision of two or more utility services.
2. “Customer” means, in addition to any person receiving water service from the
City, the owner of the property served, and as between such parties the duties,
responsibilities, liabilities and obligations hereinafter imposed shall be joint and
several.
3. “Utilities Manager” means the Manager of the City water system or any duly
authorized assistant, agent or representative.
4. “Water main” means a water supply pipe provided for public or community
use.
5. “Water service pipe” means the pipe from the water main to the building served.
6. “Water system” or “water works” or “water utility” means all public facilities
for securing, collecting, storing, pumping, treating and distributing water.
90.02 UTILITIES MANAGER DUTIES. The Utilities Manager shall administer and direct
the affairs of the City’s water system. The Utilities Manager shall also supervise the installation
of water service pipes and their connection to the water main and enforce all regulations pertaining
to water services in the City in accordance with this chapter. This chapter shall apply to all
replacements of existing water service pipes as well as to new ones. The Utilities Manager shall
make such rules, not in conflict with the provisions of this chapter, as may be needed for the
detailed operation of the water system, subject to the approval of the Council. In the event of an
emergency the Utilities Manager may make temporary rules for the protection of the system until
due consideration by the Council may be had.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
90.03 USE OF PUBLIC WATER. There shall be no permanent or temporary physical
connection between the City’s water system and any private water system, including wells,
cisterns, or any other water sources. All existing private water sources or systems that drain
their water into the City’s sanitary sewer shall be metered (minimum and standard water service
CHAPTER 90 WATER SERVICE SYSTEM
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
- 432 -
rates shall apply). All such systems shall be inspected and approved by the Utilities Manager.
Right of entry to inspect shall be as written in subsection 90.21(3) of this chapter.
90.04 MANDATORY CONNECTIONS. The owners of any houses, buildings or structures
used for human occupancy, employment or use, situated within the City and abutting on any
street, alley or right-of-way in which there is located a public water main are hereby required to
connect such facilities to the City’s public water system in accordance with the provisions of
these Water Service chapters within sixty (60) days after the date of official notice to do so.
90.05 ABANDONED CONNECTIONS. When an existing water service is abandoned or a
service is renewed with a new tap in the main, all abandoned connections with the mains shall
be turned off at the corporation stop and made absolutely watertight at the customer’s expense.
90.06 PERMISSION. Before any person makes a connection with the public water system,
permission must be obtained from the City. If the proposed work meets all the requirements of
this chapter and if all fees required under this chapter have been paid, permission shall be
granted. Work must be completed within 180 days after permission is granted, except that when
such time period is inequitable or unfair due to conditions beyond the control of the person
seeking such permission, an extension of time within which to complete the work may be
granted. Permission may be revoked at any time for any violation of these chapters.
90.07 CONNECTION CHARGE. Before permission is granted, a connection charge in an
amount established by the Council shall be paid to the City Clerk. In addition, the cost of the
service tap, meter valves, and other fittings and other costs incurred in making water service
available to the property served shall be billed by the City and are the responsibility of the
customer.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.84)
90.08 COMPLIANCE WITH PLUMBING CODE. The installation of any water service
pipe and any connection with the water system shall comply with all pertinent and applicable
provisions, whether regulatory, procedural, or enforcement provisions, of the current plumbing
code adopted by the City.
90.09 EXCAVATIONS. All trench work, excavation and backfilling required in making a
connection and located within City-owned rights-of-way and easements shall be performed in
accordance with applicable provisions in the City specifications on file in the City offices.
90.10 TAPPING MAINS. All taps into water mains shall be made by the City. The size of,
location and materials used for the tap shall be at the discretion of the City. No more than one
house, building, or premises shall be supplied from one tap unless special written permission is
obtained from the City and unless provision is made so that each house, building, or premises
may be shut off independently of the other.
90.11 INSTALLATION OF WATER SERVICE PIPE. Water service pipes from the main
to the meter setting shall be Type K copper or Polyethylene pipe (PE). If Polyethylene pipe is
used, the following specifications are also required: (1) the pipe shall be rated for a minimum
of 200 psi; (2) the pipe shall be Copper Tube Size (CTS); (3) compression fittings and stainless
steel stiffeners shall be used on all connections; and (4) a wire shall be installed with the pipe
so that the pipe can be located when necessary, as well as any other requirements that the City
may prescribe. The use of any other pipe material for the service line shall first be approved by
the Utilities Manager. Pipe must be laid sufficiently waving, and to such depth, as to prevent
rupture from settlement or freezing. (Ord. SC-O-06-14 – Jan. 19 Supp.)
CHAPTER 90 WATER SERVICE SYSTEM
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
- 433 -
90.12 RESPONSIBILITY FOR WATER SERVICE PIPE. All costs and expenses
incident to the installation, connection, maintenance, and abandonment of the water service pipe
from the main to the building served shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify
the City from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by the installation
or maintenance of said water service pipe.
90.13 FAILURE TO MAINTAIN. When any portion of the water service pipe which is the
responsibility of the property owner becomes defective or creates a nuisance and the owner fails
to correct such nuisance the City may do so and assess the costs thereof to the property.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3a & h])
90.14 CURB VALVE. There shall be installed in a location and of a design acceptable to the
City a main shut-off valve on the water service pipe. The shut-off valve shall be constructed to
be visible and even with the pavement or ground.
90.15 INTERIOR VALVE. There shall be installed a shut-off valve on every service pipe
inside the building as close to the entrance of the pipe within the building as possible and so
located that the water can be shut off conveniently. Where one service pipe supplies more than
one customer within the building, there shall be separate valves for each such customer so that
service may be shut off for one without interfering with service to the others.
90.16 COMPLETION BY THE CITY. Should any excavation be left open or only partly
refilled for twenty-four (24) hours after the water service pipe is installed and connected with
the water system, or should the work be improperly done, the City shall have the right to finish
or correct the work, and the Council shall assess the costs to the property owner. If the property
owner is assessed, such assessment may be collected with and in the same manner as general
property taxes.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3a & h])
90.17 SHUTTING OFF WATER SUPPLY. The Utilities Manager may shut off the supply
of water to any customer because of any violation of the regulations contained in these Water
Service System chapters which is not being contested in good faith. This includes nonpayment
of any billings issued by the City. The supply shall not be turned on again until all violations
have been corrected and the Utilities Manager has ordered the water to be turned on.
90.18 OPERATION OF CURB VALVE. It is unlawful for any person except the Utilities
Manager or a plumber to turn water on at the curb valve, and said plumber shall take no action
contrary to the orders of the Utilities Manager and shall leave the water off or on, as directed by
the Utilities Manager.
90.19 FIRE HYDRANTS. No person, unless specifically authorized by the City, shall open
or attempt to draw water from any fire hydrant for any purpose whatsoever.
90.20 PROTECTION FROM DAMAGE.
1. The water utility does not guarantee a constant supply of water. The utility
shall in no event be held responsible for claims made against it by reason of the breaking
of any mains or service pipe, or by reason of any other interruption of the supply of
water and no person shall be entitled to damages or have any portion of a payment
refunded for any interruption of service which in the opinion of the utility may be
deemed necessary or unavoidable.
CHAPTER 90 WATER SERVICE SYSTEM
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
- 434 -
2. Customers receiving a supply of water from the utility must have a check valve
on the water supply line.
3. The premises receiving a supply of water and all service lines, meter and
fixtures, including any and all fixtures within the said premises shall at all reasonable
hours be subject to inspection and available to repair by duly authorized employees of
the utility.
4. Special terms and conditions may be made where water is used by the utility or
community for public purposes such as fire extinguishment, public parks, etc.
5. If any loss or damage to the property of the utility or any accident or injury to
persons or property is caused by or results from the negligence or wrongful act of a
customer, member of a customer’s household, or the agent or employee of a customer,
the cost of the necessary repairs or replacements shall be paid by the customer to the
utility and any liability otherwise resulting shall be that of the customer.
6. Locates in accordance with One-Call standards are required.
90.21 POWERS AND AUTHORITY.
1. The water utility may construct extensions to its water lines to points within its
service area, but the utility shall not be required to make such installation unless deemed
appropriate by the Utilities Manager.
2. The water utility may refuse service to persons, not presently customers, when
in the opinion of the utility the capacity of the facilities will not permit such services.
The utility may also refuse service to a person whose property is not within the service
territory of the utility.
3. The Utilities Manager and other duly authorized employees of the City shall be
permitted to enter all properties for the purposes of inspection, observation,
measurement, sampling, and testing pertinent to discharge to the community system in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
90.22 SPECIAL PENALTIES. The following special penalty provisions shall apply to
violations of these Water Service chapters:
1. Notice of Violation. Any person found to be violating any provision of these
chapters shall be served by the City with written notice stating the nature of the violation
and providing a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory correction thereof. The
offender shall, within the period of time stated in such notice, permanently cease all
violations.
2. Continuing Violations. Any person who shall continue any violation beyond
the time limit provided for in subsection 1 hereof shall be in violation of this Code of
Ordinances. Each day in which any such violation shall continue shall be deemed a
separate offense.
3. Liability Imposed. Any person violating any of the provisions of these chapters
shall become liable to the City for any expense, loss, or damage occasioned the City by
reason of such violation.
[The next page is 441]
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
- 441 -
CHAPTER 91
WATER METERS
91.01 Purpose 91.06 Meter Repairs
91.02 Water Use Metered 91.07 Right of Entry
91.03 Fire Sprinkler Systems – Exception 91.08 Meter Test
91.04 Location of Meters 91.09 Meter Failure
91.05 Meter Setting
91.01 PURPOSE. The purpose of this chapter is to encourage the conservation of water and
facilitate the equitable distribution of charges for water service among customers.
91.02 WATER USE METERED. All water furnished customers shall be measured through
meters furnished by the City and installed by the customer.
91.03 FIRE SPRINKLER SYSTEMS – EXCEPTION. Fire sprinkler systems may be
connected to water mains by direct connection without meters under the direct supervision of
the Utilities Manager. No other open, unmetered connection can be incorporated in the system,
and there shall be no valves except a main control valve at the entrance to the building which
must be sealed open.
91.04 LOCATION OF METERS. All meters shall be so located that they are easily
accessible to meter readers and repairmen and protected from freezing.
91.05 METER SETTING. The property owner shall provide all necessary piping and
fittings for proper setting of the meter including a valve on the discharge side of the meter.
Meter pits may be used only upon approval of the Utilities Manager and shall be of a design and
construction approved by the Utilities Manager.
91.06 METER REPAIRS. Whenever a water meter is found to be out of order the Utilities
Manager shall have it repaired. If it is found that damage to the meter has occurred due to the
carelessness or negligence of the customer or property owner, then the property owner shall be
liable for the cost of repairs.
91.07 RIGHT OF ENTRY. The Utilities Manager shall be permitted to enter the premises
of any customer at any reasonable time to read, remove, or change a meter.
91.08 METER TEST. The Utilities Manager shall make a test of the accuracy of any water
meter at any time when requested in writing, but not more often than once in six months. Such
request shall be accompanied by a deposit in an amount established by the City from residential
customers guaranteeing payment of costs if found due. If the meter is found to overrun to the
extent of two percent (2%) or more, the cost of the test shall be paid by the City and the meter
test deposit shall be refunded to the customer. If the meter is found to be accurate or slow, or
less than 2% fast, the customer deposit shall be forfeited as the reasonable costs of the test.
Commercial customers will be charged the actual cost of contract meter testing if the test
indicates meter accuracy within the limits of 2%.
91.09 METER FAILURE. Where a meter has ceased to register, or meter reading could not
be obtained, the quantity of water consumed for billing purpose will be based upon an average
CHAPTER 91 WATER METERS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
- 442 -
of the prior twelve (12) months’ consumption, to include consideration for seasonal variations,
and the conditions of water service prevailing during the period in which the meter failed to
register.
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
- 443 -
CHAPTER 92
WATER RATES
92.01 Service Charges 92.07 Lien for Nonpayment
92.02 Rates For Service 92.08 Lien Exemption
92.03 Irrigation Rates 92.09 Lien Notice
92.04 Additional Rates Applicable for Sprinkler Systems 92.10 Utility Deposit
92.05 Billing for Water Service 92.11 Temporary Vacancy
92.06 Service Discontinued
92.01 SERVICE CHARGES. Each customer shall pay for water service provided by the
City based upon use of water as determined by meters provided for in Chapter 91. Each location,
building, premises or connection shall be considered a separate and distinct customer whether
owned or controlled by the same person or not.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.84)
92.02 RATES FOR SERVICE. Water service shall be furnished at the following rates
within the City:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.84)
RESIDENTIAL RATE – RATE NO. 1
Monthly Service Charge @ $15.61
All Usage – Winter @ $3.93/M
First 10,000 gal. - Summer @ $3.93/M
Over 10,000 gal. - Summer @ $4.16/M
Minimum Monthly Bill – $15.61
COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL – UNDER 2" METER – RATE NO. 2
Monthly Service Charge @ $15.61
First 40,000 gal. @ $3.93/M
Over 40,000 gal. @ $3.56/M
Minimum Monthly Bill – $15.61
COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL – 2" OR LARGER METER – RATE NO. 3
Monthly Service Charge @ $25.84
First 100,000 gal. @ $3.56/M
Over 100,000 gal. @ $3.08/M
Minimum Monthly Bill – $25.84
The winter rate schedule shall apply for the billing periods due and payable on the first day of
December and continuing through the first day of May. The summer rate schedule shall apply
for the billing periods due and payable on the first day of June and continuing through the first
of November.
(Ord. SC-O-02-18 – Jan. 19 Supp.)
CHAPTER 92 WATER RATES
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
- 444 -
92.03 IRRIGATION RATES. Irrigation service is available at the following rates within
the City:
IRRIGATION – RATE NO. 4
(without sewer charges)
Monthly Service Charge @ $5.78
All Usage @ $5.84/M
Minimum Monthly Bill – $5.78
Irrigation Rate No. 4 may be utilized by water consumers who are using water for irrigation
purposes where water used does not enter the sanitary sewer system. The use of this rate is
permitted only when used in addition to another meter billed under Rate No. 1, 2 or 3, however,
master metering will not be allowed. To qualify for this rate, the consumer must gain prior
approval from the City, and if approved, the consumer must install a separate water meter in an
approved manner, at the consumer’s expense, for the purpose of metering only the water which
in no way will find its way to the sanitary sewer system. Furthermore, the meter shall be
installed so as to be convenient for meter reading. Any nonapproved water utilization under
this rate which water finds its way to the sanitary sewer system, will immediately bring about
the removal of such meter and thereby the elimination of any further water use under Water
Rate No. 4. The minimum bill for Rate No. 4 shall apply at all times when the meter billed
under Rate No. 1 is in service.
(Ord. SC-O-02-18 – Jan. 19 Supp.)
92.04 ADDITIONAL RATES APPLICABLE FOR SPRINKLER SYSTEMS. The
occupant of any building located within the City of Sioux Center that requires a four-inch or
larger service line connection to the public water system to supply adequate capacity to serve a
building sprinkler system for fire protection will be billed a monthly capacity charge of $1.60
per 1,000 sq. ft. of floor space that is provided with sprinklers. The City reserves the right to
limit the amount of capacity that is available at any one building for sprinkler fire protection use
based upon the public water supply system capability at the location.
(Ord. SC-O-02-18 – Jan. 19 Supp.)
92.05 BILLING FOR WATER SERVICE. Water service shall be billed as part of a
combined service account, payable in accordance with the following:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.84)
1. Bills Issued. The City shall prepare and issue bills for combined service
accounts on or before the first day of each month.
2. Bills Payable. Bills for combined service accounts shall be due and payable at
the City office by the twentieth (20th) day of the same month.
3. Late Payment Penalty. Bills not paid when past due shall be considered
delinquent. A one-time late payment penalty in an amount established by the City shall
be added to each delinquent bill.
92.06 SERVICE DISCONTINUED. Water service to delinquent customers shall be
discontinued in accordance with the following:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.84)
1. Notice. The City shall notify each delinquent customer that service will be
discontinued if payment of the combined service account, including late payment
charges, is not received by the date specified in the notice of delinquency. Such notice
shall be sent by ordinary mail to the customer in whose name the delinquent charges
CHAPTER 92 WATER RATES
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
- 445 -
were incurred and shall inform the customer of the nature of the delinquency and afford
the customer the opportunity for a hearing prior to the discontinuance.
2. Notice to Landlords. If the customer is a tenant, and if the owner or landlord
of the property or premises has made a written request for notice, the notice of
delinquency shall also be given to the owner or landlord.
3. Hearing. If a hearing is requested by noon of the day preceding the shut off,
the Utilities Manager and City Manager shall conduct an informal hearing and shall
make a determination as to whether the disconnection is justified.
4. Fees. A fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) shall be charged before service is
restored to a delinquent customer. No fee shall be charged for the usual or customary
trips in the regular changes in occupancies of property.
92.07 LIEN FOR NONPAYMENT. The owner of the premises served and any lessee or
tenant thereof shall be jointly and severally liable for water service charges to the premises.
Water service charges remaining unpaid and delinquent shall constitute a lien upon the premises
served and shall be certified by the Clerk to the County Treasurer for collection in the same
manner as property taxes.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.84)
92.08 LIEN EXEMPTION. The lien for nonpayment shall not apply to a residential rental
property where water service is separately metered and the rates or charges for the water service
are paid directly to the City by the tenant, if the landlord gives written notice to the City that the
property is residential rental property and that the tenant is liable for the rates or charges. The
City may require a deposit not exceeding the usual cost of two months of water service be paid
to the City. The landlord’s written notice shall contain the name of the tenant responsible for
charges, the address of the rental property and the date of occupancy. A change in tenant shall
require a new written notice to be given to the City within thirty (30) business days of the change
in tenant. When the tenant moves from the rental property, the City shall refund the deposit if
the water service charges are paid in full. A change in the ownership of the residential rental
property shall require written notice of such change to be given to the City within ten (10)
business days of the completion of the change of ownership. The lien exemption does not apply
to delinquent charges for repairs to a water service.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.84)
92.09 LIEN NOTICE. A lien for delinquent water service charges shall not be certified to
the County Treasurer unless prior written notice of intent to certify a lien is given to the customer
in whose name the delinquent charges were incurred. If the customer is a tenant and if the owner
or landlord of the property or premises has made a written request for notice, the notice shall
also be given to the owner or landlord. The notice shall be sent to the appropriate persons by
ordinary mail not less than thirty (30) days prior to certification of the lien to the County
Treasurer.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.84)
92.10 UTILITY DEPOSIT. A utility deposit is required of all customers having no
established credit record, and of those who have an unacceptable credit record or who have a
prior record of failure to pay utility bills rendered by the City.
1. Amount of Deposit. The deposit amount shall be determined by previous
history of the property, and shall equal the highest monthly amount billed to the
property for combined utility charges (water, sewer, gas, electric and garbage).
CHAPTER 92 WATER RATES
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
- 446 -
2. Unpaid Account. When service has been discontinued for whatever reason, the
deposit will be applied to any unpaid balance due the City utilities department.
3. Refund of Deposit. The utilities office will hold the deposit for twelve (12)
months. If within the 12-month time period the customer has not been delinquent on
paying the utility bill more than one time, the deposit will be refunded to the customer.
If, however, the customer has been delinquent more than one time in the last 12 months,
the utility office will hold the deposit another 12 months from the date of the last
delinquency and the above procedure will again be used. A deposit will again be
required if a customer’s service is terminated for nonpayment.
92.11 TEMPORARY VACANCY. A property owner may request water service be
temporarily discontinued and shut off at the curb valve when the property is expected to be
vacant for an extended period of time. There shall be a fee in an amount set by the City for
restoring service. During a period when service is temporarily discontinued as provided herein
there shall be no minimum service charge. The City will not drain pipes or pull meters for
temporary vacancies.
[The next page is 455]
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
- 455 -
CHAPTER 93
WATER CONSERVATION
93.01 Shortages 93.06 Penalties for Violations of Water Warning Use
93.02 Condition Declarations; Indicators Regulations; Appeal
93.03 Water Watch; Voluntary Consumer Limitations 93.07 Water Appeal Board
93.04 Water Warning, Tier I; Consumer Restrictions 93.08 Municipal Infraction
93.05 Water Warning, Tier II; Consumer Prohibitions 93.09 Reduction in Flow of Water to Any Person
93.01 SHORTAGES. From time to time during and following drought conditions, in case of
significant fire protection requirements, or due to equipment failure, the City’s water supply
may become significantly and seriously depleted so that there will not then be a sufficient supply
of water to meet all customary and usual demands. Under these conditions, the City Council
may declare a public water watch, water warning, or water emergency, during which time the
following measures and provisions shall be in effect to produce an orderly and equitable
reduction of water consumption until the Council finds and declares the water shortage
condition to be ended.
93.02 CONDITION DECLARATIONS; INDICATORS.
1. Water Watch. A water watch may be declared when a water shortage or
equipment failure poses a potential threat to the ability of the water system to meet the
needs of its customers currently or in the foreseeable future. Indicators of the need to
impose a water watch include: system operating at 75 percent of pumping capacity;
moderate decrease in the pumping water level of wells or moderate decrease in recovery
rate of water level in wells; moderate decrease in water storage levels.
2. Water Warning. A Tier I or Tier II water warning may be declared when a
water shortage or equipment failure poses a serious threat to the ability of the water
system to meet the needs of its customers currently and in the foreseeable future.
Indicators of the need to impose a Tier I water warning include: system operating at 85
percent of pumping capacity; significant decrease in the pumping water level of wells
or significant decrease in recovery rate of water level in wells or significant decrease in
water storage levels. Indicators of the need to impose a Tier II water warning include
severe system emergencies such as a chemical spill or major system failure in feeder
mains, pumps, or treatment plant.
3. Water Emergency. A water emergency may be declared when a water shortage
or equipment failure poses a severe and immediate threat to the ability of the water
system to meet the needs of its customers. Indicators of the need to impose a water
emergency include: system operating at 95 percent of pumping capacity; serious
decrease in the pumping water level of wells or serious decrease in recovery rate of
water level in wells; serious decrease in water shortage levels.
93.03 WATER WATCH; VOLUNTARY CONSUMER LIMITATIONS. Under a water
watch, all customers of the municipal water system are encouraged to limit or curtail all
nonessential uses of water in order to conserve precious water resources during the time of
shortage. Customers may be encouraged to comply with the following voluntary standards:
CHAPTER 93 WATER CONSERVATION
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
- 456 -
1. No watering of lawns, shrubs, or gardens between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and
8:00 p.m. Customers may be asked to restrict such water use to every other day, using
the odd/even street address method.
2. No water should be used to fill private swimming pools, children’s wading
pools, reflecting pools or any other outdoor pool or pond.
3. No water should be used to wash streets, parking lots, driveways, sidewalks, or
building exteriors.
4. No water should be used for nonessential cleaning of commercial and industrial
equipment, machinery and interior spaces.
5. Water should be served at restaurants only upon the request of the customer.
93.04 WATER WARNING, TIER I; CONSUMER RESTRICTIONS. Under a Tier I
Water Warning, no person shall use potable processed water of the municipal water service in
any manner contrary to the following:
1. Outdoor watering or irrigation of lawn is prohibited.
2. Outdoor watering of any kind is prohibited between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and
8:00 p.m. daily. Customers may be required to restrict such water use to every other
day, using the odd/even street address method.
3. Watering or irrigation of flower and vegetable gardens, trees, and shrubs less
than four years old and new seeding or sod started before the issuance of warning is
permitted once per week with an application not to exceed one inch.
4. Car washing is prohibited except in commercial establishments which provide
such service.
5. No water shall be used to fill private swimming pools, children’s wading pools,
reflecting pools or any other outdoor pool or pond.
6. No water shall be used to wash streets, parking lots, driveways, sidewalks or
building exteriors.
7. No water shall be used for nonessential cleaning of commercial and industrial
equipment, machinery, and interior spaces.
8. Water shall be served at restaurants only upon the request of the customer.
9. Tank-load water sales may be curtailed or eliminated.
Water reclaimed or recycled after some other primary use, such as water that has been used for
washing, may be used without restriction. Additionally, water derived from sources other than
the City water utility, such as water pumped from a private well, water condensed from the
atmosphere by air conditioners or collected from rain or snow, may be used without restriction.
93.05 WATER WARNING, TIER II; CONSUMER PROHIBITIONS. Under a Tier II
Water Warning, no person shall use potable processed water of the municipal water service in
any manner contrary to the following:
1. All outside water use, except for domestic, sanitation, and fire, is prohibited.
2. All commercial and industrial uses of water not essential in providing products
or services is prohibited.
3. Irrigation of agricultural crops is prohibited.
CHAPTER 93 WATER CONSERVATION
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
- 457 -
4. Recreational and leisure water use, including lawn watering and other
incidental or recreational use, is prohibited.
5. Water use not necessary for the preservation of life or the general welfare of
the community is prohibited.
93.06 PENALTIES FOR VIOLATIONS OF WATER WARNING USE
REGULATIONS; APPEAL. The following penalties apply for violations of water warning
use restrictions imposed under this chapter:
1. First Violation. For a first violation, the utility shall issue a written notice of
violation to the water user violating the water use restrictions imposed during a water
warning or water emergency.
2. Second Violation. For a second violation within an 18-month period, a onemonth
surcharge shall be imposed in an amount equal to 50 percent of the previous
month’s water bill.
3. Subsequent Violations. For any subsequent violation within an 18-month
period, a one-month surcharge shall be imposed in an amount equal to 50 percent of the
previous month’s water bill and, in addition, the utility shall interrupt water service to
that customer at the premises at which the violation occurred. Service shall not be
restored until the customer has paid the reconnection fee and has provided reasonable
assurance that future violations of water warning or water emergency use restrictions
will not occur.
Any customer charged with a violation of the water warning or water emergency use restrictions
may request a hearing before the Water Appeal Board. The Water Appeal Board may conclude
that a violation did not occur or that the circumstances under which the violation occurred
warrant a complete or partial mitigation of the penalty.
93.07 WATER APPEAL BOARD. The Water Appeal Board shall consist of the Mayor and
the City Council. The Water Appeal Board shall hear appeals of any action taken pursuant to a
water warning or water emergency, except that, if a customer is charged with a municipal
infraction relating to this division, that proceeding shall be conducted pursuant to Section 364.22
of the Code of Iowa.
93.08 MUNICIPAL INFRACTION. A second or subsequent violation of the water warning
or water emergency use restrictions by any person within a 12-month period constitutes a
municipal infraction. Any person who, in making application to the Water Appeal Board for
adjustment of the premium charges, intentionally provides false or incorrect statements or
information commits a municipal infraction.
93.09 REDUCTION IN FLOW OF WATER TO ANY PERSON. The Utilities Manager
is authorized, after giving notice and opportunity for hearing before the Water Appeal Board, to
reduce the flow of water to any person determined to be using water in any manner not in
accordance with this chapter during a water warning or water emergency.
CHAPTER 93 WATER CONSERVATION
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
- 458 -
[The next page is 471]
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
- 471 -
CHAPTER 95
SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM
95.01 Purpose 95.06 Service Outside the City
95.02 Definitions 95.07 Right of Entry
95.03 Utilities Manager 95.08 Use of Easements
95.04 Prohibited Acts 95.09 Special Penalties
95.05 Sewer Connection Required
95.01 PURPOSE. The purpose of the chapters of this Code of Ordinances pertaining to
Sanitary Sewers is to establish rules and regulations governing the treatment and disposal of
sanitary sewage within the City in order to protect the public health, safety and welfare.
95.02 DEFINITIONS. For use in these chapters, unless the context specifically indicates
otherwise, the following terms are defined:
1. “B.O.D.” (denoting Biochemical Oxygen Demand) means the quantity of
oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard
laboratory procedure in five (5) days at twenty degrees (20º) C, expressed in milligrams
per liter or parts per million.
2. “Building drain” means that part of the lowest horizontal piping of a building
drainage system which receives the discharge from soil, waste, and other drainage pipes
inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer, beginning five (5)
feet (1.5 meters) outside the inner face of the building wall.
3. “Building sewer” means that part of the horizontal piping from the building
wall to its connection with the main sewer or the primary treatment portion of an onsite
wastewater treatment and disposal system conveying the drainage of one building
site.
4. “Customer” means any person responsible for the production of domestic,
commercial or industrial waste that is directly or indirectly discharged into the public
sewer system.
5. “Floatable oil” means oil, fat, or grease in a physical state such that it will
separate by gravity from waste water by treatment in an approved pretreatment facility.
Waste water shall be considered free of floatable fat if it is properly pretreated and the
waste water does not interfere with the collection system.
6. “Garbage” means solid wastes from the domestic and commercial preparation,
cooking, and dispensing of food, and from the handling, storage and sale of produce.
7. “Industrial wastes” means the liquid wastes from industrial manufacturing
processes, trade, or business as distinct from sanitary sewage.
8. “Inspector” means the person duly authorized by the Council to inspect and
approve the installation of building sewers and their connections to the public sewer
system; and to inspect such sewage as may be discharged therefrom.
9. “May” is permissive; (see “shall.”)
10. “Natural outlet” means any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake, or other
body of surface or groundwater.
CHAPTER 95 SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
- 472 -
11. “On-site wastewater treatment and disposal system” means all equipment and
devices necessary for proper conduction, collection, storage, treatment, and disposal of
wastewater from four or fewer dwelling units or other facilities serving the equivalent
of fifteen persons (1500 gpd) or less.
12. “pH” means the logarithm of the reciprocal of the weight of hydrogen ions in
grams per liter of solution.
13. “Properly shredded garbage” means the wastes from the preparation, cooking,
and dispensing of food which have been shredded to such a degree that all particles will
be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers, with
no particle greater than one-half inch in any dimension.
14. “Public sewer” means a sewer in which all owners of abutting properties have
equal rights, and is controlled by public authority.
15. “Sanitary sewage” means sewage discharging from the sanitary conveniences
of dwellings (including apartment houses and hotels), office buildings, factories or
institutions, and free from storm, surface water, and industrial waste.
16. “Sanitary sewer” means a sewer that carries sewage and to which storm,
surface, and groundwaters are not intentionally admitted.
17. “Sewage” means a combination of the water-carried wastes from residences,
business buildings, institutions, and industrial establishments, together with such
ground, surface, and storm waters as may be present.
18. “Sewage works” or “sewage system” means all facilities for collecting,
pumping, treating, and disposing of sewage.
19. “Sewer” means a pipe or conduit for carrying sewage.
20. “Sewer service charges” means any and all charges, rates or fees levied against
and payable by customers, as consideration for the servicing of said customers by said
sewer system.
21. “Shall” is mandatory; (see “may.”)
22. “Slug” means any discharge of water, sewage, or industrial waste that in
concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow exceeds for any period of
duration longer than fifteen (15) minutes more than five (5) times the average 24-hour
concentration or flows during normal operation.
23. “Storm drain” or “storm sewer” means a sewer that carries storm and surface
waters and drainage but excludes sewage and industrial wastes, other than unpolluted
cooling water.
24. “Suspended solids” means solids that either float on the surface of, or are in
suspension in water, sewage, or other liquids, and which are removable by laboratory
filtering.
25. “Unpolluted water” means water of quality equal to or better than the effluent
criteria in effect or water that would not cause violation of receiving water quality
standards and would not be benefited by discharge to the sanitary sewers and waste
water treatment facilities provided.
26. “Utilities Manager” means the Manager of sewage works and/or of water
pollution control of the City or any authorized deputy, agent, or representative.
CHAPTER 95 SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
- 473 -
27. “Waste water treatment works” means an arrangement of devices and structures
for treating waste water, industrial wastes, and sludge and is sometimes used as
synonymous with “waste treatment plant” or “waste water treatment plant” or “water
pollution control plant.”
28. “Watercourse” means a channel in which a flow of water occurs, either
continuously or intermittently.
95.03 UTILITIES MANAGER. The Utilities Manager is appointed by the City Council and
shall exercise the following powers and duties:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
1. Operation and Maintenance. Operate and maintain the City sewage system.
2. Inspection and Tests. Conduct necessary inspections and tests to assure
compliance with the provisions of these Sanitary Sewer chapters.
3. Records. Maintain a complete and accurate record of all sewers, sewage
connections and manholes constructed showing the location and grades thereof.
95.04 PROHIBITED ACTS. No person shall do, or allow, any of the following:
1. Damage Sewer System. Maliciously, willfully, or negligently break, damage,
destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any structure, appurtenance or equipment that
is a part of the sewer system.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.1)
2. Surface Run-Off or Groundwater. Connect a roof downspout, sump pump,
exterior foundation drain, areaway drain, or other source of surface run-off or
groundwater to a building sewer or building drain that in turn is connected directly or
indirectly to a public sanitary sewer.
3. Manholes. Open or enter any manhole of the sewer system, except by authority
of the Utilities Manager.
4. Objectionable Wastes. Place or deposit in any unsanitary manner on public or
private property within the City, or in any area under the jurisdiction of the City, any
human or animal excrement, garbage, or other objectionable waste.
5. Septic Tanks. Construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank,
cesspool, or other facility intended or used for the disposal of sewage except as provided
in these chapters and approved by the City Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3f])
6. Untreated Discharge. Discharge to any natural outlet within the City, or in any
area under its jurisdiction, any sanitary sewage, industrial wastes, or other polluted
waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with
subsequent provisions of these chapters.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3f])
95.05 SEWER CONNECTION REQUIRED. Unless exceptions are granted by the
Council, The owners of any houses, buildings, or properties used for human occupancy,
employment, recreation or other purposes, situated within the City and abutting on any street,
alley or right-of-way in which there is now located, or may in the future be located, a public
sanitary or combined sewer, are hereby required to install, at such owner’s expense, suitable
toilet facilities therein and a building sewer connecting such facilities directly with the proper
CHAPTER 95 SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
- 474 -
public sewer, and to maintain the same all in accordance with the provisions of these Sanitary
Sewer chapters, such compliance to be completed within sixty (60) days after date of official
notice from the City to do so provided that said public sewer is located within two hundred (200)
feet of the property line of such owner and is of such design as to receive and convey by gravity
such sewage as may be conveyed to it. Billing for sanitary sewer service will begin the date of
official notice to connect to the public sewer.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3f])
(IAC, 567-69.1[3])
95.06 SERVICE OUTSIDE THE CITY. The owners of property outside the corporate
limits of the City so situated that it may be served by the City sewer system may apply to the
Council for permission to connect to the public sewer upon approval of terms and conditions
stipulated by the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.4[2 & 3])
95.07 RIGHT OF ENTRY. The Utilities Manager and other duly authorized employees of
the City bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all properties
for the purposes of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, and testing in accordance
with the provisions of these Sanitary Sewer chapters.
95.08 USE OF EASEMENTS. The Utilities Manager and other duly authorized employees
of the City bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all private
properties through which the City holds a duly negotiated easement for the purposes of, but not
limited to, inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, repair, and maintenance of any
portion of the sewage works lying within said easement. All entry and subsequent work, if any,
on said easement, shall be done in full accordance with the terms of the duly negotiated easement
pertaining to the private property involved.
95.09 SPECIAL PENALTIES. The following special penalty provisions shall apply to
violations of these Sanitary Sewer chapters:
1. Notice of Violation. Any person found to be violating any provision of these
chapters except subsections 1, 3 and 4 of Section 95.04, shall be served by the City with
written notice stating the nature of the violation and providing a reasonable time limit
for the satisfactory correction thereof. The offender shall, within the period of time
stated in such notice, permanently cease all violations.
2. Continuing Violations. Any person who shall continue any violation beyond
the time limit provided for in subsection 1 hereof shall be in violation of this Code of
Ordinances. Each day in which any such violation shall continue shall be deemed a
separate offense.
3. Liability Imposed. Any person violating any of the provisions of these chapters
shall become liable to the City for any expense, loss, or damage occasioned the City by
reason of such violation.
[The next page is 481]
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
- 481 -
CHAPTER 96
BUILDING SEWERS AND CONNECTIONS
96.01 Permission Required 96.05 Excavations
96.02 Connection Fee 96.06 Inspection
96.03 Connection Requirements 96.07 Property Owner’s Responsibility
96.04 Sewer Tap 96.08 Abatement of Violations
96.01 PERMISSION REQUIRED. No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any
connection with or opening into, use, alter or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof
without first obtaining permission from the City. The owner shall be required to complete
construction and connection of the building sewer to the public sewer within 180 days after
permission has been granted, except that when a property owner makes sufficient showing that
due to conditions beyond the owner’s control or peculiar hardship, such time period is
inequitable or unfair, an extension of time within which to comply with the provisions herein
may be granted. Any permission for a sewer connection may be revoked at any time for a
violation of these chapters.
96.02 CONNECTION FEE. The person who seeks permission shall pay a connection fee in
the amount determined by the City to the Clerk to cover the cost of connecting to the City’s
system. In addition, a sewer lift station fee shall also be paid by any person seeking permission
to connect and whose sewage flows through a City-owned lift station.
96.03 CONNECTION REQUIREMENTS. The installation of the building sewer and its
connection to the public sewer shall conform to the requirements of the current plumbing code
adopted by the Council, the laws of the State and other applicable rules and regulations of the
City.
96.04 SEWER TAP. Connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall be made
at the “Y” branch, if such branch is available at a suitable location. If no properly located “Y”
branch is available, a saddle “Y” shall be installed at the location specified by the Utilities
Manager. The public sewer shall be tapped with a tapping machine and a saddle appropriate to
the type of public sewer shall be glued or attached with a gasket and stainless steel clamps to
the sewer. At no time shall a building sewer be constructed so as to enter a manhole unless
permission is received from the Utilities Manager and in accordance with the Manager’s
direction if such connection is approved.
96.05 EXCAVATIONS. All trench work, excavation and backfilling required in making a
connection shall be performed in accordance with the provisions of the current plumbing code
adopted by the City and the City specifications on file at the City offices.
96.06 INSPECTION. The City reserves the right to inspect all building sewers and
connections.
96.07 PROPERTY OWNER’S RESPONSIBILITY. All costs and expenses incident to the
installation, connection, maintenance, and abandonment of the building sewer shall be borne by
the owner. The owner shall indemnify the City from any loss or damage that may directly or
indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the building sewer.
CHAPTER 96 BUILDING SEWERS AND CONNECTIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
- 482 -
96.08 ABATEMENT OF VIOLATIONS. Building sewers, whether located upon the
private property of any owner or in the public right-of-way, which are constructed or maintained
in violation of any of the requirements of this chapter shall be deemed a nuisance and the same
shall be abated by the City in the manner provided for the abatement of nuisances.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3])
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
- 483 -
CHAPTER 97
USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS
97.01 Storm Water 97.06 Additional Information Requirements
97.02 Prohibited Discharges 97.07 Special Facilities
97.03 Restricted Discharges 97.08 Control Manholes
97.04 Restricted Discharges – Powers 97.09 Testing of Wastes
97.05 Treatment Agreement
97.01 STORM WATER. No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any storm
water, surface water, groundwater, roof run-off, sub-surface drainage, sump pump discharge,
uncontaminated cooling water, or unpolluted industrial process waters to any sanitary sewer.
Storm water and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to such sewers as are
specifically designated as combined sewers or storm sewers, or to a natural outlet approved by
the Utilities Manager. Industrial cooling water or unpolluted process waters may be discharged
on approval of the Utilities Manager, to a storm sewer, combined sewer, or natural outlet.
97.02 PROHIBITED DISCHARGES. No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged
any of the following described waters or wastes to any public sewers:
1. Flammable or Explosive Material. Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil, or
other flammable or explosive liquid, solid, or gas.
2. Toxic or Poisonous Materials. Any waters or wastes containing toxic or
poisonous solids, liquids or gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction
with other wastes, to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process, constitute a
hazard to humans or animals, create a public nuisance, or create any hazard in the
receiving waters of the sewage treatment plant.
3. Corrosive Wastes. Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.5 or having
any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures,
equipment, and personnel of the sewage works.
4. Solid or Viscous Substances. Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of
such size capable of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers, or other interference with
the proper operation of the sewage works such as, but not limited to, ashes, cinders,
sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood, unground
garbage, whole blood, paunch manure, hair and fleshings, entrails and paper dishes,
cups, milk containers, etc., either whole or ground by garbage grinders.
97.03 RESTRICTED DISCHARGES. No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged
the following described substances, materials, waters, or wastes if it appears likely in the opinion
of the Utilities Manager that such wastes can harm either the sewers, sewage treatment process,
or equipment, or which would cause operational problems/issues in the system, have an adverse
effect on the receiving stream or can otherwise endanger life, limb, public property, or constitute
a nuisance. The Utilities Manager may set limitations lower than the limitations established in
the regulations below if in the Manager’s opinion such more severe limitations are necessary to
meet the above objectives. In forming an opinion as to the acceptability of these wastes, the
Utilities Manager will give consideration to such factors as the quantities of subject wastes in
relation to flows and velocities in the sewers, materials of construction of the sewers, nature of
CHAPTER 97 USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
- 484 -
the sewage treatment process, capacity of the sewage treatment plant, degree of treatability of
wastes in the sewage treatment plant, and other pertinent factors. The substances restricted are:
1. High Temperature. Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than one
hundred fifty degrees (150º) F (65º C).
2. Fat, Oil, Grease. Waste water containing more than twenty-five (25)
milligrams per liter of petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oils, or product of
mineral oil origin.
3. Viscous Substances. Waste water from industrial plants containing floatable
oils, fat, or grease.
4. Garbage. Any garbage that has not been properly shredded, that is, to such a
degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally
prevailing in public sewers.
5. Acids. Any waters or wastes containing strong acid iron pickling wastes, or
concentrated plating solution whether neutralized or not.
6. Toxic or Objectionable Wastes. Any waters or wastes containing iron,
chromium, copper, zinc, mercury, and similar objectionable or toxic substances; or
wastes exerting an excessive chlorine requirement, to such degree that any such material
received in the composite sewage at the sewage treatment works exceeds the limits
established by the Utilities Manager for such materials.
7. Odor or Taste. Any waters or wastes containing phenols or other taste or odor
producing substances, in such concentrations exceeding limits that may be established
by the Utilities Manager as necessary, after treatment of the composite sewage, to meet
the requirements of state, federal, or other public agencies of jurisdiction for such
discharge to the receiving waters.
8. Radioactive Wastes. Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or
concentration as may exceed limits established by the Utilities Manager in compliance
with applicable State or Federal regulations.
9. Excess Alkalinity. Any waters or wastes having a pH in excess of 9.5.
10. Unusual Wastes. Materials that exert or cause:
A. Unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids (such as, but not
limited to, Fullers earth, lime slurries, and lime residues) or of dissolved solids
(such as, but not limited to, sodium chloride and sodium sulfate).
B. Excessive discoloration (such as, but not limited to dye wastes and
vegetable tanning solutions).
C. Unusual B.O.D., chemical oxygen demand, or chlorine requirements
in such quantities as to constitute a significant load on the sewage treatment
works.
D. Unusual volume of flow or concentration of wastes constituting “slugs”
as defined herein.
11. Noxious or Malodorous Gases. Any noxious or malodorous gas or other
substance that either singly or by interaction with other wastes is capable of creating a
public nuisance or hazard to life or of preventing entry into sewers for their maintenance
and repair.
CHAPTER 97 USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
- 485 -
12. Damaging Substances. Any waters, wastes, materials or substances that react
with water or wastes in the sewer system to release noxious gases, develop color of
undesirable intensity, form suspended solids in objectionable concentration or create
any other condition deleterious to structures and treatment processes.
13. Untreatable Wastes. Waters or wastes containing substances that are not
amenable to treatment or reduction by the sewage treatment processes employed, or are
amenable to treatment only to such degree that the sewage treatment plant effluent
cannot meet the requirements of other agencies having jurisdiction over discharge to
the receiving waters.
14. Excessive BOD, Solids or Flow. Any waters or wastes having (a) a five-day
BOD greater than three hundred (300) parts per million by weight, or (b) containing
more than three hundred fifty (350) parts per million by weight of suspended solids, or
(c) having an average daily flow greater than two (2) percent of the average sewage
flow of the City, shall be subject to the review of the Utilities Manager. Where
necessary in the opinion of the Utilities Manager, the owner shall provide at his expense,
such preliminary treatment as may be necessary to (a) reduce the biochemical oxygen
demand to three hundred (300) parts per weight, or (b) reduce the suspended solids to
three hundred fifty (350) parts per million by weight, or (c) control the quantities and
rates of discharge of such water or wastes. Plans, specifications, and any other pertinent
information relating to proposed preliminary treatment facilities shall be submitted for
the approval of the Utilities Manager, and no construction of such facilities shall be
commenced until said approvals are obtained in writing.
97.04 RESTRICTED AND PROHIBITED DISCHARGES – POWERS. If any waters or
wastes are discharged, or are proposed to be discharged to the public sewers, which waters
contain the substances or possess the characteristics enumerated in Sections 97.03 and 97.04
and which in the judgment of the Utilities Manager may have a deleterious effect upon the
sewage works, processes, equipment, or receiving waters, or which otherwise create a hazard to
life or constitute a public nuisance, the Utilities Manager may:
1. Rejection. Reject the wastes by requiring disconnection from the public sewage
system;
2. Pretreatment. Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to
the public sewers;
3. Controls Imposed. Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge;
and/or
4. Special Charges. Require payment to cover the added cost of handling and
treating the wastes not covered by existing taxes or sewer charges under the provisions
of Chapter 99.
97.05 TREATMENT AGREEMENT. The City may require any contributor to enter into a
treatment agreement in accordance with established State or Federal requirements.
97.06 ADDITIONAL INFORMATION REQUIREMENTS. The Utilities Manager may
require a user of sewer services to provide information needed to determine compliance with
this chapter. These requirements may include:
1. Waste waters discharge peak rate and volume over a specified time period;
2. Chemical analysis of waste waters;
CHAPTER 97 USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
- 486 -
3. Information on raw materials, processes, and products affecting waste water
volume and quality;
4. Quantity and disposition of specific liquid, sludge, oil, solvent, or other
materials important to sewer use control;
5. A plot plan of sewers of the user’s property showing sewer and pretreatment
facility location;
6. Details of waste water pretreatment facilities;
7. Details of systems to prevent and control the losses of materials through spills
to the municipal sewer.
97.07 SPECIAL FACILITIES. If the Utilities Manager permits the pretreatment or
equalization of waste flows, the design and installation of the plants and equipment shall be
subject to the requirements of all applicable codes, ordinances, and laws. Where preliminary
treatment or flow-equalizing facilities are provided for any waters or wastes, they shall be
maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective operation by the owner at the owner’s
expense.
97.08 CONTROL MANHOLES. When required by the Utilities Manager, the owner of any
property serviced by a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable control
manhole together with such necessary meters and other appurtenances in the building sewer to
facilitate observation, sampling, and measurement of the wastes. Such manhole, when required,
shall be accessibly and safely located, and shall be constructed in accordance with plans
approved by the Utilities Manager. The manhole shall be installed by the owner at the owner’s
expense, and shall be maintained by the owner so as to be safe and accessible at all times.
97.09 TESTING OF WASTES. All measurements, tests, and analyses of the characteristics
of waters and wastes to which reference is made in this chapter shall be determined in accordance
with the latest edition of Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater,
published by the American Public Health Association, and shall be determined at the control
manhole provided, or upon suitable samples taken at said control manhole. In the event that no
special manhole has been required, the control manhole shall be considered to be the nearest
downstream manhole in the public sewer to the point at which the building sewer is connected.
Sampling shall be carried out by customarily accepted methods to reflect the effect of constituents
upon the sewage works and to determine the existence of hazards to life, limb, and property. (The
particular analyses involved will determine whether a 24-hour composite of all outfalls of a
premises is appropriate or whether a grab sample or samples should be taken. Normally, but not
always, B.O.D. and suspended solids analyses are obtained from 24-hour composites of all outfalls
whereas pH’s are determined from periodic grab samples).
[The next page is 493]
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
- 493 -
CHAPTER 98
PRIVATE SEPTIC SYSTEMS
98.01 When Prohibited 98.05 Discharge Restrictions
98.02 When Required 98.06 Maintenance of System
98.03 Compliance with Regulations 98.07 Systems Abandoned
98.04 Permit Required 98.08 Disposal of Septage
98.01 WHEN PROHIBITED. Except as otherwise provided in this chapter and provided by
the Council, it is unlawful to construct or maintain any on-site wastewater treatment and
disposal system or other facility intended or used for the disposal of sewage.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3f])
98.02 WHEN REQUIRED. When a public sanitary sewer is not available under the
provisions of Section 95.05, every building wherein persons reside, congregate or are employed
shall be provided with an approved on-site wastewater treatment and disposal system complying
with the provisions of this chapter.
(IAC, 567-69.1[3])
98.03 COMPLIANCE WITH REGULATIONS. The type, capacity, location and layout of
a private on-site wastewater treatment and disposal system shall comply with the specifications
and requirements set forth by the Iowa Administrative Code 567, Chapter 69, and with such
additional requirements as are prescribed by the regulations of the County Board of Health.
(IAC, 567-69.1[3 & 4])
98.04 PERMIT REQUIRED. No person shall install or alter an on-site wastewater treatment
and disposal system without first obtaining a permit from the County Board of Health.
98.05 DISCHARGE RESTRICTIONS. It is unlawful to discharge any wastewater from an
on-site wastewater treatment and disposal system (except under an NPDES permit) to any ditch,
stream, pond, lake, natural or artificial waterway, drain tile or to the surface of the ground.
(IAC, 567-69.1[3])
98.06 MAINTENANCE OF SYSTEM. The owner of an on-site wastewater treatment and
disposal system shall operate and maintain the system in a sanitary manner at all times and at
no expense to the City.
98.07 SYSTEMS ABANDONED. At such time as a public sewer becomes available to a
property served by an on-site wastewater treatment and disposal system, as provided in Section
95.05, a direct connection shall be made to the public sewer in compliance with these Sanitary
Sewer chapters and the on-site wastewater treatment and disposal system shall be abandoned
and filled with suitable material.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3f])
98.08 DISPOSAL OF SEPTAGE. No person shall dispose of septage from an on-site
treatment system at any location except an approved disposal site.
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
- 494 -
CHAPTER 99
SEWER SERVICE CHARGES
99.01 Sewer Service Charges Required 99.05 Payment of Bills
99.02 Rate 99.06 Lien for Nonpayment
99.03 Special Rates 99.07 Deposit
99.04 Private Water Systems 99.08 Special Agreements Permitted
99.01 SEWER SERVICE CHARGES REQUIRED. Every customer shall pay to the City
sewer service fees as hereinafter provided.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.84)
99.02 RATE. Each customer shall pay sewer service charges for the use of and for the service
supplied by the municipal sanitary sewer system based upon the amount of water consumed as
follows:
1. Residential and Commercial Rate: Class I Service
Effective Date
July, 2017
Effective Date
July, 2018
Monthly Service
Charge
$18.00 Net $22.00
All Gallons @ 4.25/1,000 gal. 5.40/1,000 gal.
Minimum
Monthly Bill
$18.00 $22.00
2. Industrial Rate: Class II Service
Wastewater
Parameter
Billing Units Effective
Date July,
2017
Unit Cost
Effective Date
July, 2018
Unit Cost
Monthly Service
Charge
$1,200.00 Net $1,700.00 Net
BOD $/pound 0.19/lb 0.21/lb
TKN $/pound 0.88/lb 0.84/lb
TSS $/pound 0.14/lb 0.11/lb
TP $/pound 1.51/lb 1.54/lb
Grease $/pound 0.20/lb 0.20/lb
Flow All TG/Month 1.55/M Gal 1.86/M Gal
Minimum Monthly
Bill
$1,200.00 $1,700.00
(Ord. SC-O-02-17 – Jan. 19 Supp.)
CHAPTER 99 SEWER SERVICE CHARGES
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
- 495 -
99.03 SPECIAL RATES. Where, in the judgment of the Utilities Manager and the Council,
special conditions exist to the extent that the application of the sewer charges provided in
Section 99.02 would be inequitable or unfair to either the City or the customer, a special rate
shall be proposed by the Utilities Manager and submitted to the Council for approval by
resolution.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.84)
99.04 PRIVATE WATER SYSTEMS. Customers whose premises are served by a private
water system shall pay sewer charges based upon the water used as determined by the City either
by an estimate agreed to by the customer or by metering the water system at the customer’s
expense. Any negotiated, or agreed upon sales or charges shall be subject to approval of the
Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.84)
99.05 PAYMENT OF BILLS. All sewer service charges are due and payable under the same
terms and conditions provided for payment of a combined service account as contained in
Section 92.05 of this Code of Ordinances. Sewer service may be discontinued in accordance
with the provisions contained in Section 92.06 if the combined service account becomes
delinquent, and the provisions contained in Section 92.09 relating to lien notices shall also apply
in the event of a delinquent account.
99.06 LIEN FOR NONPAYMENT. The owner of the premises served and any lessee or
tenant thereof shall be jointly and severally liable for sewer service charges to the premises.
Sewer service charges remaining unpaid and delinquent shall constitute a lien upon the premises
served and shall be certified by the Clerk to the County Treasurer for collection in the same
manner as property taxes.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.84)
99.07 DEPOSIT. There shall be utility deposits as provided in Section 92.10 of the Code of
Ordinances.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.84)
99.08 SPECIAL AGREEMENTS PERMITTED. No statement in these chapters shall be
construed as preventing a special agreement, arrangement or contract between the Council, and
any industrial concern whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or character may be
accepted subject to special conditions, rate and cost as established by the Council.
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
- 496 -
CHAPTER 100
BENEFITED SEWER DISTRICTS
100.01 General Provisions 100.07 Application
100.02 Definitions 100.08 Subdivided Lots
100.03 Service Areas to Connect 100.09 Use of Connection Fees
100.04 Costs Established 100.10 Other Fees
100.05 Acreage Established 100.11 Disconnection
100.06 Connection Fee
100.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS. The City Council of the City of Sioux Center, after
public notice and hearing as prescribed by law, has determined the necessity of establishing
Sanitary Sewer Benefited District Service Areas and the imposition of a fee for connecting to
the City sanitary sewer upon each person who owns property in said area and will be served by
connecting to the City sanitary sewer. It is the intent of the City to utilize said connection fees
to recover 100% of the original cost of constructing sanitary sewer utilities to serve the
properties in Benefited Service Areas.
100.02 DEFINITIONS.
1. “Benefitted service area” means a designated area to which sanitary sewer
service will be provided by a sanitary sewer utility of a given design and capacity.
2. “Sanitary sewer utility” means and includes sanitary sewer trunklines and
sanitary sewer interceptors, sanitary sewer force mains, pumping stations and detention
basins.
3. “Connection” means any act that results in a direct or indirect discharge into a
City sewer utility, including but not limited to, the connection of a private sewer system
to a lateral sewer or manhole or the connection of a lateral sewer serving a subdivision
to a trunk sewer or manhole.
4. “Lot” means a parcel of land under one ownership. Two or more contiguous
parcels under common ownership may be treated as one lot for the purposes of this
ordinance if the parcels bear common improvements or if the Council finds that the
parcels have been assembled into a single unit for the purpose of use or development.
5. “Original cost” means all costs incurred in the design, construction and
financing of City sewer utilities, including but not limited to, the cost of labor, materials,
engineering, fees, legal fees, closing costs, and the reasonable loss of return on City
cash reserves used to finance construction or the interest on any indebtedness incurred
to finance construction.
6. “Service Area No. 1” means an area within the City limits of Sioux Center,
Iowa, described as follows:
That portion of the North Half (N½) of Section Nine (Sec. 9), Township
Ninety-five North (T95N), Range Forty-five West (R45W), of the 5th
Principal Meridian, Sioux Center, Sioux County, Iowa, described as
follows:
Commencing at the Southwest Corner (SW Cor.) of the Southeast
Quarter of the Northwest Quarter (SE¼–NW¼) of said Sec. 9; thence
CHAPTER 100 BENEFITED SEWER DISTRICTS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
- 497 -
east along the south line of said SE¼–NW¼ for a distance of 356 feet to
the point of beginning; thence north parallel with the west line of said
SE¼–NW¼ for a distance of 1,659 feet to the south line of the North
Half of the Southwest Quarter of the Northeast Quarter of the Northwest
Quarter (N½–SW¼–NE¼–NW¼) of said Sec. 9; thence west along said
south line for a distance of 356 feet to the west line of the East Half of
the Northwest Quarter (E½–NW¼); thence north along said west line
for a distance 332 feet to the north line of said N½–SW¼–NE¼–NW¼;
thence east along said north line for a distance of 664 feet to the west
line of the Northeast Quarter of the Northeast Quarter of the Northwest
Quarter (NE¼–NE¼–NW¼) of said Sec. 9; thence north along said west
line for a distance of 664 feet to the north line of the Northwest Quarter
of said Sec. 9; thence east along said north line for a distance of 664
feet to the North Quarter Corner (N¼ Cor.) of said Sec. 9; thence east
along the north line of the Northeast Quarter (NE¼) of said Sec. 9 for a
distance of 300 feet; thence south for a distance of 510 feet; thence east
for a distance of 440 feet; thence southeasterly to a point on the south
line of the North Half of the Northeast Quarter (N½–NE¼), which point
lies 1,150 feet west of the Southeast Corner of said N½–NE¼; thence
south to a point on the south line of said NE¼, which point lies 1,150
feet west of the East Quarter Corner (E¼ Cor.) of said Sec. 9; thence
west along the south line of said NE¼ to the Center of Section (Ctr. Sec.)
of said Sec. 9; thence west from said Ctr. Sec. along the south line of the
Northwest Quarter (NW¼) of said Sec. 9 for a distance of 966 feet to the
point of beginning, containing approximately 127 acres.
7. “Service Area No. 2” means an area within the City limits of Sioux Center,
Iowa, described as follows:
That portion of Section Nine (Sec. 9), Township Ninety-five North
(T95N), Range Forty-five West (R45W), of the 5th Principal Meridian,
Sioux Center, Sioux County, Iowa, described as follows:
The East Half of the Southwest Quarter (E½–SW¼) of said Sec. 9,
containing 80.4 acres.
and
That portion of the Southeast Quarter of the Northwest Quarter (SE¼–
NW¼) of said Sec. 9, described as follows:
Beginning at the Southwest Corner (SW Cor.) of said SE¼–NW¼;
thence north along the west line of said SE¼–NW¼ for a distance of 925
feet; thence east for a distance of 356 feet; thence south parallel with
the west line of said SE¼–NW¼ for a distance of 925 feet to the south
line of said SE¼–NW¼; thence west along the south line of said SE¼–
NW¼ for a distance of 356 feet to the point of beginning, containing 7.6
acres.
and
The Southeast Quarter (SE¼) of said Sec. 9 excepting therefrom the
following described parcel:
CHAPTER 100 BENEFITED SEWER DISTRICTS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
- 498 -
Beginning at the East Quarter Corner (E¼ Cor.) of said Sec. 9; thence
west along the north line of said SE¼ for a distance of 1,150 feet; thence
southeasterly to a point on the east line of said SE¼, which point lies
1,223 feet south of said E¼ Cor.; thence north along the east line of said
SE¼ for a distance of 1,223 feet to the point of beginning.
The above-described property contains approximately 145 acres.
Service Area No. 2 contains approximately 233 acres.
8. “Service Area No. 3” means an area within the City limits of Sioux Center,
Iowa, described as follows:
Those parts of Sections Sixteen (16) and Seventeen (17), Township 95
North, Range 45 West of the 5th P.M., City of Sioux Center, Sioux
County, Iowa, described as follows:
All that part of the South Ridge Estates Addition to the City of Sioux
Center, Iowa, (said South Ridge Estates Addition located in said Section
16), lying northwesterly of the following described line:
Commencing at the West Quarter Corner of said Section 16; thence
south 01°33'34" west along the west line of the SW¼ of said Section 16
and along the west line of said South Ridge Estates Addition for a
distance of 419.79 feet to the Point of Beginning of said described line;
thence south 88°26'43" east for a distance of 665.70 feet; thence north
01°30'47" east for a distance of 149.73 feet; thence south 88°29'13" east
for a distance of 802.09 feet; thence north 01°15'09" east for a distance
of 478.82 feet; thence north 53°35'11" east for a distance of 1,273.44
feet; thence north 32°56'01" east for a distance of 703.18 feet; thence
north 75°17'08" east for a distance of 1,844.98 feet; thence north
55°38'02" east for a distance of 807.60 feet to the point of intersection
of the south right-of-way line of 20th Street S.E. with the west right-ofway
line of Harrison Avenue and to the Point of Termination of said
described line.
EXCEPT the right-of-way of 20th Street S.E. within said South Ridge
Estates Addition.
The above described parcel contains 174.27 acres.
and
All of Lots One (1) and Two (2) of the Vermeer’s Subdivision of Part of
the NW¼–NW¼ of Section 16–T95N–R45W, Sioux County, Iowa,
containing 2.37 acres.
And
All of the Vermeer Second Addition to the City of Sioux Center, Iowa,
containing 3.20 acres. (The Vermeer Second Addition is located in the
NW¼ of said Section 16.)
And
All that part of the west 230 feet of the NW¼ of said Section 16 lying
south of Vermeer Second Addition to the City of Sioux Center, Iowa, and
CHAPTER 100 BENEFITED SEWER DISTRICTS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
- 499 -
lying north of the South Ridge Estates Addition to the City of Sioux
Center, Iowa, containing 2.02 acres.
and
That part of said Section 17, described as follows: Beginning at the East
Quarter Corner of said Section 17; thence south along the east line of
the SE¼ of said Section 17 for a distance of 870 feet; thence west to the
east right-of-way line of the Burlington Northern Railroad; thence
northeasterly along said east railroad right-of-way line to the north line
of the NE¼ of said Section 17; thence east along the north line of said
NE¼ to the Northeast Corner of said Section 17; thence south along the
east line of the NE¼ to the East Quarter Corner of said Section 17 and
to the Point of Beginning.
EXCEPT THE FOLLOWING THEREFROM:
That part of 20th Street S.W. right-of-way lying south of the north line of
the NE¼ of said Section 17.
and
The west 233 feet of the east 816 feet of the north 366 feet of the NE¼ of
said Section 17.
and
The west 233 feet of the east 583 feet of the north 366 feet of the NE¼ of
said Section 17.
and
The east 350 feet of the north 500 feet of the NE¼ of said Section 17.
The above-described property contains approximately 182 acres.
Service Area No. 3 contains approximately 360 acres.
9. “Service Area No. 4” means an area within the City limits of Sioux Center,
Iowa, described as follows:
Those parts of Sections Three (3) and Ten (10), Township 95 North,
Range 45 West of the 5th P.M., Sioux County, Iowa, described as follows:
I. All of the South 130 acres of the Southwest Quarter (SW¼) of
Section 3-T95N-R45W of the 5th P.M., Sioux County, Iowa.
II. All of the N½-NW¼ of Section 10-T95N-R45W of the 5th P.M.,
Sioux County, Iowa, containing 80.37 acres.
Service Area No. 4 contains approximately 210.37 acres.
10. “Service Area South Ridge Estates Second Addition Sanitary Service Area”
means an area within the City limits of Sioux Center, Iowa described as follows:
Block 12, South Ridge Estates in the Incorporated City of Sioux Center,
Iowa, according to the recorded plat thereof.
South Ridge Estates Second Addition Sanitary Service Area contains approximately
48.95 acres.
CHAPTER 100 BENEFITED SEWER DISTRICTS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
- 500 -
100.03 SERVICE AREAS TO CONNECT. The lots within Service Areas constitute
Benefited Service Area to be served by connecting to the City sewer utility.
100.04 COSTS ESTABLISHED. The original cost to the City of extending the City sewer
utility to the properties in Service Area No. 1 is $143,819. The original cost to the City of
extending the City sewer utility to the properties in Service Area No. 2 is $455,008. The original
cost to the City of extending the City sewer utility to the properties in Service Area No. 3 is
$323,000. The original cost to the City of extending the City sewer utility to the properties in
Service Area No. 4 is $164,895.42. The original cost to the City of extending the City sewer
utility to the properties in South Ridge Estates – Second Addition Sanitary Service Area is
$300,600. (Ord. SC-O-07-18 – Jan. 19 Supp.)
100.05 ACREAGE ESTABLISHED. The Benefited Service Area defined as Service Area
No. 1 contains approximately 127 acres. The Benefited Service Area defined as Service Area
No. 2 contains approximately 233 acres. The Benefited Service Area defined as Service Area
No. 3 contains approximately 360 acres. The Benefited Service Area defined as Service Area
No. 4 contains approximately 210.37 acres. The Benefited Service Area defined as the South
Ridge Estates – Second Addition Sanitary Sewer Service Area contains approximately 48.95
acres.
100.06 CONNECTION FEE. There is imposed on all lots within the Service Areas, for
which a sewer connection fee has not previously been paid, a fee for connection to the City
sewer utility. The connection fee shall be equal to that percentage of the original cost of bringing
the City sewer utility to each respective Service Area that equals the percentage of area that the
connected lot constitutes in relation to the entire Service Area. In Service Area No. 1 the
connection fee shall be $1,113 per acre. In Service Area No. 2 the connection fee shall be
$1,760 per acre. In Service Area No. 3 the connection fee shall be $660.77 per acre. In Service
Area No. 4 the connection fee shall be $784 per acre plus accrued interest for up to 15 years. In
the South Ridge Estates – Second Addition Sanitary Sewer Service Area the connection fee
shall be $6,141 per acre plus accrued interest for up to fifteen (15) years.
(Ord. SC-O-07-18 – Jan. 19 Supp.)
100.07 APPLICATION. Before any connection is made to a City sewer utility to serve a
lot in the Service Area, the owner of the lot or lots to be served by the connection shall file an
application, on a form provided by the City, with the City Utilities Manager. Upon approval of
the application, the City Utilities Manager shall advise the applicant of the connection fee to be
paid. Upon payment of the connection fee to the City Treasurer, the City shall issue a connection
permit. Upon completion of the connection the owner of the lot or lots being connected shall
notify the City Utilities Manager and the City Utilities Manager shall, at his or her discretion,
inspect the connection.
100.08 SUBDIVIDED LOTS. If the owner of a lot exceeding two (2) acres in size affected
by this ordinance desires to make a connection to the City sewer utility that will serve only a
portion of the lot, the owner may make application to the City Council to divide the lot. If the
Council finds that a portion or portions of the lot will not be served by the proposed connection,
and the plan of division is approved by the City Council, the original connection fee shall be
calculated and paid only upon the area included in the subdivided lots that will be served by the
connection. A new application must be filed, and a connection fee paid, when the subdivided
lots not served by the original connection to the City sewer utility are connected.
CHAPTER 100 BENEFITED SEWER DISTRICTS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
- 501 -
100.09 USE OF CONNECTION FEES. Connection fees collected by the City Treasurer
shall be used only for the purpose of operating or paying debt of the City sewer utility.
100.10 OTHER FEES. The sewer connection fees established by this ordinance are in
addition to, and not in lieu of, any other fees for connection required under the Plumbing Code,
other provisions of the municipal code, or City policy.
100.11 DISCONNECTION. In the event a connection is made to a City sewer utility
serving the Service Area without the permit required by this ordinance or without payment of
the connection fee set forth in this ordinance, the City shall disconnect such service from the
City sewer utility until such time as the property owner has received a permit for the connection
and paid the required connection fee.
(Ch. 100 – Ord. SC-O-06-17 – Jan. 19 Supp.)
CHAPTER 100 BENEFITED SEWER DISTRICTS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
- 502 -
° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° °
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
- 503 -
CHAPTER 101
STORM WATER DRAINAGE UTILITY
101.01 Purpose 101.04 Rates
101.02 Storm Water Drainage Utility Established 101.05 Use of Funds
101.03 Rate Categories 101.06 Governing Board
101.01 PURPOSE. The purpose of this chapter is to establish a Storm Water Drainage
Utility and provide a means of funding the construction, operation, and maintenance of storm
water management facilities, including (but not limited to) detention and retention basins, storm
water sewers, inlets, ditches and drains, and cleaning of streets. The Council finds that the
construction, operation, and maintenance of the City’s storm and surface water drainage system
should be funded through charging users of property that may connect or discharge, directly or
indirectly, into the storm and surface water drainage system of properties receiving the indirect
benefit of drainage diverted into the City’s system.
101.02 STORM WATER DRAINAGE UTILITY ESTABLISHED. It is found and
determined to be necessary and conducive to the protection of the public health, safety, welfare,
and convenience that a storm water drainage utility is created for all of the City and for the
purpose authorized by Section 384.84(1) Code of Iowa; that is, to establish and collect rates for
a storm water drainage system.
101.03 RATE CATEGORIES. The billing rates are divided into categories, as follows:
1. Residential: Single-Family Residential, Duplex Family Dwelling Units used
for residential, i.e. non-commercial, purposes.
2. Commercial:
A. Small: Commercial (including not-for-profit commercial users) with
less than a 7,000 square foot impervious coverage area.
B. Medium: Commercial (including not-for-profit commercial users)
with more than 7,000 square foot impervious coverage area and less than a
30,000 square foot impervious coverage area.
C. Large: Commercial (including not-for-profit commercial users) with
more than a 30,000 square foot impervious coverage area.
Renters/tenants shall pay the applicable residential rate. At any time when there is not a
renter/tenant, the owner shall be responsible for the residential rate. Triplex and multi-family
dwelling units shall pay the applicable commercial rate, but the residential rate shall not be
imposed on individual dwellings units within the complex. Square footage is determined by
adding the square footage of both contiguous and noncontiguous impervious coverage areas
together to measure the total square footage of impervious coverage areas on the property.
CHAPTER 101 STORM WATER DRAINAGE UTILITY
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
- 504 -
101.04 RATES. The following rates are charged for the following categories:
Category Monthly Rate
Residential $ 2.00
Commercial – Small $ 4.00
Commercial – Medium $10.00
Commercial – Large $20.00
101.05 USE OF FUNDS. The money paid and collected pursuant to this chapter shall be
held by the City in a special fund to be expended only for the purpose of constructing, operating,
managing, repairing, and maintaining all kinds of conduits, drains, storm water detention
devices, flow impediments, ponds, ditches, sloughs, filter strips, rip-raps, erosion control
devices, and any other things and activities useful to the proper control management, collection,
drainage, and disposition of storm water in the City.
101.06 GOVERNING BOARD. The governing board of the Storm Water Drainage Utility
is the City Council. The Storm Water Drainage Utility shall be under the direction,
management, and control of the Utility Manager, who shall function as its Director. In that
capacity, the Director shall supervise the day-to-day operation of the Storm Water Drainage
Utility, shall enforce this chapter and the provisions of all ordinances and regulations adopted
pursuant to this chapter, and shall carry out the policy directives of the Council acting in its role
as governing body of the Storm Water Drainage Utility.
[The next page is 525]
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
- 525 -
CHAPTER 105
SOLID WASTE CONTROL
105.01 Purpose 105.06 Littering Prohibited
105.02 Definitions 105.07 Open Dumping Prohibited
105.03 Sanitary Disposal Required 105.08 Toxic and Hazardous Waste
105.04 Health and Fire Hazard 105.09 Waste Storage Containers
105.05 Separation of Yard Waste Required 105.10 Prohibited Practices
105.01 PURPOSE. The purpose of the chapters in this Code of Ordinances pertaining to
Solid Waste Control and Collection is to provide for the sanitary storage, collection and disposal
of solid waste and, thereby, to protect the citizens of the City from such hazards to their health,
safety and welfare as may result from the uncontrolled disposal of solid waste.
105.02 DEFINITIONS. For use in these chapters the following terms are defined:
1. “Collector” means any person authorized to gather solid waste from public and
private places.
2. “Discard” means to place, cause to be placed, throw, deposit or drop.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 455B.361[2])
3. “Dwelling unit” means any room or group of rooms located within a structure
and forming a single habitable unit with facilities that are used, or are intended to be
used, for living, sleeping, cooking and eating.
4. “Garbage” means all solid and semisolid, putrescible animal and vegetable
waste resulting from the handling, preparing, cooking, storing, serving and consuming
of food or of material intended for use as food, and all offal, excluding useful industrial
by-products, and includes all such substances from all public and private establishments
and from all residences.
(IAC, 567-100.2)
5. “Landscape waste” means any vegetable or plant waste except garbage. The
term includes trees, tree trimmings, branches, stumps, brush, weeds, leaves, grass,
shrubbery and yard trimmings.
(IAC, 567-20.2[455B])
6. “Litter” means any garbage, rubbish, trash, refuse, waste materials or debris.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 455B.361[1])
7. “Owner” means, in addition to the record titleholder, any person residing in,
renting, leasing, occupying, operating or transacting business in any premises, and as
between such parties the duties, responsibilities, liabilities and obligations hereinafter
imposed shall be joint and several.
8. “Refuse” means putrescible and non-putrescible waste, including but not
limited to garbage, rubbish, ashes, incinerator residues, street cleanings, market and
industrial solid waste and sewage treatment waste in dry or semisolid form.
(IAC, 567-100.2)
CHAPTER 105 SOLID WASTE CONTROL
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
- 526 -
9. “Residential premises” means a single-family dwelling and any multiplefamily
dwelling up to and including four separate dwelling units. All other structures
shall be classified as institutional, commercial or industrial.
10. “Residential waste” means any refuse generated on the premises as a result of
residential activities. The term includes landscape waste grown on the premises or
deposited thereon by the elements, but excludes garbage, tires, trade wastes and any
locally recyclable goods or plastics.
(IAC, 567-20.2[455B])
11. “Rubbish” means non-putrescible solid waste consisting of combustible and
non-combustible waste, such as ashes, paper, cardboard, tin cans, yard clippings, wood,
glass, bedding, crockery or litter of any kind.
(IAC, 567-100.2)
12. “Sanitary disposal” means a method of treating solid waste so that it does not
produce a hazard to the public health or safety or create a nuisance.
(IAC, 567-100.2)
13. “Sanitary disposal project” means all facilities and appurtenances including all
real and personal property connected with such facilities, which are acquired,
purchased, constructed, reconstructed, equipped, improved, extended, maintained, or
operated to facilitate the final disposition of solid waste without creating a significant
hazard to the public health or safety, and which are approved by the Director of the
State Department of Natural Resources.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 455B.301)
14. “Solid waste” means garbage, refuse, rubbish, and other similar discarded solid
or semisolid materials, including but not limited to such materials resulting from
industrial, commercial, agricultural, and domestic activities. Solid waste may include
vehicles, as defined by Section 321.1 of the Code of Iowa. Solid waste does not include
any of the following:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 455B.301)
A. Hazardous waste regulated under the Federal Resource Conservation
and Recovery Act, 42 U.S.C. § 6921-6934.
B. Hazardous waste as defined in Section 455B.411 of the Code of Iowa,
except to the extent that rules allowing for the disposal of specific wastes have
been adopted by the State Environmental Protection Commission.
C. Source, special nuclear, or by-product material as defined in the
Atomic Energy Act of 1954, as amended to January 1, 1979.
D. Petroleum contaminated soil that has been remediated to acceptable
State or Federal standards.
105.03 SANITARY DISPOSAL REQUIRED. It is the duty of each owner to provide for
the sanitary disposal of all refuse accumulating on the owner’s premises before it becomes a
nuisance. Any such accumulation remaining on any premises for a period of more than thirty
(30) days shall be deemed a nuisance and the City may proceed to abate such nuisances in
accordance with the provisions of Chapter 50 or by initiating proper action in district court.
(Code of Iowa, Ch. 657)
CHAPTER 105 SOLID WASTE CONTROL
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
- 527 -
105.04 HEALTH AND FIRE HAZARD. It is unlawful for any person to permit to
accumulate on any premises, improved or vacant, or on any public place, such quantities of solid
waste that constitute a health, sanitation or fire hazard.
105.05 SEPARATION OF YARD WASTE REQUIRED. All yard waste shall be
separated by the owner or occupant from all other solid waste accumulated on the premises and
may be composted on the premises or placed in acceptable containers and set out for collection
or disposed of at the City’s yard waste disposal site. As used in this section, “yard waste” means
any debris such as grass clippings, leaves, garden waste, brush and trees. Yard waste does not
include tree stumps.
105.06 LITTERING PROHIBITED. No person shall discard any litter onto or in any water
or land, except that nothing in this section shall be construed to affect the authorized collection
and discarding of such litter in or on areas or receptacles provided for such purpose. When litter
is discarded from a motor vehicle, the driver of the motor vehicle shall be responsible for the
act in any case where doubt exists as to which occupant of the motor vehicle actually discarded
the litter.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 455B.363)
105.07 OPEN DUMPING PROHIBITED. No person shall dump or deposit or permit the
dumping or depositing of any solid waste on the surface of the ground or into a body or stream
of water at any place other than a sanitary disposal project approved by the Director of the State
Department of Natural Resources, unless a special permit to dump or deposit solid waste on
land owned or leased by such person has been obtained from the Director of the State
Department of Natural Resources. However, this section does not prohibit the use of rubble at
places other than a sanitary disposal project. “Rubble” means dirt, stone, brick, or similar
inorganic materials used for beneficial fill, landscaping, excavation, or grading at places other
than a sanitary disposal project. Rubble includes asphalt waste only as long as it is not used in
contact with water in a floodplain. For purposes of this section, rubble does not mean gypsum
or gypsum wallboard, coal combustion residue, foundry sand, or industrial process wastes
unless those wastes are approved by the State Department of Natural Resources.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 455B.301, Sec. 455B.307 and IAC, 567-100.2)
105.08 TOXIC AND HAZARDOUS WASTE. No person shall deposit in a solid waste
container or otherwise offer for collection any toxic or hazardous waste. Such materials shall
be transported and disposed of as prescribed by the Director of the State Department of Natural
Resources. As used in this section, “toxic and hazardous waste” means waste materials,
including but not limited to, poisons, pesticides, herbicides, acids, caustics, pathological waste,
flammable or explosive materials and similar harmful waste that requires special handling and
that must be disposed of in such a manner as to conserve the environment and protect the public
health and safety.
(IAC, 567-100.2)
(IAC, 567-102.13[2] and 400-27.14[2])
105.09 WASTE STORAGE CONTAINERS. Every person owning, managing, operating,
leasing or renting any premises, dwelling unit or any place where refuse accumulates shall
provide and at all times maintain in good order and repair portable containers for refuse in
accordance with the following:
1. Container Specifications. Waste storage containers shall comply with the
following specifications:
CHAPTER 105 SOLID WASTE CONTROL
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
- 528 -
A. Residential solid wastes shall be stored and disposed of in containers
owned and provided by the City or in other containers approved by the City.
B. The weight of the contents in an individual container shall not exceed
100 pounds.
2. Storage of Containers. Residential solid waste containers shall be stored upon
the residential premises. Commercial solid waste containers shall be stored upon
private property, unless the owner has been granted written permission from the City to
use public property for such purposes. The storage site shall be well drained and fully
accessible to collection equipment, public health personnel, and fire inspection
personnel. All owners of residential and commercial premises shall be responsible for
proper storage of all garbage and yard waste to prevent materials from being blown or
scattered around neighboring yards and streets.
3. Location of Containers for Collection. Containers for the storage of solid waste
awaiting collection shall be placed outdoors at some easily accessible place by the
owner or occupant of the premises served.
4. Nonconforming Containers. Solid waste placed in containers that are not in
compliance with the provisions of this section will not be collected.
105.10 PROHIBITED PRACTICES. It is unlawful for any person to:
1. Unlawful Use of Containers. Deposit refuse in any solid waste containers not
owned by such person without the written consent of the owner of such containers.
2. Interfere with Collectors. Interfere in any manner with solid waste collection
equipment or with solid waste collectors in the lawful performance of their duties as
such, whether such equipment or collectors be those of the City, or those of any other
authorized waste collection service.
3. Incinerators. Burn rubbish or garbage except in incinerators designed for high
temperature operation, in which solid, semisolid, liquid or gaseous combustible refuse
is ignited and burned efficiently, and from which the solid residues contain little or no
combustible material, as acceptable to the Environmental Protection Commission.
4. Scavenging. Take or collect any solid waste that has been placed out for
collection on any premises, unless such person is an authorized solid waste collector.
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
- 529 -
CHAPTER 106
COLLECTION OF SOLID WASTE
106.01 Collection Service 106.06 Right of Entry
106.02 Collection Vehicles 106.07 Contract Requirements
106.03 Loading 106.08 Collection Fees
106.04 Frequency of Collection 106.09 Lien for Nonpayment
106.05 Bulky Rubbish
106.01 COLLECTION SERVICE. The City shall provide by contract for the collection of
solid waste, except bulky rubbish as provided in Section 106.05, from residential premises only.
The owners or operators of commercial, industrial or institutional premises shall provide for the
collection of solid waste produced upon such premises.
106.02 COLLECTION VEHICLES. Vehicles or containers used for the collection and
transportation of garbage and similar putrescible waste or solid waste containing such materials
shall be leakproof, durable and of easily cleanable construction. They shall be cleaned to
prevent nuisances, pollution or insect breeding and shall be maintained in good repair.
(IAC, 567-104.9[455B])
106.03 LOADING. Vehicles or containers used for the collection and transportation of any
solid waste shall be loaded and moved in such a manner that the contents will not fall, leak, or
spill therefrom, and shall be covered to prevent blowing or loss of material. Where spillage
does occur, the material shall be picked up immediately by the collector or transporter and
returned to the vehicle or container and the area properly cleaned.
106.04 FREQUENCY OF COLLECTION. All solid waste shall be collected from
residential premises at least once each week. No more than one solid waste container per week,
per residential premises, shall be collected at the normal rate of charge for collection. Additional
containers shall be collected for an additional fee.
106.05 BULKY RUBBISH. Bulky rubbish that is too large or heavy to be collected in the
normal manner of other solid waste may be collected by the collector upon request in accordance
with procedures therefor established by the Council.
106.06 RIGHT OF ENTRY. Solid waste collectors are hereby authorized to enter upon
private property for the purpose of collecting solid waste therefrom as required by this chapter;
however, solid waste collectors shall not enter dwelling units or other residential buildings.
106.07 CONTRACT REQUIREMENTS. No person shall engage in the business of
collecting, transporting, processing or disposing of solid waste from residential premises for the
City without first entering into a contract with the City. This section does not prohibit an owner
from transporting solid waste accumulating upon premises owned, occupied or used by such
owner, provided such refuse is disposed of properly in an approved sanitary disposal project.
Furthermore, a contract is not required for the removal, hauling, or disposal of earth and rock
material from grading or excavation activities, provided that all such materials are conveyed in
tight vehicles, trucks or receptacles so constructed and maintained that none of the material
being transported is spilled upon any public right-of-way.
CHAPTER 106 COLLECTION OF SOLID WASTE
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
- 530 -
106.08 COLLECTION FEES. The collection and disposal of solid waste as provided by
this chapter are declared to be beneficial to the property served or eligible to be served and there
shall be levied and collected fees therefor in accordance with the following:
(Goreham vs. Des Moines, 1970, 179 NW 2nd, 449)
1. Fee for Collection. The fee for solid waste collection and disposal service, used
or available, is established by the City Council.
2. Payment of Bills. All fees are due and payable under the same terms and
conditions provided for payment of a combined service account as contained in Section
92.05 of this Code of Ordinances. Solid waste collection service may be discontinued
in accordance with the provisions contained in Section 92.06 if the combined service
account becomes delinquent, and the provisions contained in Section 92.09 relating to
lien notices shall also apply in the event of a delinquent account.
106.09 LIEN FOR NONPAYMENT. The owner of the premises served and any lessee or
tenant thereof are jointly and severally liable for fees for solid waste collection and disposal.
Fees remaining unpaid and delinquent shall constitute a lien upon the premises served and shall
be certified by the Clerk to the County Treasurer for collection in the same manner as property
taxes.
[The next page is 551]
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
- 551 -
CHAPTER 110
MUNICIPAL NATURAL GAS UTILITY
110.01 Purpose 110.06 Wholesale Gas Cost Adjustment
110.02 Policy Direction 110.07 Deposit
110.03 Utilities Manager 110.08 Payment of Bills
110.04 Rates 110.09 Lien for Nonpayment
110.05 Large Volume Industrial User Rate Schedule
110.01 PURPOSE. The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the operation of the
municipally owned natural gas distribution system.
110.02 POLICY DIRECTION. The Mayor and Council shall establish appropriate rules
and regulations governing the operation and maintenance of the system, as provided in the
City’s most recently adopted service rules of the Municipal Gas Utility.
110.03 UTILITIES MANAGER. The Utilities Manager, appointed by the Council, shall
be responsible for execution of policies governing the utility, as established by the Council.
110.04 RATES. The rates for natural gas sold by the Municipal Natural Gas Utility are as
follows:
1. Rate No. 148 – Residential and Small Commercial
Monthly Service Charge ......................... $ 7.00 net
Monthly Rural Service Charge ................ $ 9.00 net
First 5,000 CF or less .............................. $ 8.38 per MCF
Balance of CF per month ........................ $ 8.10 per MCF
Minimum Monthly Bill ........................... $ 7.00 (Rural $9.00)
2. Rate No. 149 - Commercial
Monthly Service Charge ......................... $ 10.00 net
First 25,000 CF or less ............................ $ 8.50 per MCF
Balance of CF .......................................... $ 7.95 per MCF
Minimum Monthly Bill ........................... $ 10.00
3. Rate No. 150 – Small Volume Interruptible
Monthly Service Charge ......................... $ 17.50 net
First 100,000 CF per month .................... $ 7.43 per MCF
Next 400,000 CF per month .................... $ 6.93 per MCF
Balance of CF .......................................... $ 6.53 per MCF
Minimum Monthly Bill ........................... $ 17.50
4. Rate No. 218 – Large Volume Interruptible
Monthly Service Charge ......................... $195.00 net
All CF ...................................................... $ 6.46 per MCF
Minimum Monthly Bill ........................... $195.00
Rate No. 218 is applicable only to non-seasonal high load factor process users who use
in excess of 12 MMCF per annum.
CHAPTER 110 MUNICIPAL NATURAL GAS UTILITY
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
- 552 -
110.05 LARGE VOLUME INDUSTRIAL USER RATE SCHEDULE.
1. The City may enter into a natural gas sales contracts with large volume
industrial users, as defined in this rate schedule, on the following terms:
A. The delivery period shall not be longer than three years, including
renewal options, for take-or-pay or take-and-pay contracts, nor longer than 30
years in the case of requirements contracts.
B. The facilities of the industrial customer must be located in the City’s
current service area or in a County contiguous to such area where gas
distribution service is not otherwise being provided.
C. Provided however that serving an industrial customer outside the City’s
current service area is subject to a determination of authority to serve the
proposed customer.
2. Large volume industrial users eligible for service under this rate schedule shall
be those that will purchase a monthly average of not less than 1,500 MMBtu per day
from the City and that elect to enter into a contractual arrangement with the City for
purchases of gas under this rate schedule.
3. The contract between the City and the customer pursuant to this rate schedule
shall be either (i) in the form of a North American Energy Standards Board (“NAESB”)
base contract for the sale and purchase of natural gas, with such special conditions and
commercial terms set forth in a transaction confirmation as shall be established by the
City, or (ii) a similar natural gas contract.
4. The commodity price per MMBtu for service under this rate schedule shall be
the applicable monthly Index price published by Inside FERC’s Gas Market Report, a
publication of S&P Global Platts, a division of S&P Global Inc., in the chart entitled
“Monthly Bidweek Spot Gas Prices – Platts Locations ($/MMBtu)” for the applicable
month of deliveries, under the heading “Midcontinent,” for “Ventura” (or such other
point as may be selected by the City), under the column “Index” (the “Index Price”),
less a discount not greater than 50% of the discount below the Index Price represented
by all of the City’s firm gas supply purchases in its gas supply portfolio at the time the
contractual arrangement with the eligible purchaser under this rate schedule is entered
into by the City. The City may negotiate lesser discounts with any eligible customer.
5. In appropriate circumstances, the City may combine sales service of
commodity gas supply under this rate schedule with transportation service to the City’s
city gate and then across the City’s system so as to provide a delivered service at the
industrial customer’s premises. In such circumstances, the delivered price to the
customer shall include a transportation service component or components in addition to
the price for the commodity gas supply under this rate schedule. However, the City
may make sales to the customer at a pipeline interconnect or other point at which the
customer customarily takes delivery of gas supplies that the customer purchases.
6. The City shall serve customers under this rate schedule from its available longterm,
firm natural gas supply contracts. The City shall not be obligated to supply any
new eligible customer under this rate schedule, or supply any portion of such quantity
requested by such customer, if under advisement of the Utilities Manager, the City
concludes that it does not have sufficient long-term, firm gas supplies or transportation
in its gas supply and transportation portfolio available to it for sale and delivery to such
new customer under this rate schedule.
(Section 110.05 – Ord. SC-O-11-18 – Jan. 19 Supp.)
CHAPTER 110 MUNICIPAL NATURAL GAS UTILITY
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
- 553 -
110.06 WHOLESALE GAS COST ADJUSTMENT. The rates established in Section
110.04 may be increased or decreased 1/10 cent ($.001) per MCF for each 1/10 cent or major
fraction thereof of increase or decrease in wholesale gas cost. Each month’s GCA will include
all demand, commodity, BTU, and transfer in lieu of taxes factors. For purposes of applying
the rate adjustment of this section, the wholesale gas cost base is hereby established at $6.836
per MCF for Rates No. 148 and No. 149; $6.275 per MCF for Rate No. 150; and $5.950 per
MCF for Rate No. 218.
110.07 DEPOSIT. A utility deposit is required pursuant to Section 92.10 of this Code of
Ordinances.
110.08 PAYMENT OF BILLS. All fees are due and payable under the same terms and
conditions provided for payment of a combined service account as contained in Section 92.05
of this Code of Ordinances. Service may be discontinued in accordance with the provisions
contained in Section 92.06 if the combined service account becomes delinquent, and the
provisions contained in Section 92.09 relating to lien notices shall also apply in the event of a
delinquent account.
110.09 LIEN FOR NONPAYMENT. The owner of the premises served and any lessee or
tenant thereof are jointly and severally liable for fees for natural gas. Fees remaining unpaid
and delinquent shall constitute a lien upon the premises served and shall be certified by the Clerk
to the County Treasurer for collection in the same manner as property taxes.
CHAPTER 110 MUNICIPAL NATURAL GAS UTILITY
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
- 554 -
° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° °
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
- 555 -
CHAPTER 111
MUNICIPAL ELECTRIC UTILITY
111.01 Purpose 111.07 Aggregation of Retail Customer Demand Response
111.02 Policy Direction 111.08 Ancillary Services Provided by Demand Response
111.03 Utilities Manager Resources
111.04 Service Rules and Regulations 111.09 Deposit
111.05 Rates 111.10 Payment of Bills
111.06 Wholesale Electric Cost Adjustment Clause (ECA) 111.11 Lien for Nonpayment
111.01 PURPOSE. The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the operation of the
municipally owned electric system.
111.02 POLICY DIRECTION. The Mayor and Council shall establish appropriate rules
and regulations governing the operation and maintenance of the electric system, as provided in
the most recently adopted service rules of the Municipal Electric Utility.
111.03 UTILITIES MANAGER. The Utilities Manager, appointed by the Council, shall
be responsible for execution of policies governing the system as established by the Council.
111.04 SERVICE RULES AND REGULATIONS. The rules and regulations for electric
service are contained in the “Municipal Electric Utility of the City of Sioux Center Tariff,” on
file with the Utilities Division of the Iowa Department of Commerce. Also, an official copy of
the rules and regulations as adopted is now on file in the office of the Clerk. The rules and
regulations contained therein shall apply to all users of the municipal electric system.
111.05 RATES. The rates for electric service shall be as follows:
1. Residential and Rural Rates
Effective Date
September, 2018
Effective Date
September, 2019
Monthly Residential
Service Charge
$12.00 net $14.00 net
Monthly Rural Service
Charge
$16.00 net $19.00 net
All KWH per month
June-September @ 9.1¢ per KWH 9.1¢ per KWH
October – May @ 7.9¢ per KWH 7.9¢ per KWH
Minimum Monthly Bill $12.00 (Residential)
$16.00 (Rural)
$14.00 (Residential
$19.00 (Rural)
CHAPTER 111 MUNICIPAL ELECTRIC UTILITY
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
- 556 -
2. Residential (All Electric) Rates
Effective Date
September, 2018
Effective Date
September, 2019
Summer Rate (June-
September)
Monthly Service
Charge
$12.00 net $14.00 net
First 300 KWH per
month @
8.4¢ per KWH 8.4¢ per KWH
Balance KWH per
month @
9.1¢ per KWH 9.1¢ per KWH
Winter Rate (October-
May)
Monthly Service
Charge
$12.00 net $14.00 net
First 750 KWH per
month @
6.8¢ per KWH 6.8¢ per KWH
Balance KWH per
month @
6.8¢ per KWH 6.8¢ per KWH
Minimum Monthly Bill $12.00 $14.00
3. Commercial Rate
Effective Date
September, 2018
Effective Date
September, 2019
Monthly Service
Charge – Single Phase
$18.00 net $21.00 net
Monthly Service
Charge – Three Phase
$22.00 net $27.00 net
All KWH per month
June-September @ 9.5¢ per KWH 9.5¢ per KWH
October – May @ 8.2¢ per KWH 8.2¢ per KWH
Minimum Monthly Bill $18.00 (Single Phase)
$22.00 (Three Phase)
$21.00 (Single Phase)
$27.00 (Three Phase)
CHAPTER 111 MUNICIPAL ELECTRIC UTILITY
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
- 557 -
4. Commercial Demand Rate
Effective Date
September, 2018
Effective Date
September, 2019
Monthly Service
Charge
$40.00 net $50.00 net
Monthly Demand
Charge
June-September $16.80 per KW $16.90 per KW
October – May $12.80 per KW $12.90 per KW
All KWH per month @ 3.9¢ per KWH 3.9¢ per KWH
Maximum Monthly
Rate @
10.5¢ per KWH 11.0¢ per KWH
Minimum Monthly Bill $6.50 per KVA/year of connected load
The Commercial Demand Rate is applicable to all customers where the fifteen (15)
minute demand exceeds one hundred (75) KW in any two months during the preceding
12 month period including the current billing month and the previous 11 months. Once
a customer meets this criteria, this rate shall apply for the current billing month and 11
subsequent months. Any customer billed under the Commercial Demand Rate whose
combined demand and energy bills result in an average KWH cost greater than the
above Maximum Monthly Rate shall be billed at the above Maximum Monthly Rate
including the applicable ECA.
5. Commercial (All Electric) Rates
Effective Date
September, 2018
Effective Date
September, 2019
Monthly Service
Charge – Single Phase
$18.00 net $21.00 net
Monthly Service
Charge – Three Phase
$22.00 net $27.00 net
All KWH per month
June-September @ 9.5¢ per KWH 9.5¢ per KWH
October – May @ 7.0¢ per KWH 7.0¢ per KWH
Minimum Monthly Bill $18.00 (Single Phase)
$22.00 (Three Phase)
$21.00 (Single Phase)
$27.00 (Three Phase)
The above Commercial (All Electric) Rates are established for single meter large use
commercial all electric heating customers. This rate is not available to customers (1)
using less than a total of 5,000 KWH per month, or (2) if KWHs used for electric space
heating are less than 50% of total KWHs when the winter rate is in effect. Further, to
qualify for this rate, the customer’s total permanent energy requirements must be
satisfied with the use of electrical energy, unless there is a special process fuel need for
which electrical energy cannot be utilized, in which case a variance will be considered
on a case by case basis.
CHAPTER 111 MUNICIPAL ELECTRIC UTILITY
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
- 558 -
The summer All Electric Rates (Residential and Commercial) shall apply for the billing
periods due and payable on the first day of June and continuing thru the first of
November. The winter All Electric Rates (Residential and Commercial) shall apply for
the billing periods due and payable on the first day of December and continuing thru the
first day of May.
Any customer who meets the criteria for the commercial Demand Rate and is also eligible
for the Commercial (All Electric) Rate shall declare which rate will be applied for the
next 12 months.
6. Water Heating Rate
Effective Date
September, 2018
Effective Date
September, 2019
All KWH per month
June-September @ 8.4¢ per KWH 8.4¢ per KWH
October – May@ 6.8¢ per KWH 6.8¢ per KWH
Minimum Monthly Bill $1.50 per mo., per meter
7. Security Lighting
Effective Date
September, 2018
Effective Date
September, 2019
Monthly Service
Charge
$5.00 net $5.25 net
(Section 110.05 – Ord. SC-O-06-18 – Jan. 19 Supp.)
111.06 WHOLESALE ELECTRIC COST ADJUSTMENT CLAUSE (ECA). The rates
established in Section 111.05 of this chapter may be increased or decreased 1/10th mill ($.0001
or .01¢) per kilowatt hour (KWH) for each 1/10th mill or major fraction thereof increase or
decrease in wholesale power cost. The ECA will be determined on the basis of wholesale power
costs including all demand, energy and transmission cost factors. For purposes of applying the
rate adjustment of this section, the wholesale annual electric cost base is hereby established as
63 mills per kilowatt hour ($.0630/KWH). The ECA will be determined based on projected
power costs for the following year, and the monthly ECA will remain the same for a twelve
month period unless power costs substantially change during the year.
(Ord. SC-O-06-18 – Jan. 19 Supp.)
111.07 AGGREGATION OF RETAIL CUSTOMER DEMAND RESPONSE. The
Sioux Center Municipal Electric Utility or its authorized designee is the sole entity permitted to
bid demand response on behalf of retail customers served by the Municipal Electric Utility
directly into any Commission-approved independent system operator’s or regional transmission
organization’s organized electric markets. Retail customers served by the Sioux Center
Municipal Electric Utility wishing to bid their demand response into a Commission-approved
independent system operator’s or regional transmission organization’s organized electric
markets may do so by participating in the program established by the Sioux Center Municipal
Utility or its authorized designee. Retail customers are not permitted to participate in the
demand response program of any other entity without the express prior authorization of the
Sioux Center Municipal Electric Utility.
CHAPTER 111 MUNICIPAL ELECTRIC UTILITY
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
- 559 -
111.08 ANCILLARY SERVICES PROVIDED BY DEMAND RESPONSE
RESOURCES. The Sioux Center Municipal Electric Utility or its authorized designee is the
sole entity permitted to bid demand response on behalf of retail customers served by the Sioux
Center Municipal Electric Utility directly into any Commission-approved independent system
operator’s or regional transmission organization’s organized markets for energy imbalance,
spinning reserves, supplemental reserves, reactive power and voltage control, or regulation and
frequency response ancillary services (or its functional equivalent in the Commission-approved
independent system operator’s or regional transmission organization’s tariff). Retail customers
served by the Sioux Center Municipal Electric Utility wishing to bid their demand response into
a Commission-approved independent system operator’s or regional transmission organization’s
organized markets for energy imbalance, spinning reserves, supplemental reserves, reactive
poser and voltage control, or regulation and frequency response ancillary services (or its
functional equivalent in the Commission-approved independent system operator’s or regional
transmission organization’s tariff) may do so by participating in the program established by the
Sioux Center Municipal Electric Utility or its authorized designee. Retail customers are not
permitted to participate in the demand response program of any other entity without the express
prior authorization of the Sioux Center Municipal Electric Utility.
111.09 DEPOSIT. A utility deposit is required pursuant to Section 92.10 of this Code of
Ordinances.
111.10 PAYMENT OF BILLS. All fees are due and payable under the same terms and
conditions provided for payment of a combined service account as contained in Section 92.05
of this Code of Ordinances. Service may be discontinued in accordance with the provisions
contained in Section 92.06 if the combined service account becomes delinquent, and the
provisions contained in Section 92.09 relating to lien notices shall also apply in the event of a
delinquent account.
111.11 LIEN FOR NONPAYMENT. The owner of the premises served and any lessee or
tenant thereof are jointly and severally liable for fees for electric service. Fees remaining unpaid
and delinquent shall constitute a lien upon the premises served and shall be certified by the Clerk
to the County Treasurer for collection in the same manner as property taxes.
CHAPTER 111 MUNICIPAL ELECTRIC UTILITY
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
- 560 -
° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° °
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
- 561 -
CHAPTER 112
CABLE TELEVISION DISTRIBUTION
NETWORK REGULATIONS
112.01 Purpose 112.06 Rules Governing Franchise
112.02 Definitions 112.07 Procedure Prior to Revocation
112.03 Cable Television Distribution Network Franchise 112.08 Interconnection
112.04 System 112.09 Protection of Privacy
112.05 Installation, Operation and Maintenance
112.01 PURPOSE. The purpose of this chapter is to regulate cable television distribution
networks in Sioux Center, Iowa, which operate pursuant to City franchise for the provision of
cable television and other services; providing definitions; providing for the term, nature and
franchise area; providing for the payment of a franchise fee; providing for the terms, conditions,
and requirements relating to the construction, operation and maintenance of cable television
distribution networks; providing for the regulation of cable television distribution networks;
providing for rates and charges; providing for penalties and damages; providing for termination
of the franchise; and providing for the severability thereof. This chapter shall be known and
may be cited as the “Cable Television Distribution Network Regulatory Ordinance.”
112.02 DEFINITIONS. The following terms, phrases and words and their derivatives shall
have the meaning specified herein:
1. “FCC” means the Federal Communications Commission and any legally
appointed or elected successor.
2. “Franchisee” means any person receiving a franchise pursuant to this chapter
and its lawful successor, transferee or assignee.
3. “Cable television distribution network” means all of the component physical
operational and programming elements of any network of cables, optical electrical or
electronic equipment, including cable television, use of the purpose of transmission of
electrical impulses of television, radio or other intelligences, either analog or digital for
sale or use by the inhabitants of the City.
4. “Franchise” or “franchise ordinance” means an ordinance passed by the
Council, approved by the voters of the City, duly published as required by law,
authorizing a franchisee to construct and operate a cable television distribution network
along the public ways within all or a specified area in the City.
5. “Annual gross revenues” means only those revenues derived from the monthly
service charges paid by subscribers located within the City for regular cable television
reception service, which service includes only the transmission of broadcast signals and
the programming presented on the required access and originations channels, if any.
Gross subscriber revenues do not include any revenues received: (i) as reimbursement
of expense in the operation of any access channels; (ii) as advertising payments; (iii)
from the leasing of cable channels; (iv) from programs for which a per-channel or perprogram
charge is made; and (v) from furnishing other communications and nonbroadcast
services either directly or as a carrier for another party or any other income
derived from the system. Gross subscriber revenues also do not include revenues
CHAPTER 112 CABLE TELEVISION DISTRIBUTION
NETWORK REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
- 562 -
received as installation charges and fees for reconnections, inspection, repairs, or
modifications of any installations.
6. “Substantially completed” means the condition of an operation when sufficient
distribution facilities have been installed so as to permit the offering of “full network
services” to at least 90 percent of the dwelling units in the service area to which access
is reasonably and legally available.
7. “Street” includes all streets, roadways, highways, avenues, lanes, alleys, courts,
places, squares, curbs, sidewalks, easements, rights-of-way or other public ways in the
City which have been or may hereafter be dedicated and open to public use, or such
other public property so designated by law.
112.03 CABLE TELEVISION DISTRIBUTION NETWORK FRANCHISE.
1. Franchise Required. No person shall construct, install, maintain, or operate, on
or within any street, any equipment or facilities for the distribution of television signals
or radio signals or other intelligences, either analog or digital, over a cable television
distribution network to any subscriber unless a franchise authorizing the use of the
streets has first been obtained pursuant to the provision of this chapter and thereafter
only while said person is legally operating under the terms and provisions of said
franchise ordinance.
2. Election and Costs. In order for a nonexclusive franchise to be granted pursuant
to this chapter, an election must be held and a majority of those voting must vote in
favor of the granting of such franchise. The entire cost of the election together with all
printing and publishing costs relating thereto shall be paid by the applicant selected by
the Council to be franchisee, regardless of whether or not the applicant is granted a
franchise by said election.
3. Term of Franchise. The nonexclusive franchise and the rights, privileges,
obligations, and authority thereby granted shall take effect and be enforced as provided
herein within 30 days from and after final passage thereof by the qualified electors at a
special or general election thereon and shall continue in full force and effect for a term
of 25 years from date of acceptance, subject however to the right of the City to terminate
said franchise as provided herein.
4. Franchise Fee. The franchisee hereunder shall pay to the City an annual fee in
the amount equal to three percent of the total annual gross revenues. Such payment
shall be in addition to any other payment charges or fees owed to the City by the
franchisee and shall not be construed as payment in lieu of personal or real property
taxes levied by the State, County, or local authority. Sales taxes or other taxes levied
directly on a per-subscription basis and collected by the franchisee to be remitted by the
franchisee to a governmental agency shall be deducted from the gross subscriber
revenue prior to the computation of the annual franchise payment. The payment due
the City under the provisions of this subsection shall be computed and due not later than
90 days after the end of the City’s fiscal year and payable at the office of the City Clerk
during its regular business hours.
5. Franchise Nonexclusive. Any franchise granted hereunder shall not be
exclusive and the City reserves the right to grant a similar franchise to any other person
at any time.
6. Authority Granted. Any franchise granted hereunder shall give to the
franchisee the right and privilege to construct, erect, operate, modify, and maintain in,
CHAPTER 112 CABLE TELEVISION DISTRIBUTION
NETWORK REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
- 563 -
upon, along, above, over, and under the streets, such towers, antennas, cables, electronic
equipment, and other network appurtenances necessary for the operation of a cable
television distribution network in the City, provided, however, that the exercise of such
right and privilege shall not interfere with the use of such streets, and the City may
demand the removal of the foregoing as have been constructed by the franchisee at any
time the City believes that such is interfering with the use of the streets.
7. Privileges Subordinated. Any privilege claimed under a franchise by the
franchisee in any street or other public property shall be subordinate to any lawful
occupancy of the streets or other public property.
8. Franchise Held in Personal Trust. Any such franchise shall be a privilege to be
held in personal trust by the original franchisee. It cannot in any event be sold,
transferred, leased, assigned, or disposed of, in whole or in part, either by forced or
involuntary sale, or by voluntary sale, merger, consolidation, or otherwise, without prior
consent of the Council as provided herein.
9. Obligations of Franchisee. Any such franchise granted shall not relieve the
franchisee of any obligations involved in obtaining pole or conduit space from any
department of the City, utility company, or from others maintaining utilities in street.
10. Acceptance of Franchise. Written acceptance shall be filed by the franchisee
not later than 12:01 p.m. of the 30th day next following the franchise election granting
such franchise. In default of the filing of such written acceptance as herein required,
the franchisee shall be deemed to have rejected and repudiated the franchise and shall
be deemed to have forfeited the franchisee’s proposal bond or certified check in lieu
thereof. Thereafter, the acceptance of the franchisee shall not be received by the City
Clerk. The franchisee shall have no rights, remedies, or redress unless and until the
Council, by resolution, shall determine that such acceptance be received, and then upon
such terms and conditions as the Council may impose. In addition and within the same
30-day period, the grantee shall:
A. File a certificate of insurance as provided herein;
B. File a performance bond as provided herein unless such bond
requirement has been waived by the Council; and
C. Advise the City in writing of the franchisee’s address for mail and
official notifications from the City.
11. Franchise Territory. This nonexclusive franchise relates to any territorial limits
of or within the City as designated by the Council and to any area henceforth added
thereto during the term of this nonexclusive franchise.
12. Abandonment of Service. After franchisee has established service pursuant to
this chapter in the franchise area, such service shall not be suspended or abandoned in
the whole of or any part of the franchise area unless the suspension or abandonment is
authorized by the Council.
112.04 SYSTEM.
1. Network Description. The cable television distribution network permitted to
be installed herein shall:
CHAPTER 112 CABLE TELEVISION DISTRIBUTION
NETWORK REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
- 564 -
A. Be operationally capable of relaying to subscriber terminals whose
television and radio broadcast signals for the carriage of which the franchisee
is now or hereafter authorized by the Federal Communications Commission;
B. Provide at least two dedicated, noncommercial access channels for use
by the educational and governmental agencies within the City;
C. Have a minimum capacity of 20 channels.
2. Emergency Alert Override. The franchisee shall incorporate into its facilities
the capability for an emergency override audio alert whereby a designee of the City, in
times of emergency, may introduce an audio message on all cable television distribution
network channels simultaneously.
112.05 INSTALLATION, OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE.
1. Regulatory Jurisdiction and Procedures.
A. The Council shall have continuing regulatory jurisdiction and primary
supervision over the operation of any franchise granted hereunder. However,
it is recognized that the daily routine, administrative responsibilities and
supervision of the franchise should be entrusted to the City Manager.
B. The Council does hereby designate the City Manager to exercise the
City’s continuing regulatory and supervisory jurisdiction over the franchisee
and, in this regard, the City Manager shall have the following responsibilities
and duties (as set out in this chapter) and such other responsibilities and duties
that the City may assign and delegate.
2. Construction Schedules.
A. Permits. Within 90 days after the effective date of a franchise grant,
the franchisee shall file with the appropriate governmental authorities, and with
the necessary utility companies, all initial papers, applications, contracts and
other documents necessary to permit the commencement of construction and
operation of the cable television distribution network and shall thereafter make
diligent efforts to obtain the proper execution and delivery of such documents
and any amendments thereto. The franchisee shall report to the City every 90
days of its progress in obtaining necessary permits, contracts and other
necessary documents as contemplated above.
B. Target Dates. Within three months after accepting the franchise,
franchisee shall furnish the City with a construction schedule and map setting
forth target dates by areas for commencement of service to subscribers. The
schedule and map shall be updated whenever substantial changes become
necessary.
C. Commencement of Construction. Within 90 days after the effective
date of FCC certification, providing all other necessary permits and contracts
have been obtained and entered into, the franchisee shall commence the
construction of the cable television distribution network and pursue such with
reasonable diligence.
D. Commencement of Operation. Within 12 months after the
commencement of construction, the franchisee shall commence operation.
CHAPTER 112 CABLE TELEVISION DISTRIBUTION
NETWORK REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
- 565 -
E. Substantial Completion of Construction. Within 36 months after the
commencement of construction, the franchisee shall have substantially
completed construction.
F. Delays and Extension of Time Provision. The franchisee shall file with
the City a formal written request for any extensions of time as per the above
construction schedules. Such request shall give documented evidence of
reasons for delay or extensions sought. The Council after reviewing such
requests may grant a revised construction schedule, the same to be appropriate
and reasonable.
3. Construction Standards.
A. All construction practices shall be in accordance with all applicable
sections of the Occupational Safety and Health Act of 1970 and any
amendments thereto as well as all state and local codes are applicable.
B. All installation of electronic equipment shall be of a permanent nature,
durable and installed in accordance with all applicable codes, including the
provisions of the Sioux Center electrical code.
C. All of the franchisee’s plant and equipment, including but not limited
to the antenna site, head-end and distribution system, towers, house
connections, structures, poles, wire, cable, coaxial cable, fixtures and
appurtenances shall be installed, located, erected, constructed, reconstructed,
replaced, removed, repaired, maintained and operated in accordance with good
engineering practices, performed by experienced maintenance and construction
personnel so as not to endanger or interfere with the safety of any persons or
property, or to interfere with improvements the City may deem proper to make,
or to interfere in any manner with the rights of any property owner, or to
unnecessarily hinder or obstruct pedestrian or vehicular traffic on municipal
properties.
D. The franchisee shall at all times employ ordinary care and shall install
and maintain in use commonly accepted methods and devices preventing
failures and accidents which are likely to cause damage, injury or nuisance to
the public.
4. Standards of Operation.
A. The franchisee shall maintain an office in the City which shall be open
during all usual business hours, have a locally listed telephone, and be so
operated that complaints and requests for repairs or adjustments may be
received at any time. In addition, the franchisee shall maintain a convenient
office in the City, open during normal business hours, for the receipt of sums
due by its subscribers and shall provide for regular billing of accounts.
B. The Council may adopt rules, regulations, and standards governing the
operation of a cable television distribution network in the City. Such rules,
regulations, and standards shall apply to and govern the operations of the
franchisee.
C. The technical standards for operation of the network shall, in addition
to meeting the requirements specified in the franchise ordinance, conform to all
requirements specified by this chapter and any other standards or codes as may
be adopted by the City.
CHAPTER 112 CABLE TELEVISION DISTRIBUTION
NETWORK REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
- 566 -
D. Any damage caused by the franchisee’s negligence shall be repaired
fully by the franchisee.
5. Records, Reports and Maps to be filed with City.
A. An “Annual Report of Cable Television Systems” (FCC Form 325,
Schedules 1, 2, 3 and 4).
B. The franchisee’s current schedule of charges, contract or application
forms for regular subscriber service, policy regarding the processing of
subscriber complaints, delinquent subscriber disconnect and reconnect
procedures, and any other terms and conditions adopted as the franchisee’s
policy in connection with its subscribers shall be filed with the City and
conspicuously posted in the franchisee’s local office.
C. The performance bond or a certified copy thereof and written evidence
of payment of required premium.
D. All policies of insurance or certified copies thereof and a certificate of
insurance as provided.
E. All rules, regulations, terms and conditions which it has adopted for the
conduct of its business.
F. A full and complete set of plans, records and “as-built” maps showing
the exact location of all cable television distribution network equipment
installed or in use in the City, exclusive of subscriber service drops.
6. Street, Right-of-Way and Easement Occupancy.
A. The facilities of the franchisee shall be installed underground in all
areas of the City and shall utilize existing conduits and other facilities when
possible, and shall not construct or install any new, different or additional
owned property until the written approval of the City is obtained, which
approval shall not be unreasonably withheld.
B. A franchisee shall notify the City at least two days prior to the intention
of the franchisee to commence any construction in any streets. The City shall
cooperate with the franchisee in granting any permits required, providing such
grant and subsequent construction by the franchisee shall not unduly interfere
with the use of such streets and that proposed construction shall be done in
accordance with the pertinent provisions of this Code of Ordinances.
C. All transmission lines, equipment, and structures shall be so installed
and located as to cause minimum interference with the rights and reasonable
convenience of property owners and at all times shall be kept and maintained
in a safe, adequate, and substantial condition, and in good order and repair. The
franchisee shall at all times employ ordinary care and shall install and maintain
and use commonly accepted methods and devices for preventing failures and
accidents which are likely to cause damage, injuries or nuisances to the public.
Suitable barricades, flags, lights or other devices shall be used at such times
and places as are reasonable required for the safety of all members of the public.
Such devices shall be used in accordance with the Uniform Traffic Manual.
D. Franchisee shall, at its own expense and in a manner approved by the
City, restore to City standards and specifications any damage or disturbance
caused to the public way as a result of its operations or construction on its
CHAPTER 112 CABLE TELEVISION DISTRIBUTION
NETWORK REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
- 567 -
behalf. Franchisee shall guarantee and maintain such restoration during the
term of the franchise against defective materials or workmanship.
E. Whenever, in case of fire or other disaster, it becomes necessary in the
judgment of the City Manager or the Fire Chief or Police Chief to remove or
damage any of the franchisee’s facilities, no charge shall be made by the
franchisee against the City for restoration and repair, unless such acts amount
to gross negligence by the City.
F. The franchisee, at the franchisee’s expense, shall locate (and expose if
necessary), protect, support, temporarily disconnect, relocate, or remove any
property of franchisee when, in the opinion of the City Manager, the same is
required by reason of traffic conditions, public safety, street vacation, freeway
or street construction, change or establishment of street grade, installation of
sewers, drains, water pipes, natural gas lines, power line, signal line,
transportation facilities, tracks, or any other types of structure or improvements
by governmental agencies whether acting in a governmental or a proprietary
capacity, or any other structure or public improvement, including but not
limited to movement of buildings, urban renewal and redevelopment, and any
general program under which the City shall undertake to cause all such
properties to be located beneath the surface of the ground. The franchisee shall,
in all cases, have the privilege, subject to the corresponding obligations, to
abandon any of its property in place. Nothing hereunder shall be deemed a
taking of the property of franchisee and franchisee shall not be entitled to a
surcharge by reason of anything hereunder.
G. The franchisee shall make no road cuts or curb cuts unless absolutely
necessary, but only after written permission has been given by the City
Manager.
H. The City shall notify the franchisee at least 10 days prior to the
intention of the City to commence any construction in the streets that requires
the relocation of franchisee’s lines, wires or other network appurtenances so as
not to interfere with such construction.
7. Fees, Rates and Charges.
A. A franchisee shall maintain and file with the City a complete and
current schedule of subscriber rates including all fees and charges for services.
B. The franchisee shall receive no consideration whatsoever for or in
connection with its provision of service to its subscribers other than as filed
with the Council.
C. Any request for an increase in rates by the franchisee shall be submitted
to the City Manager and shall be supported by a showing of increased costs for
the existing or any proposed services.
D. The City Council may amend this chapter whenever necessary to
enable the franchisee or the City to take advantage of any developments in the
field of transmission of communications signals which will afford it an
opportunity to more effectively, efficiently, or economically serve its
customers; provided, however, this section shall not be construed to require the
City to make any such amendment.
CHAPTER 112 CABLE TELEVISION DISTRIBUTION
NETWORK REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
- 568 -
112.06 RULES GOVERNING FRANCHISE.
1. Employment Practices.
A. In the carrying out of the construction, maintenance, and operation of
the cable television distribution network, the franchisee shall not discriminate
against any employee or applicant for employment because of race, creed, age,
color, sex, national origin or handicap.
B. The franchisee shall, in all solicitations of advertisements for
employees placed by or on behalf of the franchisee, state that all qualified
applicants will receive consideration for employment without regard to race,
creed, color, sex, national origin, age or handicap.
C. The franchisee shall incorporate the foregoing requirements in all of its
contracts for work relative to construction, maintenance and operation of the
cable television distribution network, other than contracts for standard
commercial supplies or raw materials, and shall require all of its contractors for
such work to incorporate such requirements in all subcontracts for such work.
2. Liability arid Indemnification.
A. Franchisee shall indemnify and hold harmless the City, its officers,
boards, commissions, agents, and employees against and from any and all
claims, demands, causes of actions, actions, suits, proceedings, damages
(including but not limited to damages to City property and damages arising out
of copyright infringements and damages arising out of any failure by franchisee
to secure consents from the owners, authorized distributors, or licensees of
programs to be delivered by franchisee’s cable television distribution network),
costs or liabilities (including costs or liabilities of the City with respect to its
employees) of every kind and nature whatsoever, including but not limited to
damages for injury or death or damage to person or property, and regardless of
the merit of any of the same, and against all liability to others, and against any
loss, cost and expense resulting or arising out of any of the same, including any
attorney fees, accountant fees, expert witness or consultant fees, court costs,
per diem expense, traveling and transportation expense, or other costs or
expense arising out of or pertaining to the exercise or the enjoyment of any
franchise hereunder by franchisee or the granting thereof by the City. Provided,
the franchisee shall not be liable for any such damages, fees, or expenses where
any lawsuit is based on the actions or omissions of the City but not on any act
or omission by the franchisee.
B. The franchisee shall maintain a general comprehensive liability
insurance policy in the amount of:
(1) $1,000,000.00 for bodily injury or death to any one person,
within the limit, however, of $2,000,000.00 for bodily injury or death
resulting from any one accident.
(2) $1,000,000.00 for property damage resulting from any one
accident.
(3) Worker’s compensation insurance in such coverage as may be
required by the worker’s compensation insurance and safety laws of
the State of Iowa and amendments thereto.
CHAPTER 112 CABLE TELEVISION DISTRIBUTION
NETWORK REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
- 569 -
3. Performance Bond. The franchisee shall maintain throughout the period of
network construction, a faithful performance bond in favor of the City, with a surety
approved by the City in the penal sum total of $100,000.00 conditioned upon the faithful
performance by the franchisee of its obligations under this chapter and the franchise.
When the network construction is substantially completed as defined herein, the penal
sum total of the performance bond shall be reduced to $25,000.00 through the remainder
of the term of the franchise, or any renewal or extension thereof and upon the further
condition that in the event the franchisee shall fail to comply with any law, ordinance
or regulation governing the franchise, there shall be recoverable, jointly and severally,
from the principal and surety of the bond, any damages or loss suffered by the City as
a result, including the full amount of any compensation, indemnification, or cost of
removal or abandonment of any property of the franchisee, plus a reasonable allowance
for attorney’s fees and costs, up to the full amount of the bond. The City, at its sole
discretion, may at any time subsequent to completion of construction, waive the
requirement of the franchisee to maintain said bond. The bond shall contain the
following endorsement: “It is hereby understood and agreed that this bond may not be
cancelled or the intention not to renew be stated until 30 days after receipt by the City
by registered mail a written notice of such intent to cancel or not to renew.”
4. Permits and Authorizations. The franchisee shall diligently apply for all
necessary permits and authorizations required in the conduct of its business, and shall
diligently pursue the acquisition thereof, including necessary easements, and necessary
authorizations from the Federal Aviation Agency to construct such receiving antenna
towers as may be required, and any necessary authorizations or waivers from the
Federal Communications Commission.
5. Rights Reserved to the City.
A. Nothing herein shall be deemed or construed to impair or affect, in any
way, to any extent, the right of the City to acquire the property of the franchisee,
either by purchase or through the exercise of the right of eminent domain, at a
fair and just value, which shall not include any amount for the franchise itself
or for any of the rights or privileges granted, and nothing herein contained shall
be construed to contract away or to modify or abridge, whether for a term or in
perpetuity, the City’s right of eminent domain.
B. There is hereby reserved to the City every right and power which is
required to be herein reserved or provided by any law, and the franchisee, by
its acceptance of the franchise, agrees to be bound thereby and to comply with
any action or requirements of the city in its exercise of such rights or power,
heretofore or hereafter enacted or established.
C. Neither the granting of any franchise nor any provision hereof shall
constitute a waiver or bar to the exercise of any governmental right or power of
the City.
D. If the Federal Communications Commission or any other Federal or
State body or agency shall now or hereafter exercise any paramount jurisdiction
over the subject matter of any franchise granted under this chapter, then to the
extent such jurisdiction shall preempt or preclude the exercise of like
jurisdiction by the City the jurisdiction of the City shall cease and no longer
exist. The preemption or preclusion of the exercise by the City of any of its
police power shall not diminish, impair, alter, or affect any contractual benefit
to the City.
CHAPTER 112 CABLE TELEVISION DISTRIBUTION
NETWORK REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
- 570 -
E. At the expiration of the term for which a franchise is granted or upon
the termination and cancellation as provided therein, the City reserves the right
to require the franchisee to remove at its own expense any and all portions of
the cable television distribution network from the public ways within the City.
6. Forfeiture or Revocation. The City reserves the right to revoke any franchise
granted hereunder and rescind all rights and privileges associated with the franchise in
the following circumstances, each of which shall represent a default and breach under
this chapter and the franchise ordinance:
A. If the franchisee should default in the performance of any of its material
obligations under this chapter or under the franchise ordinance or under such
documents, contracts and other terms and provisions entered into by and
between the City and the franchisee;
B. If the franchisee should fail to provide or maintain in full force and
effect, the liability and indemnification coverage or the performance bond as
required herein;
C. If any court of competent jurisdiction, the FCC, or any State regulatory
body, by rules, decision, or other action, determines that any material provision
of the franchise documents, including this chapter, is invalid or unenforceable
prior to the commencement of construction of the network by the franchisee;
D. If the franchisee should frequently violate any orders or rulings of any
regulatory body having jurisdiction over the franchisee relative to this
franchise;
E. If the franchisee fails to receive necessary FCC certification;
F. If the franchisee ceases to provide services for any reason within the
control of the franchisee over the cable television distribution network. The
franchisee shall not be declared at fault or be subject to any sanction under any
provision of this chapter in any case in which performance of any such
provision is prevented for reasons beyond the franchisee’s control. A fault shall
not be deemed to be beyond the franchisee’s control if committed by a
corporation or other business entity in which the franchisee holds a controlling
interest, whether held directly or indirectly.
112.07 PROCEDURE PRIOR TO REVOCATION.
1. Upon the occurrences of any of the events enumerated in subsection 6 of
Section 112.07, the Council may, after hearing, upon 30 days’ written notice to the
franchisee citing the reasons alleged to constitute cause for revocation, set a reasonable
time in which the franchisee must remedy the cause. If, during the 30-day period, the
cause shall be cured to the satisfaction of the City, the City may declare the notice to be
null and void. If the franchisee fails to remedy the cause within the time specified, the
Council may revoke the franchise. In any event, before a franchise may be terminated,
the franchisee must be provided with an opportunity to be heard before the Council.
2. When a franchise is not renewed because of a material breach of the franchise,
the franchisee shall first offer the cable television distribution network for sale to the
City at a fair and just market value, which value shall not include any value for the
franchise itself or for any of the rights or privileges granted by the City. In the event
the determination of the fair market value cannot be negotiated or determined, said
CHAPTER 112 CABLE TELEVISION DISTRIBUTION
NETWORK REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
- 571 -
value shall be determined by an impartial arbitration procedure pursuant to State law,
wherein the franchisee and the City shall each choose an arbitrator and the arbitrators
chosen shall choose the third, and the valuation determined by said arbitrators shall be
considered the fair market value at which the system will be offered to the City. The
determination of the value of the system shall be decreased by the amount of any
damages sustained by the City in connection with revocation or expiration, including
without limitation payment made by the City to another person or entity to operate the
cable television distribution network for a temporary period after revocation. The cost
of the arbitration procedure shall be shared equally by the City and the franchisee. The
City shall have 90 days to exercise the right of first refusal to purchase the network,
said 90 days commencing on the day the fair market value of the system is determined
either through negotiation or the arbitration procedure. If the City does not exercise its
option to purchase, and the network is not sold to another operator who has obtained a
franchise from the City in a reasonable period of time, the franchisee, upon request of
the City, shall promptly remove all its plant, structures and equipment; provided,
however, in the event the City determines not to exercise its right of first refusal, it shall
not unreasonably refuse to renew or grant a cable television franchise during a
reasonable interim. While transfer of the system and franchise is being negotiated,
arranged, or ordered, the franchisee may be required to continue service to the public
unless for reasons beyond control of the franchisee said operation will be economically
unfeasible to the franchisee.
3. Restoration of Property. In removing its plant, structures and equipment, the
franchisee shall refill at its own expense, any excavation that shall be made by it and
shall leave all public ways and places in as good condition as that prevailing prior to
the company’s removal of its equipment and appliances, without affecting the electric
or telephone cables, wires or attachments. The City shall inspect and approve the
condition of the public ways and public places and cables, wires, attachments after
removal. Liability insurance and indemnity provided in this chapter and the
performance bond and security fund also provided in this chapter shall continue in full
force and effect during the period of removal.
4. Restoration by City; Reimbursement of Cost. In the event of a failure by the
franchisee to complete any work required above, or any work required by City law or
ordinance within the time established and to the satisfaction of the City, the City may
cause such work to be done and the franchisee shall reimburse the City the cost thereof
within 30 days after receipt of an itemized statement of such costs.
112.08 INTERCONNECTION.
1. No prohibition of Interconnection. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed
so as to prohibit the franchisee from interconnecting its network with other similar
contiguous networks either in the City or in other municipalities, counties or states.
However, any revenues derived therefrom shall be equitably allocated in the calculation
of “annual gross revenues.”
2. Study Required for Interconnection. The franchisee shall, if requested by the
City, conduct a technical and economic feasibility study of any interconnection
requested by the City. The study shall be presented to the City and in the event that the
study shows such interconnection to be feasible, the franchisee shall, if so instructed by
the City, accomplish said interconnection. In the event that the study indicates technical
feasibility only, the City may elect, but at its sole discretion, to arrange for
CHAPTER 112 CABLE TELEVISION DISTRIBUTION
NETWORK REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
- 572 -
compensation to be paid to the franchisee, in an amount sufficient to assure an economic
“break even” by the franchisee and so order the interconnection.
112.09 PROTECTION OF PRIVACY.
1. Use of Data From Subscriber. A franchisee shall not initiate or use any form,
procedure, or device for procuring information or data from subscriber’s terminal by
use of the network, without prior valid authorization from each subscriber so affected.
2. Subscriber Lists. The franchisee shall not, without prior valid authorization
from each subscriber so affected, provide any list designating subscribers’ names or
addresses to the City or any other party.
3. Subscriber Transmission. Franchisee shall not permit the installation of any
special terminal equipment in any subscriber’s premises that will permit transmission
from subscriber’s premises of two-way services utilizing aerial, visual or digital signals
without first obtaining written permission of the subscriber.
[The next page is 631]
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
- 631 -
CHAPTER 120
LIQUOR LICENSES AND WINE AND BEER PERMITS
120.01 License or Permit Required 120.04 Action by Council
120.02 General Prohibition 120.05 Prohibited Sales and Acts
120.03 Investigation 120.06 Amusement Devices
120.01 LICENSE OR PERMIT REQUIRED. No person shall manufacture for sale,
import, sell, or offer or keep for sale, alcoholic liquor, wine, or beer without first securing a
liquor control license, wine permit, or beer permit in accordance with the provisions of Chapter
123 of the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.22, 123.122 & 123.171)
120.02 GENERAL PROHIBITION. It is unlawful to manufacture for sale, sell, offer or
keep for sale, possess or transport alcoholic liquor, wine or beer except upon the terms,
conditions, limitations, and restrictions enumerated in Chapter 123 of the Code of Iowa, and a
license or permit may be suspended or revoked or a civil penalty may be imposed for a violation
thereof.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.2, 123.39 & 123.50)
120.03 INVESTIGATION. Upon receipt of an application for a liquor license, wine or beer
permit, the Clerk may forward it to the Police Chief, who shall then conduct an investigation
and submit a written report as to the truth of the facts averred in the application. The Fire Chief
may also inspect the premises to determine if they conform to the requirements of the City. The
Council shall not approve an application for a license or permit for any premises that does not
conform to the applicable law and ordinances, resolutions and regulations of the City.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.30)
120.04 ACTION BY COUNCIL. The Council shall either approve or disapprove the
issuance of the liquor control license or retail wine or beer permit and shall endorse its approval
or disapproval on the application, and thereafter the application, necessary fee and bond, if
required, shall be forwarded to the Alcoholic Beverages Division of the State Department of
Commerce for such further action as is provided by law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.32[2])
120.05 PROHIBITED SALES AND ACTS. A person or club holding a liquor license or
retail wine or beer permit and the person’s or club’s agents or employees shall not do any of the
following:
1. Sell, dispense, or give to any intoxicated person, or one simulating intoxication,
any alcoholic liquor, wine, or beer.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49[1])
2. Sell or dispense any alcoholic beverage, wine, or beer on the premises covered
by the license or permit, or permit its consumption thereon between the hours of 2:00
a.m. and 6:00 a.m. on a weekday, and between the hours of 2:00 a.m. on Sunday and
6:00 a.m. on the following Monday; however, a holder of a license or permit granted
the privilege of selling alcoholic liquor, beer, or wine on Sunday may sell or dispense
alcoholic liquor, beer, or wine between the hours of 8:00 a.m. on Sunday and 2:00 a.m.
CHAPTER 120 LIQUOR LICENSES AND WINE AND BEER PERMITS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
- 632 -
of the following Monday, and further provided that a holder of any class of liquor
control license or the holder of a class “B” beer permit may sell or dispense alcoholic
liquor, wine, or beer for consumption on the premises between the hours of 8:00 a.m.
on Sunday and 2:00 a.m. on Monday when that Monday is New Year’s Day and beer
for consumption off the premises between the hours of 8:00 a.m. on Sunday and 2:00
a.m. on the following Monday when that Sunday is the day before New Year’s Day.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49[2b and 2k] & 123.150)
3. Sell alcoholic beverages, wine, or beer to any person on credit, except with a
bona fide credit card. This provision does not apply to sales by a club to its members,
to sales by a hotel or motel to bona fide registered guests or to retail sales by the
managing entity of a convention center, civic center, or events center.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49[2c])
4. Employ a person under eighteen (18) years of age in the sale or serving of
alcoholic liquor, wine, or beer for consumption on the premises where sold.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49[2f])
5. In the case of a retail beer or wine permittee, knowingly allow the mixing or
adding of alcohol or any alcoholic beverage to beer, wine, or any other beverage in or
about the permittee’s place of business.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49[2i])
6. Knowingly permit any gambling, except in accordance with Iowa law, or
knowingly permit any solicitation for immoral purposes, or immoral or disorderly
conduct on the premises covered by the license or permit.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49[2a])
7. Knowingly permit or engage in any criminal activity on the premises covered
by the license or permit.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49[2j])
8. Keep on premises covered by a liquor control license any alcoholic liquor in
any container except the original package purchased from the Alcoholic Beverages
Division of the State Department of Commerce and except mixed drinks or cocktails
mixed on the premises for immediate consumption.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49[2d])
9. Reuse for packaging alcoholic liquor or wine any container or receptacle used
originally for packaging alcoholic liquor or wine; or adulterate, by the addition of any
substance, the contents or remaining contents of an original package of an alcoholic
liquor or wine; or knowingly possess any original package that has been reused or
adulterated.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49[2e])
10. Allow any person other than the licensee, permittee, or employees of the
licensee or permittee to use or keep on the licensed premises any alcoholic liquor in any
bottle or other container that is designed for the transporting of such beverages, except
as allowed by State law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49[2g])
11. Sell, give, possess, or otherwise supply a machine that is used to vaporize an
alcoholic beverage for the purpose of being consumed in a vaporized form.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49[21])
CHAPTER 120 LIQUOR LICENSES AND WINE AND BEER PERMITS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
- 633 -
12. Permit or allow any person under twenty-one (21) years of age to remain upon
licensed premises unless over fifty percent (50%) of the dollar volume of the business
establishment comes from the sale and serving of prepared foods. This provision does
not apply to holders of a class “C” beer permit only.
120.06 AMUSEMENT DEVICES. The following provisions pertain to electronic or
mechanical amusement devices, which are allowed only in premises with a liquor control license
or beer permit as specifically authorized in Section 99B.10 of the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 99B.10C)
1. As used in this section an “electronic or mechanical amusement device” means
a device that awards a prize redeemable for merchandise on the premises where the
device is located and which is required to be registered with the Iowa Department of
Inspection and Appeals.
2. It is unlawful for any person under the age of twenty-one (21) to participate in
the operation of an electrical or mechanical amusement device.
3. It is unlawful for any person owning or leasing an electrical or mechanical
amusement device, or an employee of a person owning or leasing an electrical or
mechanical amusement device, to knowingly allow a person under the age of 21 to
participate in the operation of an electrical or mechanical amusement device.
4. It is unlawful for any person to knowingly participate in the operation of an
electrical or mechanical amusement device with a person under the age of 21.
CHAPTER 120 LIQUOR LICENSES AND WINE AND BEER PERMITS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
- 634 -
° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° °
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
- 635 -
CHAPTER 121
CIGARETTE AND TOBACCO PERMITS
121.01 Definitions 121.06 Refunds
121.02 Permit Required 121.07 Persons Under Legal Age
121.03 Application 121.08 Self-Service Sales Prohibited
121.04 Fees 121.09 Permit Revocation
121.05 Issuance and Expiration
121.01 DEFINITIONS. For use in this chapter the following terms are defined:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 453A.1)
1. “Carton” means a box or container of any kind in which ten or more packages
or packs of cigarettes or tobacco products are offered for sale, sold, or otherwise
distributed to consumers.
2. “Cigarette” means any roll for smoking made wholly or in part of tobacco, or
any substitute for tobacco, irrespective of size or shape and irrespective of tobacco or
any substitute for tobacco being flavored, adulterated or mixed with any other
ingredient, where such roll has a wrapper or cover made of paper or any other material.
However, this definition is not to be construed to include cigars.
3. “Package” or “pack” means a container of any kind in which cigarettes or
tobacco products are offered for sale, sold, or otherwise distributed to consumers.
4. “Place of business” means any place where cigarettes or tobacco products are
sold, stored or kept for the purpose of sale or consumption by a retailer.
5. “Retailer” means every person who sells, distributes or offers for sale for
consumption, or possesses for the purpose of sale for consumption, cigarettes,
irrespective of the quantity or amount or the number of sales or who engages in the
business of selling tobacco products to ultimate consumers.
6. “Self-service display” means any manner of product display, placement, or
storage from which a person purchasing the product may take possession of the product,
prior to purchase, without assistance from the retailer or employee of the retailer, in
removing the product from a restricted access location.
7. “Tobacco products” means the following: cigars; little cigars; cheroots;
stogies; periques; granulated, plug cut, crimp cut, ready rubbed and other smoking
tobacco; snuff; 635avendish; plug and twist tobacco; fine-cut and other chewing
tobaccos; shorts or refuse scraps, clippings, cuttings and sweepings of tobacco; and
other kinds and forms of tobacco prepared in such manner as to be suitable for chewing
or smoking in a pipe or otherwise, or for both chewing and smoking, but does not mean
cigarettes.
121.02 PERMIT REQUIRED.
1. Cigarette Permits. It is unlawful for any person, other than a holder of a retail
permit, to sell cigarettes at retail and no retailer shall distribute, sell, or solicit the sale
of any cigarettes within the City without a valid permit for each place of business. The
CHAPTER 121 CIGARETTE AND TOBACCO PERMITS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
- 636 -
permit shall, at all times, be publicly displayed at the place of business so as to be easily
seen by the public and the persons authorized to inspect the place of business.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 453A.13)
2. Tobacco Permits. It is unlawful for any person to engage in the business of a
retailer of tobacco products at any place of business without first having received a
permit as a tobacco products retailer for each place of business owned or operated by
the retailer.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 453A.47A)
A retailer who holds a cigarette permit is not required to also obtain a tobacco permit. However,
if a retailer only holds a cigarette permit and that permit is suspended, revoked, or expired, the
retailer shall not sell any cigarettes or tobacco products during such time.
121.03 APPLICATION. A completed application on forms furnished by the State
Department of Revenue or on forms made available or approved by the Department and
accompanied by the required fee shall be filed with the Clerk. Renewal applications shall be
filed at least five (5) days prior to the last regular meeting of the Council in June. If a renewal
application is not timely filed, and a special Council meeting is called to act on the application,
the costs of such special meeting shall be paid by the applicant.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 453A.13 & 453A.47A)
121.04 FEES. The fee for a retail cigarette or tobacco permit shall be as follows:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 453A.13 & 453A.47A)
FOR PERMITS GRANTED DURING: FEE:
July, August or September $ 75.00
October, November or December $ 56.25
January, February or March $ 37.50
April, May or June $ 18.75
121.05 ISSUANCE AND EXPIRATION. Upon proper application and payment of the
required fee, a permit shall be issued. Each permit issued shall describe clearly the place of
business for which it is issued and shall be nonassignable. All permits expire on June 30 of
each year. The Clerk shall submit a duplicate of any application for a permit, and any permit
issued, to the Alcoholic Beverages Division of the Department of Commerce within thirty (30)
days of issuance.
121.06 REFUNDS. A retailer may surrender an unrevoked permit and receive a refund from
the City, except during April, May, or June, in accordance with the schedule of refunds as provided
in Section 453A.13 or 453A.47A of the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, 453A.13 & 453A.47A)
121.07 PERSONS UNDER LEGAL AGE. No person shall sell, give, or otherwise supply
any tobacco, tobacco products, or cigarettes to any person under eighteen (18) years of age. The
provision of this section includes prohibiting a minor from purchasing cigarettes or tobacco
products from a vending machine. If a retailer or employee of a retailer violates the provisions
of this section, the Council shall, after written notice and hearing, and in addition to the other
penalties fixed for such violation, assess the following:
1. For a first violation, the retailer shall be assessed a civil penalty in the amount
of three hundred dollars ($300.00). Failure to pay the civil penalty as ordered under
CHAPTER 121 CIGARETTE AND TOBACCO PERMITS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
- 637 -
this subsection shall result in automatic suspension of the permit for a period of fourteen
(14) days.
2. For a second violation within a period of two years, the retailer shall be assessed
a civil penalty in the amount of one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00) or the
retailer’s permit shall be suspended for a period of thirty (30) days. The retailer may
select its preference in the penalty to be applied under this subsection.
3. For a third violation within a period of three years, the retailer shall be assessed
a civil penalty in the amount of $1,500.00 and the retailer’s permit shall be suspended
for a period of 30 days.
4. For a fourth violation within a period of three years, the retailer shall be
assessed a civil penalty in the amount of $1,500.00 and the retailer’s permit shall be
suspended for a period of sixty (60) days.
5. For a fifth violation with a period of four years, the retailer’s permit shall be
revoked.
The Clerk shall give ten (10) days’ written notice to the retailer by mailing a copy of the notice
to the place of business as it appears on the application for a permit. The notice shall state the
reason for the contemplated action and the time and place at which the retailer may appear and
be heard.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 453A.2, 453A.22 and 453A.36[6])
121.08 SELF-SERVICE SALES PROHIBITED. Beginning January 1, 1999, except for
the sale of cigarettes through a cigarette vending machine as provided in Section 453A.36(6) of
the Code of Iowa, a retailer shall not sell or offer for sale cigarettes or tobacco products, in a
quantity of less than a carton, through the use of a self-service display.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 453A.36A)
121.09 PERMIT REVOCATION. Following a written notice and an opportunity for a
hearing, as provided by the Code of Iowa, the Council may also revoke a permit issued pursuant
to this chapter for a violation of Division I of Chapter 453A of the Code of Iowa or any rule
adopted thereunder. If a permit is revoked, a new permit shall not be issued to the permit holder
for any place of business, or to any other person for the place of business at which the violation
occurred, until one year has expired from the date of revocation, unless good cause to the
contrary is shown to the Council. The Clerk shall report the revocation or suspension of a retail
permit to the Alcoholic Beverages Division of the Department of Commerce within thirty (30)
days of the revocation or suspension.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 453A.22)
CHAPTER 121 CIGARETTE AND TOBACCO PERMITS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
- 638 -
° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° °
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
- 639 -
CHAPTER 122
PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS AND TRANSIENT
MERCHANTS
122.01 Purpose 122.11 Loud Speaking Systems and Other Noise
122.02 Definitions 122.12 Location in Streets and Congested Areas
122.03 License Required 122.13 Revocation of License
122.04 Application for License 122.14 Hearing
122.05 License Fees 122.15 Record and Determination
122.06 Bond Required 122.16 Appeal
122.07 License Issued 122.17 Effect of Revocation
122.08 Display of License 122.18 Rebates
122.09 License Not Transferable 122.19 License Exemptions
122.10 Time Restriction 122.20 Charitable and Nonprofit Organizations
122.01 PURPOSE. The purpose of this chapter is to protect residents of the City against
fraud, unfair competition, and intrusion into the privacy of their homes by licensing and
regulating peddlers, solicitors, and transient merchants.
122.02 DEFINITIONS. For use in this chapter the following terms are defined:
1. “Peddler” means any person carrying goods or merchandise who sells or offers
for sale for immediate delivery such goods or merchandise from house to house or upon
the public street.
2. “Solicitor” means any person who solicits or attempts to solicit from house to
house or upon the public street any contribution or donation or any order for goods,
services, subscriptions or merchandise to be delivered at a future date.
3. “Transient merchant” means any person who engages in a temporary or
itinerant merchandising business and in the course of such business hires, leases or
occupies any building or structure whatsoever, or who operates out of a vehicle that is
parked anywhere within the City limits. Temporary association with a local merchant,
dealer, trader or auctioneer, or conduct of such transient business in connection with, as
a part of, or in the name of any local merchant, dealer, trader, or auctioneer does not
exempt any person from being considered a transient merchant.
122.03 LICENSE REQUIRED. Any person engaging in peddling, soliciting or in the
business of a transient merchant in the City without first obtaining a license as herein provided
is in violation of this chapter.
122.04 APPLICATION FOR LICENSE. An application in writing shall be filed with the
City Clerk for a license under this chapter. Such application shall set forth the applicant’s name,
permanent and local address, and business address if any. The application shall also set forth
the applicant’s employer, if any, and the employer’s address, the nature of the applicant’s
business, the last three places of such business and the length of time sought to be covered by
the license.
122.05 LICENSE FEES. A license fee of $25.00 per week shall be paid to the City Clerk
prior to the issuance of any license.
CHAPTER 122 PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS AND TRANSIENT MERCHANTS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
- 640 -
122.06 BOND REQUIRED. Before a license under this chapter is issued to a transient
merchant, an applicant shall provide to the Clerk evidence that the applicant has filed a bond
with the Secretary of State in accordance with Chapter 9C of the Code of Iowa.
122.07 LICENSE ISSUED. The Clerk shall refer the application to the Police Chief for
review and if the Police Chief finds the application is completed in conformance with the
requirements of this chapter and the facts stated therein are found to be correct, the Police Chief
shall recommend to the Clerk to issue the license. Upon payment of the license fee, the shall
issue a license immediately.
122.08 DISPLAY OF LICENSE. Each solicitor or peddler shall keep such license in
possession at all times while doing business in the City and shall, upon the request of prospective
customers, exhibit the license as evidence of compliance with all requirements of this chapter.
Each transient merchant shall display publicly such merchant’s license in the merchant’s place
of business.
122.09 LICENSE NOT TRANSFERABLE. Licenses issued under the provisions of this
chapter are not transferable in any situation and are to be applicable only to the person filing the
application.
122.10 TIME RESTRICTION. All peddler’s and solicitor’s licenses shall provide that said
licenses are in force and effect only between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. No sales are
allowed on Sunday.
122.11 LOUD SPEAKING SYSTEMS AND OTHER NOISES. No licensee hereunder
(or any person on behalf of the licensee) shall shout, blow on a horn, ring a bell, or use any loud
speaking system, amplifying system, or any other noise-making device for the purpose of
advertising or otherwise announcing or proclaiming the licensee’s wares or business activities,
except as the same may be permissible under any other ordinance of the City or statute of the
State.
122.12 LOCATION IN STREETS OR CONGESTED AREAS. No licensee (or any
person acting for or on behalf of the licensee) shall have any right to any location in the public
streets or ways or upon any public property, nor shall such person be permitted to operate in any
congested area where such operations might impede or inconvenience the public. The judgment
of a police officer exercised in good faith shall be deemed conclusive as to whether the area is
congested or the public inconvenienced.
122.13 REVOCATION OF LICENSE. Following a written notice and an opportunity for
a hearing, the City Clerk may revoke any license issued pursuant to this chapter for the following
reasons:
1. Fraudulent Statements. The licensee has made fraudulent statements in the
application for the license or in the conduct of the business.
2. Violation of Law. The licensee has violated this chapter or has otherwise
conducted the business in an unlawful manner.
3. Felony Conviction. Conviction of the licensee or any person acting on behalf
of the licensee or a felony or for any misdemeanor involving moral turpitude.
CHAPTER 122 PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS AND TRANSIENT MERCHANTS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
- 641 -
4. Endangered Public Welfare, Health, or Safety. The licensee has conducted the
business in an unlawful manner or in such manner as to endanger the public welfare,
safety, order, or morals.
The City Clerk shall send the written notice to the licensee at the licensee’s local address. The
notice shall contain particulars of the complaints against the licensee, the ordinance provisions
or State statutes allegedly violated, and the date, time, and place for hearing on the matter.
122.14 HEARING. The City Clerk shall conduct a hearing at which both the licensee and
any complainants shall be present to determine the truth of the facts alleged in the complaint
and notice. Should the licensee, or authorized representative, fail to appear without good cause,
the City Clerk may proceed to a determination of the complaint.
122.15 RECORD AND DETERMINATION. The City Clerk shall make and record
findings of fact and conclusions of law, and shall revoke a license only when upon review of
the entire record the City Clerk finds clear and convincing evidence of substantial violation of
this chapter or State law.
122.16 APPEAL. If the City Clerk revokes or refuses to issue a license, the City Clerk shall
make a part of the record the reasons therefor. The licensee, or the applicant, shall have a right
to a hearing before the Council at its next regular meeting. The Council may reverse, modify,
or affirm the decision of the City Clerk by a majority vote of the Council members present and
the City Clerk shall carry out the decision of the Council.
122.17 EFFECT OF REVOCATION. Revocation of any license shall bar the licensee
from being eligible for any license under this chapter for a period of one year from the date of
the revocation.
122.18 REBATES. Any licensee, except in the case of a revoked license, shall be entitled
to a rebate of part of the fee paid if the license is surrendered before it expires. The amount of
the rebate shall be determined by dividing the total license fee by the number of days for which
the license was issued and then multiplying the result by the number of full days not expired.
In all cases, at least five dollars ($5.00) of the original fee shall be retained by the City to cover
administrative costs.
122.19 LICENSE EXEMPTIONS. The following are excluded from the application of this
chapter.
1. Newspapers. Persons delivering, collecting for, or selling subscriptions to
newspapers.
2. Club Members. Members of local civic and service clubs, Boy Scout, Girl
Scout, 4-H Clubs, Future Farmers of America, and similar organizations.
3. Local Residents and Farmers. Local residents and farmers who offer for sale
their own products or local citizens selling garden or farm products at any local farmers
market authorized by the City.
4. Students. Students representing the Sioux Center School District conducting
projects sponsored by organizations recognized by the school.
5. Route Sales. Route delivery persons who only incidentally solicit additional
business or make special sales.
CHAPTER 122 PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS AND TRANSIENT MERCHANTS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
- 642 -
6. Resale or Institutional Use. Persons customarily calling on businesses or
institutions for the purposes of selling products for resale or institutional use.
122.20 CHARITABLE AND NONPROFIT ORGANIZATIONS. Authorized
representatives of charitable or nonprofit organizations operating under the provisions of
Chapter 504 of the Code of Iowa desiring to solicit money or to distribute literature are exempt
from the operation of Sections 122.04 and 122.05. All such organizations are required to submit
in writing to the Clerk the name and purpose of the cause for which such activities are sought,
names and addresses of the officers and directors of the organization, the period during which
such activities are to be carried on, and whether any commissions, fees or wages are to be
charged by the solicitor and the amount thereof. If the Clerk finds that the organization is a
bona fide charity or nonprofit organization, the Clerk shall issue, free of charge, a license
containing the above information to the applicant. In the event the Clerk denies the exemption,
the authorized representatives of the organization may appeal the decision to the Council, as
provided in Section 122.16 of this chapter.
[The next page is 675]
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
- 675 -
CHAPTER 135
STREET USE AND MAINTENANCE
135.01 Removal of Warning Devices 135.08 Burning Prohibited
135.02 Obstructing or Defacing 135.09 Excavations
135.03 Placing Debris On 135.10 Maintenance of Parking or Terrace
135.04 Playing In 135.11 Failure to Maintain Parking or Terrace
135.05 Traveling on Barricaded Street or Alley 135.12 Dumping of Snow
135.06 Use for Business Purposes 135.13 Driveway Culverts
135.07 Washing Vehicles
135.01 REMOVAL OF WARNING DEVICES. It is unlawful for a person to willfully
remove, throw down, destroy or carry away from any street or alley any lamp, obstruction, guard
or other article or things, or extinguish any lamp or other light, erected or placed thereupon for
the purpose of guarding or enclosing unsafe or dangerous places in said street or alley without
the consent of the person in control thereof.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.1)
135.02 OBSTRUCTING OR DEFACING. It is unlawful for any person to obstruct, deface
or injure any street or alley in any manner.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.1)
135.03 PLACING DEBRIS ON. It is unlawful for any person to throw or deposit on any
street or alley any glass, glass bottle, nails, tacks, wire, cans, trash, garbage, rubbish, litter, offal,
leaves, grass or any other debris likely to be washed into the storm sewer and clog the storm
sewer, or any substance likely to injure any person, animal or vehicle.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.369)
135.04 PLAYING IN. It is unlawful for any person to coast, sled, or play games on streets
or alleys, except in the areas blocked off by the City for such purposes.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[2])
135.05 TRAVELING ON BARRICADED STREET OR ALLEY. It is unlawful for any
person to travel or operate any vehicle on any street or alley temporarily closed by barricades,
lights, signs, or flares placed thereon by the authority or permission of any City official, police
officer or member of the Fire Department.
135.06 USE FOR BUSINESS PURPOSES. It is unlawful to park, store or place,
temporarily or permanently, any machinery or junk or any other goods, wares, and merchandise
of any kind upon any street or alley for the purpose of storage, exhibition, sale or offering same
for sale, without permission of the Council.
135.07 WASHING VEHICLES. It is unlawful for any person to use any public sidewalk,
street, or alley for the purpose of washing or cleaning any automobile, truck equipment, or any
vehicle of any kind when such work is done for hire or as a business. This does not prevent any
person from washing or cleaning his or her own vehicle or equipment when it is lawfully parked
in the street or alley.
CHAPTER 135 STREET USE AND MAINTENANCE
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
- 676 -
135.08 BURNING PROHIBITED. No person shall burn any trash, leaves, rubbish, or other
combustible material in any curb and gutter or on any paved or surfaced street or alley.
135.09 EXCAVATIONS. No person shall dig, excavate, or in any manner disturb any street,
parking or alley except in accordance with City specifications on file in the City offices.
135.10 MAINTENANCE OF PARKING OR TERRACE. It shall be the responsibility of
the abutting property owner to maintain all property outside the lot and property lines and inside
the curb lines upon the public streets, except that the abutting property owner shall not be
required to remove diseased trees or dead wood on the publicly owned property or right-of-way.
Maintenance includes timely mowing, trimming trees and shrubs, and picking up litter.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[2c])
135.11 FAILURE TO MAINTAIN PARKING OR TERRACE. If the abutting property
owner does not perform an action required under the above section within a reasonable time,
the City may perform the required action and assess the cost against the abutting property for
collection in the same manner as a property tax.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[2e])
135.12 DUMPING OF SNOW. It is unlawful for any person to throw, push, or place or
cause to be thrown, pushed or placed, any ice or snow from private property, sidewalks, or
driveways onto the traveled way of a street or alley so as to obstruct gutters, or impede the
passage of vehicles upon the street or alley or to create a hazardous condition therein; except
where, in the cleaning of large commercial drives in the business district it is absolutely
necessary to move the snow onto the street or alley temporarily, such accumulation shall be
removed promptly by the property owner or agent. Arrangements for the prompt removal of
such accumulations shall be made prior to moving the snow. It is also illegal to pile snow in
piles so high on the right-of-way so as to obstruct the view of motorists on the street.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[2])
135.13 DRIVEWAY CULVERTS. The property owner shall, at the owner’s expense,
install any culvert deemed necessary under any driveway or any other access to the owner’s
property, and before installing a culvert, permission must first be obtained from the City. In the
event repairs are needed at any time with respect to culverts, it shall be the responsibility of the
property owner to make such repairs, and, in the event the owner fails to do so, the City shall
have the right to make the repairs. If the property owner fails to reimburse the City for the cost
of said repairs, the cost shall be certified to the County Treasurer and specially assessed against
the property as by law provided.
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
- 677 -
CHAPTER 136
SIDEWALK REGULATIONS
136.01 Purpose 136.10 Failure to Repair or Barricade
136.02 Definitions 136.11 Interference with Sidewalk Improvements
136.03 Removal of Snow, Ice, and Accumulations 136.12 Encroaching Steps
136.04 Responsibility for Maintenance 136.13 Openings and Enclosures
136.05 City May Order Repairs 136.14 Fires or Fuel on Sidewalks
136.06 Sidewalk Construction Ordered 136.15 Defacing
136.07 Permission Required 136.16 Debris on Sidewalks
136.08 Sidewalk Standards 136.17 Merchandise Display; Outdoor Seating
136.09 Barricades and Warning Lights 136.18 Sales Stands
136.01 PURPOSE. The purpose of this chapter is to enhance safe passage by citizens on
sidewalks, to place the responsibility for the maintenance, repair, replacement, or reconstruction
of sidewalks upon the abutting property owner and to minimize the liability of the City.
136.02 DEFINITIONS. For use in this chapter the following terms are defined:
1. “Broom finish” means a sidewalk finish that is made by sweeping the sidewalk
when it is hardening.
2. “Established grade” means that grade established by the City for the particular
area in which a sidewalk is to be constructed.
3. “One-course construction” means that the full thickness of the concrete is
placed at one time, using the same mixture throughout.
4. “Owner” means the person owning the fee title to property abutting any
sidewalk and includes any contract purchaser for purposes of notification required
herein. For all other purposes, “owner” includes the lessee, if any.
5. “Portland cement” means any type of cement except bituminous cement.
6. “Sidewalk” means all permanent public walks in business, residential or
suburban areas.
7. “Sidewalk improvements” means the construction, reconstruction, repair,
replacement, or removal, of a public sidewalk and/or the excavating, filling or
depositing of material in the public right-of-way in connection therewith.
8. “Wood float finish” means a sidewalk finish that is made by smoothing the
surface of the sidewalk with a wooden trowel.
136.03 REMOVAL OF SNOW, ICE, AND ACCUMULATIONS. It is the responsibility
of the abutting property owners to remove snow, ice, and accumulations promptly from
sidewalks. If a property owner does not remove the snow or ice within a period of ten hours
after the accumulation on the sidewalk, the City may do so and assess the costs against the
property owner for collection in the same manner as a property tax.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[2b & e])
136.04 RESPONSIBILITY FOR MAINTENANCE. It is the responsibility of the abutting
property owners to maintain in a safe and hazard-free condition any sidewalk outside the lot and
property lines and inside the curb lines or traveled portion of the public street.
CHAPTER 136 SIDEWALK REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
- 678 -
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[2c])
136.05 CITY MAY ORDER REPAIRS. If the abutting property owner does not maintain
sidewalks as required, the Council may serve notice on such owner, by certified mail, requiring
the owner to repair, replace or reconstruct sidewalks within a reasonable time and if such action
is not completed within the time stated in the notice, the Council may require the work to be
done and assess the costs against the abutting property for collection in the same manner as a
property tax.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[2d & e])
136.06 SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION ORDERED. The Council may order the
construction of permanent sidewalks upon any street or court in the City and may specially
assess the cost of such improvement to abutting property owners in accordance with the
provisions of Chapter 384 of the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.38)
136.07 PERMIT REQUIRED. No person shall remove, reconstruct, or install a sidewalk
unless such person has obtained permission from the City and has agreed that said removal,
reconstruction, or installation will comply with all ordinances and requirements of the City for
such work.
136.08 SIDEWALK STANDARDS. Sidewalks repaired, replaced, or constructed under the
provisions of this chapter shall be of the following construction and meet the following
standards:
1. Cement. Portland cement shall be the only cement used in the construction and
repair of sidewalks.
2. Construction. Sidewalks shall be of one-course construction.
3. Sidewalk Base. Concrete may be placed directly on compact and well-drained
soil. Where soil is not well drained, a three-inch sub-base of compact, clean, coarse
gravel or sand shall be laid. The adequacy of the soil drainage is to be determined by
the City.
4. Sidewalk Bed. The sidewalk bed shall be so graded that the constructed
sidewalk will be at established grade.
5. Length, Width and Depth. Length, width and depth requirements are as
follows:
A. Residential sidewalks shall be at least four (4) feet wide and four (4)
inches thick.
B. All sidewalks throughout the Business District shall be constructed
from lot line to the curb line unless the location of the sidewalk is varied by an
appropriate resolution of the Council upon application by the landowner.
C. Driveway areas shall be not less than six (6) inches in thickness.
6. Location. Residential sidewalks shall be located with the inner edge (edge
nearest the abutting private property) on the property line, unless the Council establishes
a different distance due to special circumstances.
7. Grade. Curb tops shall be on level with the centerline of the street, which shall
be the established grade.
CHAPTER 136 SIDEWALK REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
- 679 -
8. Elevations. The street edge of a sidewalk shall be at an elevation even with the
curb at the curb or not less than one-half (½) inch above the curb for each foot between
the curb and the sidewalk.
9. Slope. All sidewalks shall slope one-quarter (¼) inch per foot toward the curb.
10. Finish. All sidewalks shall be finished with a “broom” or “wood float” finish.
11. Curb Ramps and Sloped Areas for Persons with Disabilities. If a street, road,
or highway is newly built or reconstructed, a curb ramp or sloped area shall be
constructed or installed at each intersection of the street, road, or highway with a
sidewalk or path. If a sidewalk or path is newly built or reconstructed, a curb ramp or
sloped area shall be constructed or installed at each intersection of the sidewalk or path
with a street, highway, or road. Curb ramps and sloped areas that are required pursuant
to this subsection shall be constructed or installed in compliance with applicable Federal
requirements adopted in accordance with the Federal Americans with Disabilities Act,
including (but not limited to) the guidelines issued by the Federal Architectural and
Transportation Barriers Compliance Board.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 216C.9)
136.09 BARRICADES AND WARNING LIGHTS. Whenever any material of any kind
is deposited on any street, avenue, highway, passageway or alley when sidewalk improvements
are being made or when any sidewalk is in a dangerous condition, it shall be the duty of all
persons having an interest therein, either as the contractor or the owner, agent, or lessee of the
property in front of or along which such material may be deposited, or such dangerous condition
exists, to put in conspicuous places at each end of such sidewalk and at each end of any pile of
material deposited in the street, a sufficient number of approved warning lights or flares, and to
keep them lighted during the entire night and to erect sufficient barricades both at night and in
the daytime to secure the same. The party or parties using the street for any of the purposes
specified in this chapter shall be liable for all injuries or damage to persons or property arising
from any wrongful act or negligence of the party or parties, or their agents or employees or for
any misuse of the privileges conferred by this chapter or of any failure to comply with provisions
hereof.
136.10 FAILURE TO REPAIR OR BARRICADE. It is the duty of the owner of the
property abutting the sidewalk, or the owner’s contractor or agent, to notify the City
immediately in the event of failure or inability to make necessary sidewalk improvements or to
install or erect necessary barricades as required by this chapter.
136.11 INTERFERENCE WITH SIDEWALK IMPROVEMENTS. No person shall
knowingly or willfully drive any vehicle upon any portion of any sidewalk or approach thereto
while in the process of being improved or upon any portion of any completed sidewalk or
approach thereto, or shall remove or destroy any part or all of any sidewalk or approach thereto,
or shall remove, destroy, mar or deface any sidewalk at any time or destroy, mar, remove or
deface any notice provided by this chapter.
136.12 ENCROACHING STEPS. It is unlawful for a person to erect or maintain any stairs
or steps to any building upon any part of any sidewalk without permission by resolution of the
Council.
CHAPTER 136 SIDEWALK REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
- 680 -
136.13 OPENINGS AND ENCLOSURES. It is unlawful for a person to:
1. Stairs and Railings. Construct or build a stairway or passageway to any cellar
or basement by occupying any part of the sidewalk, or to enclose any portion of a
sidewalk with a railing without permission by resolution of the Council.
2. Openings. Keep open any cellar door, grating, or cover to any vault on any
sidewalk except while in actual use with adequate guards to protect the public.
3. Protect Openings. Neglect to properly protect or barricade all openings on or
within six (6) feet of any sidewalk.
136.14 FIRES OR FUEL ON SIDEWALKS. It is unlawful for a person to make a fire of
any kind on any sidewalk or to place or allow any fuel to remain upon any sidewalk.
136.15 DEFACING. It is unlawful for a person to scatter or place any paste, paint, or writing
on any sidewalk.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.1)
136.16 DEBRIS ON SIDEWALKS. It is unlawful for a person to throw or deposit on any
sidewalk any glass, nails, glass bottle, tacks, wire, cans, trash, garbage, rubbish, litter, offal, or
any other debris, or any substance likely to injure any person, animal, or vehicle.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[2])
136.17 MERCHANDISE DISPLAY; OUTDOOR SEATING. It is unlawful for a person
to place upon or above any sidewalk, any goods or merchandise for sale or for display in such
a manner as to interfere with the free and uninterrupted passage of pedestrians on the sidewalk;
in no case shall more than three (3) feet of the sidewalk next to the building be occupied for
such purposes. This provision also applies to tables and chairs set out for outdoor seating, and
such tables and chairs shall be removed each day when the business is closed.
136.18 SALES STANDS. It is unlawful for a person to erect or keep any vending machine
or stand for the sale of fruit, vegetables or other substances or commodities on any sidewalk
without first obtaining a written permit from the Council.
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
- 681 -
CHAPTER 137
VACATION AND DISPOSAL OF STREETS
137.01 Vacation of Streets 137.02 Easements
137.01 VACATION OF STREETS. Streets, alleys or any public grounds shall be vacated
in accordance with the provisions of Section 364.12 of the Code of Iowa.
137.02 EASEMENTS. When any street, alley, portion thereof, or any public grounds are
vacated, any easement located therein shall be reserved by the City and remain in full force,
unless otherwise stipulated by the Council.
EDITOR’S NOTE
The following ordinances (as well as all other ordinances vacating streets, alleys, and/or public grounds
which are not codified herein) are specifically saved from repeal and remain in full force and effect.
ORDINANCE NO. ADOPTED ORDINANCE NO. ADOPTED
SC-0-03-04 June 1, 2004
SC-0-02-07 April 11, 2007
CHAPTER 137 VACATION AND DISPOSAL OF STREETS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
- 682 -
° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° °
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
- 683 -
CHAPTER 138
STREET GRADES
138.01 Established Grades 138.02 Record Maintained
138.01 ESTABLISHED GRADES. The grades of all streets, alleys and sidewalks, which
have been heretofore established by ordinance, are hereby confirmed, ratified, and established
as official grades.
138.02 RECORD MAINTAINED. The Clerk shall maintain a record of all established
grades and furnish information concerning such grades upon request.
EDITOR’S NOTE
The following ordinances (as well as all other ordinances establishing street and/or sidewalk grades which
are not codified herein) are specifically saved from repeal and remain in full force and effect.
ORDINANCE NO. ADOPTED ORDINANCE NO. ADOPTED
SC-O-02-99 February 1, 1999
SC-O-03-00 April 24, 2000
SC-O-01-01 March 1, 2001
SC-O-03-02 September 3, 2002
SC-O-08-07 November 27, 2007
SC-O-01-09 January 29, 2009
SC-O-02-11 2011
SC-O-06-12 July 2, 2012
SC-O-02-13 January 23, 2013
SC-O-07-15 December 15, 2015
SC-O-06-16 December 7, 2016
CHAPTER 138 STREET GRADES
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
- 684 -
[The next page is 701]
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
- 701 -
CHAPTER 140
USE OF PUBLIC PROPERTY AND RIGHT-OF-WAY
140.01 Purpose and Rule of Interpretation 140.08 Construction and Excavation by Holders of
140.02 License and Lease Required a License or Lease
140.03 Compensation Required 140.09 City Construction and Paving
140.04 Limit on Term 140.10 Design Notice to City
140.05 Placement of Facilities 140.11 Above-Ground Cables, Wires, Conduits and Poles
140.06 Indemnification and Bond 140.12 Assignment
140.07 Regulation by City 140.13 Forfeiture
140.14 Application
140.01 PURPOSE AND RULE OF INTERPRETATION. The Council finds it necessary
for the City to establish uniform rules and controls to ensure public safety and provide efficient
delivery of services by the City and others wishing to utilize streets and other public property
for the delivery of utility or other services, in order to protect public and private investment,
ensure orderly use of public property and ensure the health, safety, and welfare of the
population, to provide for the regulation and administration of the public streets and other public
property, and secure the rights of the City to a return on its investment in public property. This
chapter is to be interpreted in light of these findings for the benefit of the public and users of the
streets and other public property.
140.02 LICENSE AND LEASE REQUIRED. No person or other entity shall use the
public right-of-way or other public property without first obtaining a license and lease from the
City. An application for a license and lease shall be filed with the City Manager on a form
provided by the City and shall include at a minimum the following information: the name,
address, and telephone number of a person whom the City may notify or contact at any time
concerning the license or lease; an engineering site plan showing the proposed location of the
facilities including any manholes, the size, type and proposed depth of any conduit or other
enclosures; and any additional information the City may require. All license and leases required
by this section shall be granted by the Council.
140.03 COMPENSATION REQUIRED. No license or lease for the use of public right-ofway
or other public property shall be granted without requiring the grantee thereof to pay
reasonable and competitively neutral compensation for the nonexclusive use of public right-ofway
or other public property. Compensation will be as follows:
1. License Charge. A license charge will be assessed on all licenses for space in
the right-of-way. This license charge is a one-time charge for the term of the license or
lease. Payment is expected when the license or lease is signed; however, a payment
schedule may be entered into between the City and the licensee. If the license is
renewed, a new license charge will be assessed. The fee is based on administrative and
development costs associated with the processing and issuance of licenses and is
established at $500.00.
2. Lease Charge. All new and renewed leases shall be assessed an annual charge
of five percent (5%) of the gross receipts of customers within the City limits as allowed
by law. This charge reflects the actual costs the City incurs with acquiring and
maintaining the City’s right-of-ways.
CHAPTER 140 USE OF PUBLIC PROPERTY AND RIGHT-OF-WAY
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
- 702 -
3. Management Charge. An annual right-of-way management charge will be
assessed on July 1 of each year that the license or lease is in force unless the above lease
charge is applied. The charge is based on the number of linear feet of right-of-way
occupancy within the City right-of-way, and reflects the actual management cost the
City incurs while managing, mapping, locating, and subdividing the right-of-way. The
fee is established at $0.25 per linear foot.
4. Degradation Charge. In addition to the license, lease charge, and annual
management charge, any person or other entity shall pay a charge every time such
person’s facility requires excavation in the right-of-way/street. All street and sidewalk
crossings will be bored unless open excavation is authorized by the City representative.
However, if excavation of streets/sidewalks is necessary and approved, this charge will
cover costs for street and sidewalk degradation and future replacement, inspection, and
obstruction and routing of pedestrian and vehicle traffic. The charge is established at
twenty-five dollars ($25.00) per square yard. Streets/sidewalks are to be replaced
initially at the expense of the entity and approved by the City representative. All or part
of this charge may be waived if work is done in conjunction with City construction.
140.04 LIMIT ON TERM. No license or lease for use of the public right-of-way or other
public property shall be granted for a term exceeding five (5) years.
140.05 PLACEMENT OF FACILITIES. The facilities, fixtures, and equipment of the
distribution, transmission, or sale of any utility services, or services provided under license,
lease or easement, shall be placed and maintained so as not to unnecessarily or unreasonably
interfere with travel on the streets, highways, avenues, alleys, bridges and public places in the
City, nor shall such facilities, fixtures and equipment interfere with the proper use of the same,
including, but not limited to, ordinary drainage, or the functioning of sewers, underground pipe
or other property of the City. In the event that facilities, fixtures and equipment of any person
or other entity located within a public right-of-way must be relocated because of paving, road
construction or road reconstruction, sewer construction or sewer reconstruction, or the
construction or reconstruction of public drainage systems or similar public works or the
construction or reconstruction of the facilities of any City-owned utility, such relocation, at the
written request of the City, shall be completed by the owner of such facilities at the owner’s
cost. The City shall, upon request of any person or other entity holding a license or lease, review
any plans for the construction of facilities, fixtures and equipment within the public right-ofway
and advise the person or other entity of any conflict such construction may have with
planned or anticipated public improvements, but failure of the City to so advise such person or
other entity will not relieve the owner of such facilities of its obligations under this chapter.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, the City Manager may require placement of equipment or
facilities belonging to any holder of a license or lease be limited to locations designated by the
City Manager if such limitation is deemed to be necessary to protect the integrity of use of
present and future users of the public right-of-way or other public property. In addition, all
excavation or areas disturbed shall be brought back to original condition or better as determined
by the City representative.
140.06 INDEMNIFICATION AND BOND. The holder of any license or lease shall
indemnify and hold the City harmless at all times during the term of the license or lease from
and against all claims for injury or damage to any person or property, including payments under
worker’s compensation laws, caused by the construction, erection, operation or maintenance of
its facilities, fixtures or equipment, or the negligence of its contractors or its employees. In case
of any suit or action at law being commenced against the City, upon any claim for damage
CHAPTER 140 USE OF PUBLIC PROPERTY AND RIGHT-OF-WAY
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
- 703 -
arising out of any loss, injury or damage claimed to have been caused by any installation,
improvement, obstruction or excavation made or left in, under or upon such street, sidewalk,
alley or public place by the holder of a license or lease, its agents, contractors or employees,
upon being notified in writing by the City of such action or proceeding, the holder of said license
or lease; and if any judgment or decree shall in any such case be rendered against the City
therein, the holder of such license or lease shall assume, pay and satisfy such judgment or decree,
with the cost thereof. Immediately upon issuance of the license or lease, the holder of the license
or lease shall purchase general liability insurance. The amount of insurance shall be a minimum
of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) with a maximum deductible of five thousand dollars
($5,000.00) and provide the City with a 30-day notice of cancellation of this policy. The holder
of the license or lease shall file with the City Manager a certificate of insurance that clearly
discloses on its face coverage in conformity with these requirements and showing the City as
co-insured. Upon request of the City, the holder of the license or lease shall submit a certified
copy of the policy.
140.07 REGULATION BY THE CITY. The City reserves the right to make reasonable
general regulations for the use of streets and other public property, which regulations, unless
otherwise specifically provided, shall apply to any holder of a license or lease.
140.08 CONSTRUCTION AND EXCAVATION BY HOLDERS OF A LICENSE OR
LEASE. Authorization or a written permit shall be obtained from the City representative
whenever it becomes necessary for the holder of any license or lease to excavate in streets, rightof-
way, or public grounds of the City. The City’s requirement is to bore all streets and sidewalks
unless deemed impractical by the City Manager. Such permits shall state a particular part or
point of the street where the excavation is to be made and the length of time in which such
permit shall authorize the work to be done. All work shall be done according to City
specifications. An exception to a requirement for a permit shall be made in cases of emergency
involving public safety, in which case a permit will be obtained at the earliest opportunity after
the work has started. In making excavations in the streets, right-of-way, or public grounds, the
holder of a license or lease shall properly protect, according to safety standards generally
accepted at the time of placement, as may be determined from time to time by the City
representative, all excavations and obstructions by proper placement of shoring, surface plates,
barricades, warning lights, and such other or additional devices as circumstances may warrant.
If in the opinion of the City representative such excavation or obstruction is not properly and
safely protected, the City representative shall notify such holder of a license or lease who shall
immediately comply with such reasonable instructions. Immediately after use, any trenches for
excavations which the holder of a license or lease has opened shall be filled. However, no trench
or excavation in the streets, right-of-way, or public grounds shall be filled or covered without
giving the City the right and opportunity to inspect the same. If excavation is in a grassed area,
sod replacement will be required unless seeding is acceptable as determined by the City
representative. All backfilling in streets/sidewalks will be according to City specifications of at
least ninety-five percent (95%) compaction. Temporary street surfacing will be placed in such
excavations as soon as the same has been backfilled. Pavements, sidewalks, curbs and gutters,
or other portions of streets and rights-of-way or public places opened, disturbed or damaged
shall be promptly restored by saw cutting the edges of the existing surface and replaced with
like materials at the expense of the holder of the license or lease and left in as good condition
or better than before the opening, disturbance, or damage occurred. In the event like
replacement materials are not available, the holder of the license or lease shall notify the City
representative, who must approve the use of any alternate materials. In the event that the holder
of a license or lease fails to comply with the provisions of this section, after having been given
reasonable notice, the City may do such works as may be needed to properly repair such
CHAPTER 140 USE OF PUBLIC PROPERTY AND RIGHT-OF-WAY
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
- 704 -
pavements, sidewalks, curbs and gutters, or other portions of streets and public places and the
cost thereof shall be repaid to the City by the holder of the license or lease. In cases where a
cut or disturbance is made in a section of street paving or sidewalks, but causes greater
disturbance than to just the area cut, rather than replace only the area cut, the holder of a license
or lease shall replace that area as may be ordered by the City representative, which in no event
shall exceed the panel or panels disturbed.
140.09 CITY CONSTRUCTION AND PAVING. Whenever the City shall pave or repave
any street or sidewalk or change the grade line of any street or public place or construct or
reconstruct any conduit, water main service or water connection, sanitary sewer, storm sewer,
or other City-owned public works or City-owned utility, it shall be the duty of the holder of any
license or lease, when so ordered by the City, to relocate its service lines and other property in
the streets or other public places at its own expense so as to conform to the established grade or
line of such street or public place and so as not to interfere with the public improvements so
constructed or reconstructed. In the case of other public improvements, including (but not
limited to) urban renewal projects, the City may require the holder of a license or lease to
relocate its service lines and appurtenances in the streets at the owner’s expense. The City may
at its discretion assign personnel for inspection of excavation and related work being performed
by the holder of a license or lease. Should the holder of the license or lease fail or refuse to do
and perform the things provided in this section, the City may, after reasonable notice, perform
the work and charge the expense thereof to the holder of the license or lease and the holder of
the license or lease shall promptly pay said charges.
140.10 DESIGN NOTICE TO CITY. The holder of a license or lease shall promptly, upon
request, furnish the City representative a detailed map or maps, including (but not limited to)
dimensions of its distribution system and facilities both within the City limits and the area within
two (2) miles surrounding the City unless that area is within another City. The holder of a
license or lease shall thereafter update the map or maps at least annually or upon request,
showing all subsequent additions or deletions to the distribution system. Prior to any excavation
by the City or its agents, a representative must contact the holder of any license or lease
regarding current information on the location of underground lines or facilities in the area
concerned. The obligation to contact the holder of a license or lease under this section shall be
satisfied if contact is made with a corporation organized pursuant to Code of Iowa Chapter 480
or an entity with a similar function utilized by both the City and the company, currently the
Iowa One Call System.
140.11 ABOVE-GROUND CABLES, WIRES, CONDUITS AND POLES. All cables,
wires and conduits shall be placed underground in conformance with City standards as currently
practiced by the City.
140.12 ASSIGNMENT. No sale or assignment of any license or lease of the use of the
public right-of-way or other public property shall be effective until it is approved by the City
Council and until the holder thereof has filed in the office of the Clerk written notice of the
proposed sale, transfer, disposition, or assignment, such notice to clearly summarize the
proposed procedure and the terms and conditions thereof. Such approval by the City shall not
be unreasonably withheld. The proposed vendee, assignee, or lessee shall similarly file an
instrument, duly executed, reciting such proposal, accepting the terms of the license and lease
and agreeing to perform all of the conditions thereof.
140.13 FORFEITURE. The violation of any material portion of a license or lease by the
holder thereof or its successors or assigns, or its failure promptly to perform any of the
CHAPTER 140 USE OF PUBLIC PROPERTY AND RIGHT-OF-WAY
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
- 705 -
provisions of this chapter shall be cause for forfeiture of the license or lease and the termination
of all rights thereunder. Such forfeiture shall be accomplished by ordinance of the City after
written notice to the holder thereof and a continuation of the violation, failure, or default
specified in the notice for at least thirty (30) days from the date the notice was served.
140.14 APPLICATION. This chapter shall apply to all licenses and leases granted by the
City.
CHAPTER 140 USE OF PUBLIC PROPERTY AND RIGHT-OF-WAY
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
- 706 -
° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° °
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
- 707 -
CHAPTER 141
SUBSURFACE MOISTURE DRAINAGE REGULATIONS
141.01 Application 141.06 Emergency Conditions
141.02 Definition 141.07 Future Subdivisions
141.03 Prohibited Acts 141.08 Sanitary Sewer
141.04 Notice of Prohibited Discharge 141.09 Additional Rules
141.05 Alternatives to Discharge Onto Public Areas
141.01 APPLICATION. The provisions of this chapter apply to all subsurface or subsoil
drainage or discharge from buildings or other structures, whether new or existing.
141.02 DEFINITION. “Subsurface or subsoil drainage system” includes but is not limited
to drainage tiles, footing drains, drywell seepage pits, sump pumps, and any other structures or
systems collecting subsoil or subsurface moisture for drainage, pumping, discharge. or removal
to another location.
141.03 PROHIBITED ACTS.
1. No water collected by a subsurface or subsoil drainage system shall be
discharged onto a public street, sidewalk, or alley, or onto any surface adjacent to a
public street, sidewalk, or alley so as to permit the water discharged to drain upon a
public street, sidewalk, or alley, if such discharge results in a buildup of ice, or presence
or growth of moss, algae, or other vegetative growth on the street or sidewalk upon
which the water is so discharged.
2. Any water collected by a subsurface or subsoil drainage system from any
structures or buildings constructed after the effective date of the ordinance codified in
this chapter shall be discharged into a drainage tile if such a tile exists adjacent to the
owner’s property.
141.04 NOTICE OF PROHIBITED DISCHARGE. If prohibited discharge occurs, the
City shall notify the offending property owner, specifying that prohibited discharge has
occurred, and notifying the property owner that the property owner has 14 days in which to
correct the problem and cease the prohibited discharge.
141.05 ALTERNATIVES TO DISCHARGE ONTO PUBLIC AREAS.
1. The property owner shall cease the prohibited discharge and implement other
methods of disposal of the subsurface or subsoil drainage system discharge within 14
days of the date of notice from the City as provided in Section 141.04 above. The
property owner may request an extension of time in which to implement a Cityapproved
plan for alternative discharge.
2. If any discharge of water from a subsurface or subsoil drainage system is
determined to cause a buildup of ice, or the presence or growth of moss, algae or other
vegetative growth in violation of Section 141.03 above, the offending property owner
may correct the problem discharge by such other suitable methods as may be available,
such as discharge onto the property owner’s property. The property owner may also
remedy the problem by discharging collected water from the subsurface or subsoil
drainage system into a drainage tile.
CHAPTER 141 SUBSURFACE MOISTURE DRAINAGE REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
- 708 -
3. If other acceptable remedies are not available, the property owner may request
that the City consider installing drainage tile. The cost for any and all present or future
property owners to connect to the City-installed drainage tile shall be $400.00 per
structure serviced by a subsurface or subsoil drainage system. In addition, the property
owner will be required to make and maintain the necessary connection of the discharge
to the City-installed drainage tile.
141.06 EMERGENCY CONDITIONS. No offense shall be charged and no fine levied
under this chapter for prohibited discharge during periods of community emergency caused by
extraordinarily high levels of precipitation.
141.07 FUTURE SUBDIVISIONS. All plans for new subdivisions within the City of Sioux
Center shall include adequate provisions for the disposal of subsurface or subsoil drainage
system discharge, such as drainage tile to accept discharge. Adequate plans shall not allow for
discharge onto any public street, sidewalk, or alley. The City Council will not approve or accept
any subdivision plans after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter which
does not make adequate provision for disposal of subsurface or subsoil drainage system
discharge. Any structures, facilities, or systems included to provide discharge or disposal shall
be installed at the developer’s expense.
141.08 SANITARY SEWER. Nothing in this section shall be construed to allow discharge
into the City’s sanitary sewer system in violation of Section 97.01 of this Code of Ordinances.
141.09 ADDITIONAL RULES. The City Council shall have authority to establish by
resolution such other and further rules and regulations as may be necessary to clarify and
implement the requirements of this chapter.
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
- 709 -
CHAPTER 142
CONTROL OF STORM WATER DRAINAGE
142.01 Purpose 142.04 When a Detention Variance is Granted
142.02 Three Levels of Surface Drainage Requirements 142.05 Building Construction
142.03 Acceptable Temporary Detention
142.01 PURPOSE. The purpose of this chapter is to set requirements for the control of storm
water drainage in connection with the construction of impervious surface area such as hard
surface parking, driveways, building roofs, etc. It must be recognized that the flow of surface
water is greatly increased with the construction of impervious surface area as compared to the
original vegetation ground cover. It must also be recognized that underground storm sewer
drainage is normally designed at a capacity level of two inches per hour. When rainfall events
exceed storm sewer capacity, swales or other surface grade provisions must be made around
buildings to accommodate excess runoff. This is imperative for lots that are located in a natural
water course.
142.02 THREE LEVELS OF SURFACE DRAINAGE REQUIREMENTS. There are
three levels of surface drainage requirements listed hereafter. The applicable level is based upon
the square feet of impervious surface on a contiguous site (not separated by public right-ofway).
The impervious surface area is the square footage of the proposed improvement or
combination of existing and proposed impervious surface area on the site. Credit will be
allowed if an existing impervious surface area is replaced with another surface within one year.
The replaced square footage will be deducted from the total square footage of the new
impervious area.
1. Level 1: 0 – 7,000 square feet of impervious surface area. Storm water runoff
to be reduced by using reasonably acceptable measures.
2. Level 2: 7,001 – 30,000 square feet impervious surface area. Allowable runoff
from the site shall be equal to that of a rainfall intensity of two inches per hour for
residential development. When the calculated allowable runoff is exceeded, storm
water detention must be designed with a minimum capacity of 50% of the difference
between the allowable runoff and a 100-year rainfall event. Also, the site plan must
clearly describe where storm water that is not detained will flow off the site. A partial
or full variance may be granted, with conditions, by the City only if detention is
determined to be unnecessary or impractical.
3. Level 3: Above 30,000 square feet impervious surface area. Allowable runoff
from the site shall be equal to that of a rainfall intensity of two inches per hour for
residential development. When the calculated allowable runoff is exceeded, storm
water detention must be designed with a minimum capacity of 100% of the difference
between the allowable runoff and a 100-year rainfall event. Also, the site plan must
clearly describe where storm water that is not detained will flow off the site. A partial
or full variance may be granted, with conditions, by the City only if detention is
determined to be unnecessary or impractical. Calculations must be certified by a
professional engineer licensed in the State of Iowa and familiar with storm water
detention calculations.
CHAPTER 142 CONTROL OF STORM WATER DRAINAGE
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
- 710 -
142.03 ACCEPTABLE TEMPORARY DETENTION. Acceptable temporary detention
may include but is not limited to: on- or off-site detention, on- or off-site absorption areas, joint
detention for multiple properties, and provisions made for entire subdivisions.
142.04 WHEN A DETENTION VARIANCE IS GRANTED. When a partial or full
detention variance is granted, a fee shall be applied to compensate the City for its costs of
making drainage improvements related to the additional surface runoff. The fee calculation
shall be six dollars ($6.00) per cubic foot of storm water detention excused by the variance. The
fee shall be paid upon completion of construction.
142.05 BUILDING CONSTRUCTION. When building construction takes place on
property located in or near a natural surface water drainage area or swale, provisions must be
made for excess surface water flows. Any building placed in such an area must be constructed
with adjoining grade at least 6? above the elevation of any downstream surface constraint. In
addition, adequate swale provisions must be constructed on the property to allow excess runoff
water to flow around the building without blocking or unreasonably restricting surface flows in
the natural drainage area.
[The next page is 725]
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
- 725 -
CHAPTER 145
DANGEROUS BUILDINGS
145.01 Enforcement Officer 145.05 Conduct of Hearing
145.02 General Definition of Unsafe 145.06 Posting of Signs
145.03 Unsafe Building 145.07 Right to Demolish; Municipal Infraction
145.04 Notice to Owner 145.08 Costs
145.01 ENFORCEMENT OFFICER. The Mayor or the City Code Enforcement Officer
is responsible for the enforcement of this chapter.
145.02 GENERAL DEFINITION OF UNSAFE. All buildings or structures that are
structurally unsafe or not provided with adequate egress, or which constitute a fire hazard, or
are otherwise dangerous to human life, or which in relation to existing use constitute a hazard
to safety or health, or public welfare, by reason of inadequate maintenance, dilapidation,
obsolescence, or abandonment, are, for the purpose of this chapter, unsafe buildings. All such
unsafe buildings are hereby declared to be public nuisances and shall be abated by repair,
rehabilitation, demolition, or removal in accordance with the procedure specified in this chapter.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 657A.1 & 364.12[3a])
145.03 UNSAFE BUILDING. “Unsafe building” means any structure or mobile home
meeting any or all of the following criteria:
1. Various Inadequacies. Whenever the building or structure, or any portion
thereof, because of (i) dilapidation, deterioration, or decay; (ii) faulty construction; (iii)
the removal, movement, or instability of any portion of the ground necessary for the
purpose of supporting such building; (iv) the deterioration, decay, or inadequacy of its
foundation; or (v) any other cause, is likely to partially or completely collapse.
2. Manifestly Unsafe. Whenever, for any reason, the building or structure, or any
portion thereof, is manifestly unsafe for the purpose for which it is being used.
3. Inadequate Maintenance. Whenever a building or structure, used or intended
to be used for dwelling purposes, because of dilapidation, decay, damage, faulty
construction, or otherwise, is determined by any health officer to be unsanitary, unfit
for human habitation or in such condition that it is likely to cause sickness or disease.
4. Fire Hazard. Whenever any building or structure, because of dilapidated
condition, deterioration, damage, or other cause, is determined by the Fire Marshal or
Fire Chief to be a fire hazard.
5. Abandoned. Whenever any portion of a building or structure remains on a site
after the demolition or destruction of the building or structure or whenever any building
or structure is abandoned for a period in excess of six (6) months so as to constitute
such building or portion thereof an attractive nuisance or hazard to the public.
145.04 NOTICE TO OWNER. The enforcement officer shall examine or cause to be
examined every building or structure or portion thereof reported as dangerous or damaged and,
if such is found to be an unsafe building as defined in this chapter, the enforcement officer shall
give to the owner of such building or structure written notice stating the defects thereof. This
notice may require the owner or person in charge of the building or premises, within forty-eight
CHAPTER 145 DANGEROUS BUILDINGS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
- 726 -
(48) hours or such reasonable time as the circumstances require, to commence either the
required repairs or improvements or demolition and removal of the building or structure or
portions thereof, and all such work shall be completed within ninety (90) days from date of
notice, unless otherwise stipulated by the enforcement officer. If necessary, such notice shall
also require the building, structure, or portion thereof to be vacated forthwith and not reoccupied
until the required repairs and improvements are completed, inspected, and approved by the
enforcement officer.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3h])
1. Notice Served. Such notice shall be served by sending by certified mail to the
owner of record, according to Section 364.12[3h] of the Code of Iowa, if the owner is
found within the City limits. If the owner is not found within the City limits such service
may be made upon the owner by registered mail or certified mail. The designated period
within which said owner or person in charge is required to comply with the order of the
enforcement officer shall begin as of the date the owner receives such notice.
2. Hearing. Such notice shall also advise the owner that he or she may request a
hearing before the Council on the notice by filing a written request for hearing within
the time provided in the notice.
145.05 CONDUCT OF HEARING. If requested, the Council shall conduct a hearing in
accordance with the following:
1. Notice. The owner shall be served with written notice specifying the date, time
and place of hearing.
2. Owner’s Rights. At the hearing, the owner may appear and show cause why
the alleged nuisance shall not be abated.
3. Determination. The Council shall make and record findings of fact and may
issue such order as it deems appropriate.†
145.06 POSTING OF SIGNS. The enforcement officer shall cause to be posted at each
entrance to such building a notice to read: “DO NOT ENTER. UNSAFE TO OCCUPY. CITY
OF SIOUX CENTER, IOWA.” Such notice shall remain posted until the required demolition,
removal or repairs are completed. Such notice shall not be removed without written permission
of the enforcement officer and no person shall enter the building except for the purpose of
making the required repairs or of demolishing the building.
145.07 RIGHT TO DEMOLISH; MUNICIPAL INFRACTION. In case the owner fails,
neglects, or refuses to comply with the notice to repair, rehabilitate, or to demolish and remove
the building or structure or portion thereof, the Council may order the owner of the building
prosecuted as a violator of the provisions of this chapter and may order the enforcement officer
to proceed with the work specified in such notice. A statement of the cost
† EDITOR’S NOTE: Suggested forms of notice and of a resolution and order of the Council for the
administration of this chapter are provided in the APPENDIX to this Code of Ordinances. Caution is
urged in the use of this procedure. We recommend you review the situation with your attorney before
initiating procedures and follow his or her recommendation carefully.
CHAPTER 145 DANGEROUS BUILDINGS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
- 727 -
of such work shall be transmitted to the Council. As an alternative to this action, the City may
utilize the municipal infraction process to abate the nuisance.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3h])
145.08 COSTS. Costs incurred under Section 145.07 shall be paid out of the City treasury.
Such costs shall be charged to the owner of the premises involved and levied as a special
assessment against the land on which the building or structure is located, and shall be certified
to the County Treasurer for collection in the manner provided for other taxes. In addition, the
City may take any other action deemed appropriate to recover costs incurred.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3h])
CHAPTER 145 DANGEROUS BUILDINGS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
- 728 -
[The next page is 735]
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
- 735 -
CHAPTER 147
RENTAL INSPECTION PROGRAM
147.01 Purpose 147.06 Transfer of Ownership
147.02 Definitions 147.07 Rental Inspection
147.03 Enforcement 147.08 Violations
147.04 Permit Required 147.09 Appeals
147.05 Expiration of Permit 147.10 Municipal Infraction
147.01 PURPOSE. It is the purpose of this ordinance to establish a rental housing inspection
program within the City of Sioux Center in order to protect, preserve and promote the physical
health and social well-being of the citizens. The purpose of this ordinance is also to prevent and
control the incidence of communicable diseases, to reduce environmental hazards to the health
of citizens, to regulate rental dwellings for the purpose of maintaining adequate sanitation and
safe conditions, and to protect the safety of citizens.
147.02 DEFINITIONS. The following definitions shall apply for purposes of this
ordinance:
1. “Rental unit” shall mean any building or portion thereof which is allowed to be
occupied by one or more persons as a dwelling space which includes one or more of the
following activities: sleeping, eating, or general habitation for which as a condition of
occupying the space, the renter or renters exchange cash or other valuable consideration
for the right to occupy the space.
2. “Exempt rentals” shall mean rental units that are inspected by a third-party
organization and are recognized by the City office.
3. “Newly constructed units” shall mean any unit that has been newly constructed
and been granted a Certificate of Occupancy within the last year.
4. “Major violation” shall mean a violation of the Property Maintenance Code that
if allowed to remain as found would constitute an immediate threat to the safety of those
living in the home. (Examples of major violations would include but are not limited to:
improper venting of combustion air, missing or inoperable smoke detectors, improper
electrical wiring or equipment, lack of or damaged water heater.)
5. “Tenant/renter” shall mean a person or group occupying a unit.
6. “Owner/landlord” shall mean person or persons who are responsible for the
renting or leasing or rental units and may include the owners of such property or their
designated representative.
7. “Owner representative” shall mean a person who is appointed by a rental
property owner to act as the property manager if the owner is unavailable. The owner’s
representative should be able to provide a City inspector access to the entire property
for inspections and be at least 18 years old.
147.03 ENFORCEMENT. The Code Enforcement Department is hereby designated as the
City department having responsibility to enforce this ordinance and the City Zoning
Administrator and Code Enforcement Director are hereby authorized to take actions as
necessary to enforce the provisions of this ordinance.
CHAPTER 147 RENTAL INSPECTION PROGRAM
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
- 736 -
147.04 PERMIT REQUIRED. Any person or entity wishing to engage in the renting of
dwelling units shall first obtain a rental permit from the City of Sioux Center. This permit shall
be made available to any authority or tenant upon request.
1. No person shall rent or lease any dwelling unit or any portion of a dwelling unit
until they have received a valid rental permit from the City of Sioux Center.
2. It is the responsibility of the property owner or owner’s representative to ensure
that the rental has been inspected and granted a rental permit. Failure to obtain a rental
permit or renew a rental permit will result in a notice being sent to the property owner
that the rental is not in compliance and may result in legal action.
3. Rental units that are found to be exempt rentals are not required to be registered
or inspected as part of the rental inspection program.
4. Rental units that qualify as newly constructed units must be registered before
they are occupied. The final inspection of the building permit process will serve as the
first inspection of the rental inspection program.
5. Failure to register any rental property within ninety (90) days of adoption of
this policy will result in the property being in violation and required to pay all fines or
municipal infraction penalties related the failure to register.
6. Rental permits will be valid for only one (1) property. For properties that have
multiple rental units the permit shall be valid for the entire property, but not more than
one (1) property.
7. A rental permit or the renewal of a rental permit may be denied or revoked if
the property owner has one or more rentals in which the property has been cited for
violations of the Sioux Center City Code. Prior violations that have been corrected shall
not be held against any rental. If the rental property has three (3) or more nuisance
violations within a twelve (12) month period, the City may choose to deny or revoke
the rental permit.
147.05 EXPIRATION OF PERMIT. Every rental permit issued by the Code Enforcement
Department under the provisions of this ordinance shall be valid for one (1) year. Permits that
are revoked as herein provided shall be null and void at time of revocation. Permits that have
not been renewed before the expiration date will be subject to a thirty (30) day renewal period.
If at the end of the thirty (30) day renewal period the permit has not been renewed, the rental
dwelling is then no longer considered an existing rental and must be re-registered as a new
applicant.
147.06 TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP. If ownership of a rental property is transferred to
a new owner, the new owner is responsible for registering the rental property and paying
registration fees before the property can be rented. No refunds will be given to property owners
for a partial year’s registration. If the new owner does not register the rental property within
the first thirty (30) days of acquiring title to the property, there shall be a late fee of fifty dollars
($50.00) added to the registration fee.
147.07 RENTAL INSPECTION. The Code Enforcement Department shall inspect all
dwellings on a regular basis and in accordance with inspection policies established by the Code
Enforcement Department. The Code Enforcement Department shall inspect all rental dwellings
for conformity with all current applicable building codes adopted by the City of Sioux Center,
as incorporated into the inspection checklist developed by the Code Enforcement Department.
CHAPTER 147 RENTAL INSPECTION PROGRAM
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
- 737 -
The Code Enforcement Department shall not be responsible to inspect for noise complaints,
rental agreements, or the presence of asbestos, lead-based paint, or mold.
147.08 VIOLATIONS. Whenever a property or portion of a property being governed by
the provisions of this ordinance is found to have a major violation the Code Enforcement
Department may order repairs to remedy the violation by written letter to be delivered by
certified mail. The code official may order such use of property or portion of property to be
discontinued and vacated until violation is corrected. Notice to vacate and removal of tenant
shall be carried out according to Iowa law.
147.09 APPEALS. An owner or an owner’s representative that wishes to appeal a notice of
violation or any other action of the Code Enforcement Department in enforcing this ordinance
may do so by completing an application for appeal to the City of Sioux Center’s Board of
Adjustment.
147.10 MUNICIPAL INFRACTION. If a property remains in violation after notice of the
violation is given and time to correct the violation has expired, such violation shall constitute a
municipal infraction and the Code Enforcement Department may file a municipal infraction
action against the property owner as set forth in Chapter 3 of the Sioux Center Code of
Ordinances.
(Ch. 147 – Ord. SC-O-07-17 – Jan. 19 Supp.)
CHAPTER 147 RENTAL INSPECTION PROGRAM
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
- 738 -
[The next page is 751]
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
- 751 -
CHAPTER 150
BUILDING NUMBERING
150.01 Definitions 150.03 Building Numbering Plan
150.02 Owner Requirements
150.01 DEFINITIONS. For use in this chapter, the following terms are defined:
1. “Owner” means the owner of the principal building.
2. “Principal building” means the main building on any lot or subdivision thereof.
150.02 OWNER REQUIREMENTS. Every owner shall comply with the following
numbering requirements:
1. Obtain Building Number. The owner shall obtain the assigned number to the
principal building from the Clerk.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3d])
2. Display Building Number. The owner shall place or cause to be installed and
maintained on the principal building the assigned number in a conspicuous place to the
street in figures not less than two and one-half (2½) inches in height and of a contrasting
color with their background.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3d])
3. Failure to Comply. If an owner refuses to number a building as herein provided,
or fails to do so for a period of thirty (30) days after being notified in writing by the
City to do so, the City may proceed to place the assigned number on the principal
building and assess the costs against the property for collection in the same manner as
a property tax.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3h])
150.03 BUILDING NUMBERING PLAN. Building numbers shall be assigned in
accordance with the building numbering plan on file in the office of the Clerk.
CHAPTER 150 BUILDING NUMBERING
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
- 752 -
° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° °
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
- 753 -
CHAPTER 151
TREES
151.01 Definition 151.04 Trimming Trees to be Supervised
151.02 Planting Restrictions 151.05 Disease Control
151.03 Duty to Trim Trees 151.06 Inspection and Removal
151.01 DEFINITION. For use in this chapter, “right-of-way parking” means that part of the
street, avenue, or highway in the City not covered by sidewalk and lying between the lot line
and the curb line or, on unpaved streets, that part of the street, avenue, or highway lying between
the lot line and that portion of the street usually traveled by vehicular traffic.
151.02 PLANTING RESTRICTIONS. No tree shall be planted in any right-of-way
parking or street except in accordance with the following:
1. Alignment. All trees planted in any street shall be planted in the right-of-way
parking midway between the outer line of the sidewalk and the curb. In the event a curb
line is not established, trees shall be planted on a line ten (10) feet from the property
line.
2. Spacing. Trees shall not be planted on any right-of-way parking that is less
than nine (9) feet in width, or contains less than eighty-one (81) square feet of exposed
soil surface per tree unless permission from the City is given. Trees shall not be planted
closer than forty-five (45) feet from street intersections (property lines extended) and
ten (10) feet from driveways. If it is at all possible trees should be planted inside the
property lines and not between the sidewalk and the curb.
3. Prohibited Trees. No person shall plant in any street any fruit-bearing tree or
any tree of the kinds commonly known as cottonwood, poplar, box elder, Chinese elm,
evergreen, willow, or black walnut.
151.03 DUTY TO TRIM TREES. The owner or agent of the abutting property shall keep
the trees overhanging the sidewalks trimmed so that all branches will be at least eight (8) feet
above the sidewalks. If the abutting property owner fails to trim the trees, the City may serve
notice on the abutting property owner requiring that such action be taken within five (5) days.
If such action is not taken within that time, the City may perform the required action and assess
the costs against the abutting property for collection in the same manner as a property tax.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[2c, d & e])
151.04 TRIMMING TREES TO BE SUPERVISED. Except as allowed in Section 151.03,
it is unlawful for any person to trim or cut any tree in a street or public place unless the work is
done under the supervision of the City.
151.05 DISEASE CONTROL. Any dead, diseased, or damaged tree or shrub that may
harbor serious insect or disease pests or disease injurious to other trees is hereby declared to be
a nuisance.
151.06 INSPECTION AND REMOVAL. The City shall cause to be inspected any trees or
shrubs reported or suspected to be dead, diseased or damaged, and such trees and shrubs shall
be subject to the following:
CHAPTER 151 TREES
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
- 754 -
1. City Property. If it is determined that any such condition exists on any public
property, including the strip between the curb and the lot line of private property, the
City may cause such condition to be corrected by treatment or removal. The City may
also order the removal of any trees on the streets of the City which interfere with the
making of improvements or with travel thereon.
2. Private Property. If it is determined with reasonable certainty that any such
condition exists on private property and that danger to other trees or to adjoining
property or passing motorists or pedestrians is imminent, the City shall notify by
certified mail the owner, occupant or person in charge of such property to correct such
condition by treatment or removal within fourteen (14) days of said notification. If such
owner, occupant, or person in charge of said property fails to comply within 14 days of
receipt of notice, the City may cause the condition to be corrected and the cost assessed
against the property.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3b & h])
[The next page is 775]
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
- 775 -
CHAPTER 155
BUILDING CODES
155.01 Building Code Adopted 155.09 Housing and Property Code Adopted
155.02 Residential Code Adopted 155.10 Private Sewage Disposal Code Adopted
155.03 Fire Code Adopted 155.11 Swimming Pool and Spa Code Adopted
155.04 Existing Building Code Adopted 155.12 Electric Code Adopted
155.05 Plumbing Code Adopted 155.13 Penalty for Violations
155.06 Mechanical Code Adopted 155.14 Permit Fees
155.07 Energy Conservation Code Adopted 155.15 Stop Work Orders
155.08 Fuel Gas Code Adopted
155.01 BUILDING CODE ADOPTED. International Building Code, 2015 edition,
including Appendix Chapters C, E, F, G, H, I, and J (see International Building Code Section
101.2.1, 2015 edition), as published by the International Code Council, be and is hereby adopted
as the Building Code of the City of Sioux Center, in the State of Iowa for regulating and
governing the conditions and maintenance of all property, buildings and structures; by providing
the standards for supplied utilities and facilities and other physical things and conditions
essential to ensure that structures are safe, sanitary and fit for occupation and use; and the
condemnation of buildings and structures unfit for human occupancy and use and the demolition
of such structures as herein provided; providing for the issuance of permits and collection of
fees therefor; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of
said Building Code on file in the office of the City of Sioux Center are hereby referred to,
adopted, and made a part of hereof, as if fully set out in this legislation, with the additions,
insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in Section 155.01(1) of this ordinance.
1. The following sections are hereby revised:
A. Section 101.1 Insert: The City of Sioux Center
B. Section 1612.3 Insert: The City of Sioux Center
C. Section 1612.3 Insert: September 2, 1988
155.02 RESIDENTIAL CODE ADOPTED. International Residential Code, 2015 edition,
including Appendix Chapters A, B, C, E, F, G, H, J, M, N, O, and P, (see International
Residential Code Section R102.5, 2015 edition), as published by the International Code
Council, be and is hereby adopted as the Residential Code of the City of Sioux Center, in the
State of Iowa for regulating and governing the construction, alteration, movement, enlargement,
replacement, repair, equipment, location, removal and demolition of detached one- and twofamily
dwellings and multiple single- family dwellings (townhouses) not more than three stories
in height with separate means of egress as herein provided; providing for the issuance of permits
and collection of fees therefor; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties,
conditions and terms of said Residential Code on file in the office of the City of Sioux Center
are hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this ordinance, with
the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in Section 155.02(1).
1. The following sections are hereby revised:
A. Section R101.1 Insert: The City of Sioux Center,
B. Section R105.2 Item 1. Delete 200 sq. ft. Insert 120 sq. ft.
CHAPTER 155 BUILDING CODES
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
- 776 -
C. Table R301.2(1) Insert: Ground Snow Load = 35 pounds per square
foot; Wind Design: Speed = 115, Topographical Effects = No, Special Wind
Region = No, Wind Blown Debris Zone = No; Seismic Design Category = A;
Subject to Damage from: Weathering = Severe, Frost Line Depth = 42 inches,
Termite = Slight to Moderate; Winter Design Temperature = -10 degrees
Fahrenheit; Ice Barrier Underlayment Required = Yes; Flood Hazards =
September 2, 1988; Air Freezing Index = 2300; Mean Annual Temperature =
46 degrees Fahrenheit.
D. Section R313 Delete Entire Section R313 “Automatic Fire Sprinkler
Systems”
E. Section P2603.5.1 Insert: 48 inches in two locations
155.03 FIRE CODE ADOPTED. International Fire Code, 2012 edition, including
Appendix Chapters B, C, D, F, I, and J (see International Fire Code Section 101.2.1, 2015
edition), as published by the International Code Council, be and is hereby adopted as the Fire
Code of the City of Sioux Center, in the State of Iowa regulating and governing the safeguarding
of life and property from fire and explosion hazards arising from the storage, handling and use
of hazardous substances, materials and devices, and from conditions hazardous to life or
property in the occupancy of buildings and premises as herein provided; providing for the
issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor; and each and all of the regulations,
provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said Fire Code on file in the office of the City of
Sioux Center are hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this
legislation, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in Section
155.03(1) of this ordinance.
1. That the following sections are hereby revised:
A. Section 101.1 Insert: City of Sioux Center
B. Section 109.4 Insert: See Section 155.13 of this Code
C. Section 111.4 Insert: See Section 155.13 of this Code
155.04 EXISTING BUILDING CODE ADOPTED. International Existing Building Code,
2015 edition, including Appendix Chapters A, B, and C (see International Existing Building
Code Section 101.6, 2015 edition), as published by the International Code Council, be and is
hereby adopted as the Existing Building Code of the City of Sioux Center, in the State of Iowa
for regulating and governing the repair, alteration, change of occupancy, addition and relocation
of existing buildings, including historic buildings, as herein provided; providing for the issuance
of permits and collection of fees therefor; and each and all of the regulations, provisions,
penalties, conditions and terms of said Existing Building Code on file in the office of the City
of Sioux Center are hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this
legislation, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in Section
155.04(1) of this ordinance.
1. The following sections are hereby revised:
A. Section 101.1 Insert: City of Sioux Center
B. Section 1401.2 Insert: January 27, 2016
155.05 PLUMBING CODE ADOPTED. International Plumbing Code, 2015 edition,
including Appendix Chapters C, and E as published by the International Code Council, be and
is hereby adopted as the Plumbing Code of the City of Sioux Center, in the State of Iowa
CHAPTER 155 BUILDING CODES
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
- 777 -
regulating and governing the design, construction, quality of materials, erection, installation,
alteration, repair, location, relocation, replacement, addition to, use or maintenance of plumbing
systems as herein provided; providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor;
and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said Plumbing
Code on file in the office of the City of Sioux Center are hereby referred to, adopted, and made
a part hereof as if fully set out in this legislation, with the additions, insertions, deletions and
changes, if any, prescribed in Section 155.05(1) of this ordinance.
1. The following sections are hereby revised:
A. Section 101.1 Insert: City of Sioux Center
B. Section 106.6.2 Insert: See Section 155.14
C. Section 106.6.3 Insert: 100% in two locations
D. Section 108.4 Insert: See section 155.13 of this Code
E. Section 108.5 Insert: See section 155.13 of this Code
F. Section 305.4.1 Insert: 48 inches in two locations
G. Section 903.1 Insert: 12 inches
155.06 MECHANICAL CODE ADOPTED. International Mechanical Code, 2015 edition,
as published by the International Code Council, be and is hereby adopted as the Mechanical
Code of the City of Sioux Center, in the State of Iowa regulating and governing the design,
construction, quality of materials, erection, installation, alteration, repair, location, relocation,
replacement, addition to, use or maintenance of mechanical systems as herein provided;
providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor; and each and all of the
regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said Mechanical Code on file in the
office of the City of Sioux Center are hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof, as if
fully set out in this legislation, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any,
prescribed in Section 155.06(1) of this ordinance.
1. The following sections are hereby revised:
A. Section 101.1 Insert: City of Sioux Center
B. Section 106.5.2 Insert: See Section 155.14 of this code
C. Section 106.5.3 Insert: 100% in two locations
D. Section 108.4 Insert: See Section 155.13 of this code
E. Section 108.5 Insert: See Section 155.13 of this code
155.07 ENERGY CONSERVATION CODE ADOPTED. International Energy
Conservation Code, 2015 edition, as published by the International Code Council, be and is
hereby adopted as the Energy Conservation Code of the City of Sioux Center, in the State of
Iowa for regulating and governing energy-efficient building envelopes and installation of
energy-efficient mechanical, lighting and power systems as herein provided; providing for the
issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor; and each and all of the regulations,
provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said Energy Conservation Code on file in the
office of the City of Sioux Center are hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof, as if
fully set out in this legislation, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any,
prescribed in Section 155.07(1) of this ordinance.
1. The following sections are hereby revised:
CHAPTER 155 BUILDING CODES
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
- 778 -
A. Section C101.1 Insert: City of Sioux Center
B. Section R101.1 Insert: City of Sioux Center
C. Table R402.1.2 Insert: R-20 in Climate Zone 6 for Wood Framed Wall
R-Value
D. Section R402.4.1.2 Air changes per hour for climate zone 7: Delete 3;
Insert 4
E. Section R403.3.4 Delete 4cfm; Insert 6cfm
F. Section R403.3.5 Delete section; Insert: Building cavities shall not be
used as supply ducts or plenums. Building framing cavities may be used as
return ducts provided that ducts have been tested for leakage in accordance with
Section R403.3.4 and cavity is not located on an exterior wall.
155.08 FUEL GAS CODE ADOPTED. International Fuel Gas Code, 2015 edition,
including Appendix Chapters as published by the International Code Council, be and is hereby
adopted as the Fuel Gas Code of the City of Sioux Center in the State of Iowa for regulating and
governing fuel gas systems and gas-fired appliances as herein provided; providing for the
issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor; and each and all of regulations, provisions,
penalties, conditions and terms of said Fuel Gas Code on file in the office of the City of Sioux
Center are hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this
legislation, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in Section
155.08(1) of this ordinance.
1. The following sections are hereby revised:
A. Section 101.1 Insert: City of Sioux Center
B. Section 106.6.2 Insert: See Section 155.14 of this code
C. Section 106.6.3 Insert: 100% in two locations
D. Section 108.4 Insert: See Section 155.13 of this code
E. Section 108.5 Insert: See Section 155.13 of this code
155.09 HOUSING AND PROPERTY CODE ADOPTED. International Property
Maintenance Code, 2015 edition, as published by the International Code Council, be and is
hereby adopted as the Property Maintenance Code of the City of Sioux Center, in the State of
Iowa for regulating and governing the conditions and maintenance of all property, buildings and
structures; by providing the standards for supplied utilities and facilities and other physical
things and conditions essential to ensure that structures are safe, sanitary and fit for occupation
and use; and the condemnation of buildings and structures unfit for human occupancy and use,
and the demolition of such existing structures as herein provided; providing for the issuance of
permits and collection of fees therefor; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties,
conditions and terms of said Property Maintenance Code on file in the office of the City of Sioux
Center are hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this
legislation, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in Section
155.09(1) of this ordinance.
1. The following sections are hereby revised:
A. Section 101.1 Insert: City of Sioux Center
B. Section 103.5 Insert: See Section 155.14 of this Code
CHAPTER 155 BUILDING CODES
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
- 779 -
C. Section 112.4 Insert: See Section 155.13 of this Code
D. Section 302.4 Insert: 6 inches
E. Section 304.14 Insert: April 1 to October 31
F. Section 602.3 Insert: September 1 to June 30
G. Section 602.4 Insert: September 1 to June 30
155.10 PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL CODE ADOPTED. International Private
Sewage Disposal Code, 2015 edition, including Appendix Chapters A, and B (see International
Private Sewage Disposal Code, Section 101.2.1, 2015 edition), as published by the International
Code Council, be and is hereby adopted as the Private Sewage Disposal Code of the City of
Sioux Center, in the State of Iowa regulating and governing the design, construction, quality of
materials, erection, installation, alteration, repair, location, relocation, replacement, addition to,
use or maintenance of individual sewage disposal systems as herein provided; providing for the
issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor; and each and all of the regulations,
provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said Private Sewage Disposal Code on file in the
office of the City of Sioux Center are hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof, as if
fully set out in this legislation, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any,
prescribed in Section 155.10(1) of this ordinance.
1. The following sections are hereby revised:
A. Section 101.1 Insert: City of Sioux Center
B. Section 106.4.2 Insert: See Section 155.14 of this Code
C. Section 106.4.3 Insert: 100% in two locations
D. Section 108.4 Insert: See Section 155.13 of this Code
E. Section 108.5 Insert: See Section 155.13 of this Code
F. Section 405.2.5 Insert: April 1, May 1, June 1
G. Section 405.2.6 Insert: April 1
155.11 SWIMMING POOL AND SPA CODE ADOPTED. International Swimming Pool
and Spa Code, 2015 edition, as published by the International Code Council, be and is hereby
adopted as the Pool and Spa Code of the City of Sioux Center, in the State of Iowa regulating
and governing the design, construction, alteration, movement, renovation, replacement, repair
and maintenance of swimming pools, spas, hot tubs, aquatic facilities and related equipment as
herein provided; providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefore; and each
and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said Pool and Spa Code
on file in the office of the City of Sioux Center are hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part
hereof, as if fully set out in this legislation, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes,
if any, prescribed in Section 155.11(1) of this ordinance.
1. The following sections are hereby revised:
A. Section 101.1 Insert: City of Sioux Center
B. Section 105.6.2 Insert: See Section 155.14
C. Section 105.6.3 100% in two locations
D. Section 107.4 Insert: See Section 155.13 of this Code
CHAPTER 155 BUILDING CODES
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
- 780 -
E. Section 107.5 Insert: See Section 155.13 of this Code
155.12 ELECTRIC CODE ADOPTED. National Electric Code, 2014 edition, as published
by the National Fire Protection Association, be and hereby adopted as the Electric Code of the
City of Sioux Center, in the State of Iowa for the purpose in the practical safeguarding of persons
and property from hazards arising from the use of electricity; and containing provisions that are
considered necessary for safety; compliance therewith and proper maintenance results in an
installations that is essentially free from hazard but not necessarily efficient, convenient, or
adequate for good service or future expansion of electrical use; and each and all of the
regulations, penalties, conditions and terms of said Electric Code on file in the office of the City
of Sioux Center are hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this
ordinance, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in Section
155.12(1) of this ordinance.
1. The following sections are hereby revised:
A. 210.8 Paragraph (A), Subparagraph (2) Insert:
(1) Exception No. 1 to receptacles that are not readily accessible.
(2) Exception No. 2 to a single receptacle or a duplex receptacle
for two appliances located within dedicated space for each appliance
that, in normal use, is not easily moved from one place to another and
that is cord-and-plug connected in accordance with 400.7(A)(6),
(A)(7), or (A)(8).
(3) NOTE: Receptacles installed under exceptions to 210.8(A)(2)
shall not be considered as meeting the requirements of 210.52(G).
B. 210.8 Paragraph (A), Subparagraph (5) Insert:
(1) Exception No. 2 to (5): Receptacles that are not readily
accessible.
(2) Exception No. 3 to (5): A single receptacle or a duplex
receptacle for two appliances located within dedicated space for each
appliance that, in normal use, is not easily moved from one place to
another and that is cord-and-plug connected in accordance with
400.7(A)(6), (A)(7), or (A)(8).
(3) Receptacles installed under the exceptions to 210.8(A)(5) shall
not be considered as meeting the requirements of 210.52(G).
C. 210.12(B) Delete section
D. 220.12 Delete the exception to Section 220.12 and insert in lieu thereof
the following exception:
EXCEPTION: Where the building is designed and constructed to
comply with an energy code adopted by the local authority, the lighting
load shall be permitted to be calculated at the values specified in the
energy code.
E. 504.1(5) Delete section 406.4(D)(4)
155.13 PENALTY FOR VIOLATIONS. Any person who violates any provision of the
codes adopted by this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and shall be punished
CHAPTER 155 BUILDING CODES
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
- 781 -
as provided in Section 1.14 of this Code of Ordinances. Each day such violation shall continue
shall be deemed a separate offense.
155.14 PERMIT FEES. The amounts to be charged for the issuance of permits and the
performance of inspections as required by the technical codes adopted by this chapter shall be
as determined by the Council from time to time and on file in the office of the code enforcement
official.
155.14 STOP WORK ORDERS. Upon notice from the code enforcement official that work
on any building or structure is being done contrary to the provisions of this chapter or any
technical code adopted herein, or in a dangerous or unsafe manner, such work shall be
immediately stopped. Such notice shall be in writing and shall be given to the owner of the
property or to said owner’s agent or to the person doing the work, and shall state the conditions
under which work may be resumed. Where an emergency exists, no written notice shall be
required to be given by the code enforcement official.
(Ch. 15 – Ord. SC-O-04-15 – Jan. 19 Supp.)
CHAPTER 155 BUILDING CODES
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
- 782 -
[The next page is 811]
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
- 811 -
CHAPTER 165
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
165.01 Short Title 165.15 Design Standards for Lots
165.02 Purpose 165.16 Monuments
165.03 Jurisdiction 165.17 Improvements
165.04 Definitions 165.18 Re-Subdivisions
165.05 Pre-Application 165.19 Required Improvements
165.06 Preliminary Plat Approval 165.20 Requirements for Installation of Utilities
165.07 Final Plat Approval 165.21 Specifications
165.08 Plats Outside Corporate Limits 165.22 Acceptance
165.09 Preliminary Plat Data 165.23 Improvements Within Extraterritorial Jurisdiction
165.10 Final Plat Data 165.24 School and Park Dedications
165.11 Design Standards Generally 165.25 Fees
165.12 Design Standards for Streets 165.26 Variances
165.13 Design Standards for Easements 165.27 Enforcement
165.14 Design Standards for Blocks 165.28 Amendments
165.01 SHORT TITLE. This chapter may be known and cited as the “Subdivision
Regulations of Sioux Center, Iowa.”
165.02 PURPOSE. It is deemed essential to establish minimum standards for the design and
development of all new subdivisions so that existing developments will be protected and so that
adequate provisions are made for public utilities and other public requirements and to improve
the health, safety, and general welfare of the public.
165.03 JURISDICTION. In accordance with the provisions of Chapter 354 of the Code of
Iowa and amendatory acts thereto, this chapter is adopted by the City, governing the
subdivisions of all lands within the corporate limits of the City and, pursuant to Section 354.9
of the Code of Iowa, all lands within two (2) miles of its corporate limits.
165.04 DEFINITIONS. For the purpose of this chapter , certain terms and words are hereby
defined.
1. “Access street” means a street that is parallel to and adjacent to a major
thoroughfare or highway; and which provides access to abutting properties and
protection from through traffic.
2. “Block” means an area of land within a subdivision that is entirely bounded by
streets, highways, or ways, except alleys; and the exterior boundary or boundaries of
the subdivision.
3. “Building lines” shall be shown on all lots intended for residential use of any
character, and for commercial and industrial lots when required by ordinance. Such
building lines shall not be less than required by the Zoning Ordinance. Where the
subdivided area is not under zoning control, the Commission shall require building lines
in accordance with the needs of each addition.
4. “City Engineer” means any duly qualified person designated by the Council.
5. “Collector streets” are those which carry traffic from minor streets to the major
system of arterial streets and highways, including the principal entrance streets of a
residential development and streets for circulation within such a development.
CHAPTER 165 SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
- 812 -
6. “Commission” means the Planning and Zoning Commission of the City.
7. “Cul-de-sac” means a short, minor street, having one end open to motor traffic,
the other end being permanently terminated by a vehicular turnaround.
8. “Easement” means a grant by the property owner of the use, for a specific
purpose, of a strip of land by the general public, a corporation, or a certain person or
persons, and within the limits of which the owner of the fee shall not erect any
permanent structures but shall have the right to make any other use of the land, subject
to such easement, which is not inconsistent with the rights of the grantee. Public utilities
shall have the right to trim or remove trees that interfere with the use of such easement.
9. “Engineer” means a registered engineer authorized to practice civil
engineering, as defined by the registration act of the State of Iowa.
10. “Half street” means a one-half width street right-of-way on the boundary of a
subdivision dedicated by the subdivider to the City for future development when
another subdivision is platted along the side of the half street.
11. “Lot” means a portion of a subdivision or other parcel of land intended for the
purpose, whether immediate or future, of transfer of ownership or for building
development.
12. “Lot of record” means a lot that is a part of a legal subdivision of the City, the
plat of which has been recorded in the office of the County Recorder, or a lot or parcel
of land, the deed or valid contract of sale of which was recorded in the office of the
County Recorder.
13. “Major thoroughfare” means a street used primarily for fast, or high volume of
traffic.
14. “Minor street” means a street used primarily for access to the abutting
properties.
15. “Performance bond” means a surety bond or cash deposit made out to the City
in an amount equal to the full costs of the improvements that are required by this
chapter, said cost being estimated by the City Engineer, and said improvements will be
constructed in accordance with this chapter.
16. “Plat” means a map, drawing, or chart on which the subdivider’s plan of the
subdivision is presented and which the subdivider submits for approval and intends to
be in final form to record.
17. “Right-of-way” means the area measured between property lines, dedicated to
and accepted for public use and providing access to abutting properties.
18. “Roadway” means that portion of the street available for vehicular traffic, and
where curbs are laid, that portion from back to back of curbs.
19. “Subdivision” means a subdivision of land into three (3) or more lots for the
purpose, whether immediate or future, or transfer of ownership or building development
or any change in existing street lines or public easement. The term, when appropriate
to the context, relates to the process of subdividing or to the land subdivided, or the resubdivision
of land heretofore divided or platted into lots or other divisions of land, or
if a new street is involved, any division of land, and as further defined in Chapter 354,
Code of Iowa.
CHAPTER 165 SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
- 813 -
20. “Surveyor” means a registered surveyor authorized to practice surveying, as
defined by the registration act of the State of Iowa.
165.05 PRE-APPLICATION. Prior to the subdivision of any land the subdivider or the
subdivider’s agent should discuss informally with the Commission the property proposed for
subdivision, with reference to these subdivision regulations and procedures, zoning regulations
and controls, and planning documents.
165.06 PRELIMINARY PLAT APPROVAL. In obtaining preliminary approval of a
proposed subdivision by the City, the subdivider shall submit a preliminary plat in accordance
with the following procedure:
1. The subdivider shall first prepare and file with the City Clerk six (6) copies of
a preliminary plat conforming in detail to the requirements set forth in this chapter.
Eight (8) copies of the preliminary plat shall be submitted for subdivisions within the
extraterritorial limits of the City.
2. The City Clerk shall forthwith refer two (2) copies to the City Engineer and two
(2) copies to the Commission. In the case of a subdivision outside the corporate limits
of the City, the City Clerk shall refer two (2) copies of the preliminary plat to the County
Board Of Supervisors and keep the County Engineer advised of the status of the plat
and actions taken thereon.
3. The City Engineer shall carefully examine said plat as to its compliance with
the laws and ordinances of the City, the existing street system, sound engineering
practices, and shall submit such findings in duplicate to the Commission.
4. After receiving the City Engineer’s report and any comments from the County
in relation to those subdivisions outside the corporate limits, the Commission shall
study the preliminary plat and other material for conformity thereof to these regulations.
The Commission may confer with the subdivider on changes deemed advisable and the
kind and extent of such improvements to be made by the subdivider. The Commission
shall approve or reject such plan within thirty (30) days after the date of submission
thereof to the Commission. If the Commission does not act within 30 days, the
preliminary plat shall be deemed to be approved; provided, however, the subdivider
may agree to an extension of the time for a period not to exceed sixty (60) days. The
approval of the preliminary plat by the Commission shall be null and void unless the
final plat is presented to the Commission within one hundred eighty (180) days after
date of approval. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall inform the local school
and park boards of the proposed subdivision, and receive information from them before
making any final decision.
5. Before approving a preliminary plat, the Commission may, at its discretion,
hold a public hearing on the proposed plat, notice of which shall be given by publication
in a local newspaper of general distribution, or by posting notices on the tract, or by
sending notices to affected property owners by mail. Such notice shall be given at least
seven (7) days prior to the public hearing.
6. Upon approval of the preliminary plat by the Commission, the subdivider may
proceed with the preparation of the final plat and detailed construction drawings and
specifications for the improvements required under these regulations.
7. Approval of the preliminary plat by the Commission is revocable and does not
constitute final plat approval of the subdivision by the Council or the Council’s
authorization to proceed on construction of improvements within the subdivision.
CHAPTER 165 SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
- 814 -
165.07 FINAL PLAT APPROVAL. In obtaining approval of a proposed subdivision by
the City, the subdivider shall submit a final plat in accordance with the following order and
procedure:
1. Before submitting the final plat to the Commission for approval, the subdivider
shall furnish all plans and information as listed in Section 165.10 of this chapter
necessary for the detailed engineering consideration of the improvements required
under this chapter and obtain approval of the City Engineer, which shall be endorsed
thereon.
2. The final plat shall be filed in duplicate together with a certificate from the City
Engineer that the final plat is substantially in accord with the preliminary plat as
approved by the Commission.
3. The Commission shall then consider the final plat and shall submit their
recommendation to the City Council, together with a certified copy of their resolution
showing action of the City Planning and Zoning Commission.
4. The City Council shall then consider the plat and if the same is acceptable and
in accordance with this chapter, the Council may accept the same. If said plat is
disapproved by the Council, such disapproval shall point out in writing wherein said
proposed plat is objectionable.
5. The passage of a resolution by the Council accepting the plat shall constitute
final approval of the platting or the area shown on the final plat, but the subdivider or
owner shall cause such plat to be recorded in the office of the County Recorder, as
provided in Chapter 354, Code of Iowa, and amendatory acts thereto, and shall file
satisfactory evidence of such recording in the office of the City Clerk before the City
shall recognize the plat as being in full force and effect.
165.08 PLATS OUTSIDE CORPORATE LIMITS. Procedure for approval of
preliminary and final plats of land within two (2) miles of the corporate limits shall be the same
as set out in subsections 165.06(1) and (2) above, except that eight (8) copies of the plat shall
be filed with the City Clerk, and the Clerk shall refer one copy to the County Engineer and one
copy to the County Board of Supervisors and request their recommendations to be submitted to
the City Planning and Zoning Commission. The Commission shall have thirty (30) days to
submit a recommendation to the Council and shall not take action on the plat prior to receiving
the recommendations by the County, provided that the County shall submit its recommendations
within thirty (30) days after the referral of the plat to the County Engineer and County Board of
Supervisors.
165.09 PRELIMINARY PLAT DATA. The preliminary plat of a subdivision is not
intended to serve as a record plat. Its purpose is to show on a map all facts needed to enable the
Commission to determine whether the proposed layout of the land in question is satisfactory
from the standpoint of the public interest. The subdivider, or the subdivider’s representative,
may call at the City offices in advance of the preliminary plat in order to discuss the proposed
subdivision and in order to obtain information as to the requirements necessary for approval of
the plat.
1. Number of Copies and Scale. The required number of copies of the preliminary
plat shall be submitted as prescribed for review. The scale of the map shall be 100 feet
to one inch, and placed on a drawing, the dimensions of which will be 18 inches by 24
inches. A scale other than one inch to 100 feet may be used if prior approval is obtained
from the Commission and County Recorder.
CHAPTER 165 SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
- 815 -
2. Contents of Preliminary Plat.
A. Name of subdivision, date, point of compass, scale, and official
description of the property being platted;
B. Name and address of recorded owner and of developer;
C. Name and address of engineer and/or land surveyor;
D. Existing buildings, railroads, underground utilities, and other rights-ofway;
E. Location, names, and widths of all existing and proposed roads, alleys,
streets, and highways in or adjoining the area being subdivided;
F. Location and names of adjoining subdivisions, and the names of the
owners of adjoining acreage parcels;
G. Proposed lot lines with approximate dimensions and the square foot
area of irregularly shaped lots;
H. Areas proposed for public use, such as schools, parks, and playgrounds;
I. Contour lines at intervals of not more than five (5) feet;
J. Building setback lines;
K. Boundaries of the proposed subdivision shall be indicated by a heavy
line;
L. Zoning classification of the area;
M. Proposed utility service, including location and size or capacity:
(1) Source of water supply;
(2) Provision for sewage disposal;
(3) Provision for storm water drainage, including proposed storm
sewers, ditches, culverts, bridges, and other structures;
N. A vicinity sketch at a legible scale showing the relationship of the plat
to its general surroundings;
O. Lot and block numbers.
3. Accompanying Material:
A. Any plat that cannot reasonably be served by public sewer shall show
results of soil percolation tests made by the engineer preparing the plat; such
tests shall be made in accordance with specifications approved by the City
Engineer.
B. Restrictions proposed, if any, shall be included in the owner’s
dedication of the plat.
C. Written statement by the appropriate officials of the availability of gas
and electricity to the proposed subdivision.
D. Written and signed statements explaining how and when the subdivider
proposes to provide and install all required improvements required by this
chapter. Such statement shall acknowledge required inspections and approvals
by the City Engineer.
CHAPTER 165 SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
- 816 -
165.10 FINAL PLAT DATA. The final plat may include all or part of the preliminary plat.
1. Number of Copies and Scale. When and if the preliminary plat is approved,
the subdivider shall submit six (6) copies of the final plat for review by the Commission.
The scale of the map shall be 100 feet to one inch, and placed on a drawing the
dimensions of which will be 18 inches by 24 inches. A scale other than one inch to 100
feet may be used if prior approval is obtained from the Commission and County
Recorder.
2. Contents of Final Plat. The final plat shall contain the following:
A. A survey of the tract including angles and accurate boundary lines, with
dimensions to the nearest 1/100 foot; the error of closure shall be not more than
one foot in 10,000 feet on the boundary, and one foot in 5,000 feet for any
individual lot.
B. Accurate references to known or permanent monuments, giving the
bearing and distance from some corner of a congressional division of the county
of which the subdivision is a part.
C. Accurate locations of all existing and recorded streets intersecting the
boundaries of the tract.
D. Accurate metes and bounds description of the boundary.
E. Street names.
F. Complete curve notes for all curves included in the plat.
G. Street right-of-way lines with accurate dimensions in feet and
hundredths of feet with angles to right-of-way lines and lot lines.
H. Lot and block numbers and dimensions.
I. Accurate locations and descriptions of easements for utilities and any
limitations on such easements.
J. Accurate dimensions for any property to be reserved for public,
semipublic, or community use.
K. Building lines and dimensions.
L. Location, type, material and size of all monuments and markers.
M. Name of the subdivision.
N. Name and address of owners and subdivider.
O. North point, scale and date.
P. Certification by a registered land surveyor of the State of Iowa.
3. Accompanying Material.
A. Plan and profiles of all streets and alleys at a 50-foot horizontal scale
and 5-foot vertical scale. Profiles shall show location, size, and grade of all
conduits, sewers, pipelines, etc., to be placed under the streets and alleys.
Profiles of east and west streets shall be drawn so that the west end of the profile
shall be at the left side of the drawing. Profiles of north and south streets shall
be drawn so that the south end profile shall be at the left side of the drawing.
CHAPTER 165 SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
- 817 -
B. Any protective covenants or restrictions to be imposed upon the plat
shall be submitted for approval.
C. A dedication to the City, properly executed, for all streets intended as
public streets, and for any other property intended for public use, except for
areas outside the corporate limits.
D. The following certificates:
(1) A statement by the proprietors and their spouses, if any, that
the plat is prepared with their free consent and in accordance with their
desire, signed and acknowledged before an officer authorized to take
the acknowledgments of deeds. The statement by the proprietors may
also include a dedication to the public of all lands within the plat that
are designated for streets, alleys, parks, open areas, school property, or
other public use, if the dedication is approved by the Council.
(2) A statement from the mortgage holders or lienholders, if any,
that the plat is prepared with their free consent and in accordance with
their desire, signed and acknowledged before an officer authorized to
take the acknowledgment of deeds. An affidavit and bond as provided
for in Section 354.12 of the Code of Iowa may be recorded in lieu of
the consent of the mortgage or lienholder. When a mortgage or
lienholder consents to the subdivision, a release of mortgage or lien
shall be recorded for any areas conveyed to the City or dedicated to the
public.
(3) An opinion by an attorney-at-law who has examined the
abstract of title of the land being platted. The opinion shall state the
names of the proprietors and holders of mortgages, liens or other
encumbrances on the land being platted and shall note the
encumbrances, along with any bonds securing the encumbrances.
Utility easements shall not be construed to be encumbrances for the
purpose of this section.
(4) A certificate of the County Treasurer that the land is free from
certified taxes and certified special assessments or that the land is free
from certified taxes and that the certified special assessments are
secured by bond in compliance with Section 354.12 of the Code of
Iowa.
(5) A resolution and certificate for approval by the Council and for
signatures of the Mayor and Clerk.
E. Drainage plans for the positive removal of storm water.
165.11 DESIGN STANDARDS GENERALLY. The standards and details of design herein
contained are intended only as minimum requirements so that the general arrangement and
layout of a subdivision may be adjusted to a wide variety of circumstances. However, in the
design and development of a plat, the subdivider shall use standards consistent with the site
conditions so as to assure an economical, pleasant, and durable neighborhood.
165.12 DESIGN STANDARDS FOR STREETS.
CHAPTER 165 SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
- 818 -
1. Comprehensive Plan. All proposed plats and subdivision shall conform to the
comprehensive plan. All proposed plats and subdivisions shall also conform to
additional proposed street plans as set out by the City.
2. Continuation of Existing or Planned Streets. Proposed streets shall provide for
continuation or completion of any existing streets (constructed or recorded) or any
streets that are a part of an approved preliminary subdivision plan, in adjoining property,
at equal or greater width, but not less than sixty (60) feet in width, and in similar
alignment, unless variations are recommended by the Commission.
3. Circulation. The street pattern shall provide ease of circulation within the
subdivision as well as convenient access to adjoining streets, thoroughfares, or
unsubdivided land as may be required by the Commission. In a case where a street will
eventually be extended beyond the plat, but is temporarily dead-ended, an interim
turnaround may be required.
4. Street Intersections. Street intersections shall be as nearly at right angles as
possible.
5. Cul-De-Sac. Whenever a cul-de-sac is permitted, such street shall be no longer
than 600 feet and shall be provided at the closed end with a turnaround having a street
property line diameter of at least 100 feet in the case of residential subdivisions. The
right-of-way width of the street leading to the turnaround shall be a minimum of 60 feet.
The property lines at the intersection of the turnaround and the lead-in portion of the
street shall be rounded at a radius of not less than 120 feet; or equal straight approach
lines. A turnaround diameter greater than 100 feet may be required by the Commission
in the case of commercial or industrial subdivisions if it is deemed necessary.
6. Street Names. All newly platted streets shall be named and in a manner
conforming to the prevailing street naming system. A proposed street that is obviously
in alignment with other existing streets, or with a street that may logically be extended,
although the various portions be at a considerable distance from each other, shall bear
the same name. Names of new streets shall be subject to the approval of the
Commission in order to avoid duplication or close similarity of names.
7. Physical and Cultural Features. In general, streets shall be platted with
appropriate regard for topography, creeks, wooded areas, and other natural features that
would lend themselves to attractive treatment.
8. Half Streets. Dedication of half streets will not be permitted. Where there
exists a dedicated or platted half street or alley adjacent to the tract to be subdivided,
the other half shall be platted if deemed necessary by the Commission.
9. Alleys. Alleys may be required in business areas and industrial districts for
adequate access to block interiors and for off-street loading and parking purposes.
Except where justified by unusual conditions, alleys will not be approved in residential
districts. Dead-end alleys shall be provided with a means of turning around at the dead
end thereof.
10. Neighborhood Plan. If any overall plan has been made by the Commission for
the neighborhood in which the proposed subdivision is located, the street system of the
latter shall conform in general thereto.
11. Land Not Platted. Where the plat to be submitted includes only part of the tract
owned by the subdivider, the Commission may require topography and a sketch of a
tentative future street system of the unsubdivided portion.
CHAPTER 165 SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
- 819 -
12. Major Thoroughfares. Where a new subdivision, except where justified by
limiting conditions, involves frontage on a heavy traffic-way, the street layout shall
provide motor access to such frontage by one of the following means:
A. A parallel street supplying frontage for lots backing onto the trafficway.
B. A series of culs-de-sac or short loops entered from and planned at right
angles to such a parallel street, with their terminal lots backing onto the
highway.
C. An access drive separated by a planting strip from the highway to
which a motor access from the drive is provided at points suitably spaced.
D. A service drive or alley at the rear of the lots.
Where any one of the above-mentioned arrangements is used, deed covenants or other
means shall prevent any private residential driveways from having direct access to the
traffic-way.
13. Dedication. A dedication to the City shall be given for all streets before the
same will be accepted for City maintenance.
14. Street Grades. Streets and alleys shall be completed to grades that have been
officially determined or approved by the City. All streets shall be graded to the full
width of the right-of-way and adjacent side slopes graded to blend with the natural
ground level. The maximum grade shall not exceed six percent (6%) for main and
secondary thoroughfares, or ten percent (10%) for minor or local service streets. All
changes in grades on major roads or highways shall be connected by vertical curves of
a minimum length in feet equivalent to twenty (20) times the algebraic difference
between the rates or grades, or greater, if deemed necessary by the City; for minor
streets, fifteen (15) times. The grade alignment and resultant visibility, especially at
intersections, shall be worked out in detail to meet the approval of the City.
15. Street Rights-of-Way and Widths. Minimum rights-of-way shall be provided
as follows:
A. Arterials and primary extensions – 100 feet;
B. Major streets – 80 feet;
C. Residential streets – 70 feet;
D. Minor streets – 60 feet;
E. Culs-de-sac – 100 feet in diameter;
F. Alleys – 20 feet;
All streets shall have a width and cross section as indicated by current City
specifications.
16. Other Considerations.
A. The street and alley layout shall provide access to all lots and parcels
of land within the subdivision.
B. Street jogs of less than 200 feet shall be avoided.
C. No dead-end streets or alleys will be permitted except at subdivision
boundaries.
CHAPTER 165 SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
- 820 -
D. Major and collector streets in a subdivision shall extend through to the
boundaries thereof.
E. Intersection of more than two (2) streets at a point shall not be
permitted.
F. Alleys shall not be permitted in residential areas but may be provided
in commercial and industrial areas as determined by the Commission.
G. Dedication of half streets shall not be permitted. Where there exists a
dedicated or platted half street or alley adjacent to the tract to be subdivided,
the other half shall be platted.
165.13 DESIGN STANDARDS FOR EASEMENTS.
1. Easements not less than ten feet in width shall be provided along each side of
the rear lot lines of all lots, and along such other lot lines as may be required by public
and private utility companies, or as may be required by the Commission.
2. Easements of greater width may be required for utility placement.
3. Utility easements shall convey to the City, its successors and assigns, the
perpetual right within the areas shown on the plat and described in the easement, to
construct, reconstruct, operate and maintain electric lines consisting of poles, wires,
cables, conduits, fixtures, anchors and other similar equipment, including the right to
trim or remove trees within such areas where necessary to secure a clearance of four
feet from the wires or poles, together with the right to extend to any telephone,
telegraph, electric or power company, the right to use separately or jointly with the City,
the areas included in the easement for the purposes above enumerated.
4. Whenever any stream or important surface watercourse is located in an area
that is being subdivided, the subdivider shall, at his or her own expense, make adequate
provision for widening the channel so that it will properly carry the surface water, and
shall provide and dedicate to the City an easement along each side of the stream, which
easement shall be for the purpose of installation of public utilities. The waterway
easement shall be adequate to provide for these purposes, and said easement shall be a
minimum of 20 feet on each side plus stream design width and a total width adequate
to provide any necessary channel straightening or relocations.
165.14 DESIGN STANDARDS FOR BLOCKS. No block shall be longer than 1,320 feet.
165.15 DESIGN STANDARDS FOR LOTS.
1. Corner lots shall be not less than 20 feet greater in width than the minimum
required interior lot width so as to permit adequate building setbacks on both front and
side streets.
2. Double frontage lots, other than corner lots, shall be prohibited except where
such lots back onto a major street or highway or except in the case of large commercial
or industrial lots.
3. Each lot shall be provided means of a public street with satisfactory access to
an existing public street, except in the (GC) zoning district.
4. Each lot shall be provided with not less than 40 feet of access frontage to a
public street.
CHAPTER 165 SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
- 821 -
5. No lot shall be less in size or shape than required to provide an adequate
building site in compliance with this chapter.
6. For the purpose of complying with minimum health standards, the following
minimum lot sizes shall be observed:
A. Lots that cannot be reasonably served by an existing public sanitary
sewer system and public water mains, shall have a minimum width of 100 feet,
measured at the building line, and an area of not less than 20,000 square feet or
the minimum permitted by the zoning ordinance, whichever is larger.
B. Lots that are not within a reasonable distance of a public sanitary sewer
system but are connected to a public water supply main shall have a minimum
width of 80 feet and an area of 10,000 square feet or the minimum permitted
by the zoning ordinance, whichever is larger.
7. Side lot lines where possible shall be at right angles or radial to the street lines.
165.16 MONUMENTS.
1. Concrete monuments at least 36 inches long and four inches square with a
suitable center point shall be set at all boundary corners of the plat, except in cases
where it is deemed clearly unreasonable or infeasible by the Commission. These
monuments shall be described in relation to the standard subdivision lines of the section
to which the monument is placed.
2. Iron pin or pipe monuments three-fourths inch in diameter and 36 inches long
or suitable concrete markers shall be placed at all points on boundary lines where there
is a change of direction and at all lot corners.
165.17 IMPROVEMENTS. The subdivider shall be responsible for the installation and/or
construction of all improvements required by this chapter, and shall warranty the design,
material and workmanship of such improvements, installation, and/or construction for a period
of two years from and after completion. Such warrant shall be by bond or other acceptable
collateral, shall be subject to review by the City Attorney, shall specifically assure the expedient
repair or replacement of defective improvements under warranty, and shall indemnify the City
from any and all costs or losses resulting from or attributed to such defective improvements.
Before the Council approves the final plat, all of the foregoing improvements shall be
constructed and accepted by formal resolution of the Council. Before passage of said resolution
of acceptance, the City Engineer shall report that said improvements meet all City specifications
and ordinances or other requirements and agreements between the subdivider and the City. This
requirement may be waived if the subdivider will post a performance bond or certified check
with the City, guaranteeing that said improvements will be constructed within a period of two
years from final acceptance of the plat; however, if a performance bond is posted, final
acceptance of the plat will not constitute final acceptance by the City of any improvements
constructed. Improvements will be accepted only after their construction has been completed,
and no public funds will be expended in the subdivision until such improvements have been
completed and accepted by the City. If a performance bond is posted, such bond shall be subject
to review by the City Attorney prior to acceptance, shall specifically assure the expedient
installation and completion of all improvements within the specified construction time period,
and shall indemnify the City from any and all costs or losses of the development and
construction. The Council may waive the requirements of this chapter for the construction and
installation of some or all of the improvements in cases of dedications of land or rights-of-way
CHAPTER 165 SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
- 822 -
to public use where such dedication is in excess of the needs of the subdivision and is desired
by a public agency in lieu of a purchase or condemnation.
165.18 RE-SUBDIVISIONS. The Council may waive the requirements for the construction
and installation of some or all of the foregoing improvements in cases of re-subdivisions where
only the size, shape, or arrangement of the lots is being changed and no new streets are required
and in cases of dedications of land or rights-of-way to public use where such dedication is in
excess of the needs of the subdivision and is desired by a public agency in lieu of a purchase or
condemnation proceeding.
165.19 REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS. All plans, specifications, installation, and
construction required by this chapter shall be subject to the review, approval, and inspection by
the City Engineer or other authorized City representative. The subdivider shall furnish the City
Engineer with a construction schedule prior to commencement of any and/or all construction;
and shall notify the City Engineer not less than 24 hours in advance of readiness for required
inspections.
1. Grading. All streets and alleys within the platted area which are being
dedicated for public use shall be brought to the grade approved by the City Council after
receiving the report and recommendations of the City Engineer. Such improvements
may be cost-shared by the City subject to current Council policy, such policy being
adopted by resolution. The cost of improvements outside the City limits shall be subject
to current County policy, such policy being adopted by resolution.
2. Sanitary Sewers. The subdivider shall at his or her expense provide the
subdivision with a gravity sanitary sewer system including all necessary pumping
stations, force mains, lot services, pumping equipment and other appurtenances,
approved by the City Council, which shall connect with a sanitary sewer outlet or
treatment facility. The sewers shall extend to the subdivision boundaries as necessary
to provide for the extension of the sewers to adjacent property. Within the City limits,
the construction of lift stations and force mains may be cost-shared by the City, subject
to current Council policy, such policy being adopted by resolution. The cost of lift
stations and force mains outside the City limits shall be subject to current County policy,
such policy being adopted by resolution.
3. Storm Drains. The subdivider shall at his or her expense provide the
subdivision with adequate drains, ditches, culverts, complete bridges, storm sewers,
intakes, and manholes to provide the collection and removal of all surface waters. These
improvements shall extend to the boundaries of the subdivision so as to provide for
extension to adjoining properties. Where oversized storm sewers or drainage structures
are required to serve other areas of the watershed, the additional cost may be cost-shared
by the City or assessed on an area basis to the properties served, subject to current City
Council policy, such policy being adopted by resolution. Improvements outside the
City limits shall be subject to current County policy, such policy being adopted by
resolution.
4. Water. Within the City limits the construction of the water system may be costshared
by the City, subject to current City Council policy, such policy being passed by
resolution. The cost of improvements outside the City limits shall be subject to current
County policy, such policy being adopted by resolution.
5. Curb and Gutter. The subdivider shall at his or her expense install curb and
gutter on all streets in the plat being dedicated for public use. Curb and gutter shall be
CHAPTER 165 SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
- 823 -
constructed of Portland cement concrete in accordance with designs and specifications
and at grades approved by the Council.
6. Surfacing. The subdivider shall at his or her expense surface all streets being
dedicated for public use from curb to curb. Surfacing shall be constructed in accordance
with current City designs and specifications, and at grades approved by the City
Council. Where a surface width in excess of 31 feet is required, the cost of the
additional surface width, which shall be assumed to be the center portion of the roadway
surface may be standard or greater thickness of street surface is deemed necessary by
the City Council than is herein required, the additional cost may be borne by the City,
according to current City Council policy, such policy being adopted by resolution.
7. Markers or Monuments. The subdivider shall at his or her expense place
markers or monuments as required in Section 165.16.
8. Sidewalks. The subdivider shall at his or her expense provide a four-foot-wide
concrete sidewalk along each lot frontage where deemed necessary by the Commission.
Such walk need not be constructed until completion of site grading and construction on
the lot, but shall be constructed prior to the occupancy of the structure, and shall be
constructed according to City design and specifications.
165.20 REQUIREMENTS FOR INSTALLATION OF UTILITIES. The City Council
may require that all utility lines, except electric lines of nominal voltage in excess of 15,000
volts, be installed underground. The subdivider shall be responsible for making the necessary
arrangements with the utility companies for installation of such facilities. If overhead utility
lines or wires are permitted, they shall be placed in the easements provided in the rear of the
lots. In their determination on whether or not to require underground utilities, the Council may
consider that soil, topographical, or other conditions make such installations within the
subdivision unreasonable or impractical. Utilities shall be provided in rear lot easements
wherever possible. When it is necessary to install utilities in street rights-of-way, the following
requirements shall apply:
1. After grading is completed and approved and before any pavement base is
applied, all of the in-street underground work (water mains, gas mains, etc., and all
service connections) shall be completely installed and approved through the length of
the street and across the flat section. Where the utility mains are outside the pavement
area, the subdivider may be allowed to omit the installation of service connections,
provided that at such time as these service connections are needed, they may be jacked
across the street without breaking or weakening the existing pavement.
2. Where rock is known to exist beneath the pavement area and at such depth as
to interfere with the jacking of service connections, the complete installation of service
connections before any base is applied shall be required. In cases where underground
utilities must be provided within the right-of-way of streets, they should not be installed
under the paved portions of such streets.
165.21 SPECIFICATIONS. The type of construction, the materials, the methods and
standards of subdivision improvements shall be equal to the current specifications of the City
for like work. Plans and specifications shall be submitted to the City Council for approval prior
to construction, and construction shall not be started until plans and specifications have been
approved.
CHAPTER 165 SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
- 824 -
165.22 ACCEPTANCE. All of the above improvements shall, upon their completion,
inspection, approval, and acceptance by the City of Sioux Center, become the property of the
City.
165.23 IMPROVEMENTS WITHIN EXTRATERRITORIAL JURISDICTION.
Improvements in the two-mile control area shall be the same as required above, provided they
are not less than that required by the County subdivision policy, and provided further that all
road and drainage construction plans shall be approved by the County Engineer, and completed
roads shall be accepted by the Board of Supervisors for public maintenance. In cases where the
cost-sharing policy may differ, the above requirements so indicate.
165.24 SCHOOL AND PARK DEDICATIONS. Where an area being subdivided includes
land proposed to be used for parks, schools, or other public use as indicated on the adopted
official plans for the City, the subdivider shall indicate the location of such areas on the proposed
subdivision plat.
1. Proposed park sites within the City limits shall be purchased by the City within
two (2) years of the recording date of the subdivision at the current appraised raw land
value at time of the sale, as determined by three (3) registered land appraisers, plus onehalf
of the cost for grading and paving including curbs of the portion of any streets that
are contiguous to the site.
2. Proposed park sites outside of the City limits will be reserved for three (3)
years, giving the Sioux County Supervisors or other authorized public agency option to
purchase the land at the appraised value as per requirements of subsection 1.
3. Proposed school sites will be reserved for four years giving the Sioux Center
Community School District the option to purchase the land at the current appraised raw
land value at the time of the sale, as determined by three (3) registered land appraisers,
plus one-half of the cost for grading and paving, including curbs, of any streets
contiguous to the site.
4. Should the park or school sites not be purchased within the time limit specified
above, the subdivider may then sell them for an alternate purpose as shown on the
approved subdivision plat and in conformance with the official zoning map.
5. Public open spaces shall, wherever possible, be located contiguous to other
such areas in adjacent subdivisions, in order to provide for maximum use of the
resulting area. Such areas shall be shown on the preliminary plat. The Council may
not approve a site that is undesirable for public or civic uses.
6. If the Council desires a public open space larger than that indicated by the
preliminary plat, the subdivider shall reserve the area in excess for purchase by the
appropriate public agency within two (2) years from the endorsement date of the final
plat. The purchase price of such land shall be equivalent to the current value of said
land as established by three (3) registered land appraisers, plus one-half of the cost for
grading and paving, including curbs of the portion of any streets that are contiguous to
the site. After such time, the subdivider may replat such acreage for an alternate purpose
as shown on the approved subdivision plat and in conformance with the official zoning
map.
7. Natural features, historic sites and similar community assets shall be preserved.
8. Proposed park and school sites shall be indicated on the final plat as recorded.
CHAPTER 165 SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
- 825 -
165.25 FEES. Each preliminary plat submitted for approval shall be accompanied by a fee
as set by resolution of the Council, which shall be credited to the General Fund of the City.
165.26 VARIANCES. Where the strict application of standards or requirements established
by this chapter would cause substantial hardship or impose unreasonable restrictions on the
development of a tract of land because of natural or physical conditions or limitations not
created by the owner or developer, the Commission may recommend and the Council may grant
such variances from these standards or requirements as may be necessary to permit the
reasonable development of the land while preserving the intent of this policy.
165.27 ENFORCEMENT. In addition to other remedies and penalties prescribed by law,
the provisions of this chapter shall not be violated subject to the following:
1. No plat or subdivision in the City or within two (2) miles thereof (subject to
exceptions as provided in Chapter 354, Code of Iowa), shall be recorded or filed with
the County Auditor or County Recorder, nor shall any plat or subdivision have any
validity until it complies with the provisions of this chapter and has been approved by
the City Council as prescribed herein.
2. No more than two (2) building permits shall be issued for each separate tract
existing at the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter unless the tract
shall have been platted in accordance with the provisions contained herein.
3. No public improvements over which the Council has control shall be made with
City funds, nor shall any City funds be expended for street maintenance, street
improvements, or other services in any area that has been subdivided after the date of
adoption of such ordinance unless such subdivision and streets have been approved in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter and the street accepted by the City
Council as a public street.
4. Any persons who shall dispose of or offer for sale or lease any lots in the City,
addition thereto, or within the jurisdictional area thereof until the plat shall have been
approved, acknowledged, and recorded as provided by this chapter and Chapter 354,
Code of Iowa, shall forfeit and pay fifty dollars ($50.00) for each lot or part thereof,
sold, disposed of, leased, or offered for sale. Each day that a violation exists constitutes
a separate offense and is punishable in the manner described above.
5. No zoning compliance permit required by the zoning ordinance shall be issued
until, and unless, all improvements required by this chapter have been made in
accordance with City plans and specifications and accepted by the Council.
165.28 AMENDMENTS. Any provisions of these regulations may be changed and
amended from time to time by the City Council; provided, however, such amendments shall
first be submitted to the Planning and Zoning Commission for review and study. The
Commission shall report within thirty (30) days, after which the Council shall give notice of and
hold a public hearing on the proposed amendment. The amendment shall become effective from
and after its adoption and required publication.
[The next page is 841]
CHAPTER 165 SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
- 826 -
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
- 841 -
CHAPTER 170
AIRPORT HEIGHT ZONING REGULATIONS
170.01 Definitions 170.04 Lighting
170.02 Airport Zones and Airspace Height Limitations 170.05 Variances
170.03 Use Restrictions
170.01 DEFINITIONS. As used in this chapter, unless the context otherwise requires:
1. “Airport” means the Sioux Center Municipal Airport.
2. “Airport elevation” means the highest point of an airport’s usable landing area
measured in feet above mean sea level, which elevation is established to be 1,446 feet.
3. “Airport hazard” means any structure or tree or use of land that would exceed
the Federal obstruction standards as contained in Fourteen (14) Code of Federal
Regulations Sections 77.21, 77.23 and 77.25 and which obstructs the airspace required
for the flight of aircraft and landing or takeoff at an airport or is otherwise hazardous to
such landing or taking off of aircraft.
4. “Airport primary surface” means a surface longitudinally centered on a runway.
When the runway has a specially prepared hard surface, the primary surface extends
200 feet beyond each end of that runway. The width of the primary surface of a runway
will be that width prescribed in Part 77 of the Federal Aviation Regulations (FAR) for
the most precise approach existing or planned for either end of that runway. The
elevation of any point on the primary surface is the same as the elevation of the nearest
point on the runway centerline.
5. “Airspace height” – For the purpose of determining the height limits in all zones
set forth in this chapter and shown on the zoning map, the datum shall be mean sea level
elevation unless otherwise specified.
6. “Control zone” means airspace extending upward from the surface of the earth,
which may include one or more airports, and is normally a circular area of five (5)
statute miles in radius, with extensions where necessary to include instrument approach
and departure paths.
7. “Instrument runway” means a runway having an existing instrument approach
procedure utilizing air navigation facilities or area type navigation equipment, for which
an instrument approach procedure has been approved or planned.
8. “Minimum descent altitude” means the lowest altitude expressed in feet above
mean sea level, to which descent is authorized on final approach or during circle-toland
maneuvering in execution of a standard instrument approach procedure, where no
electronic glide slope is provided.
9. “Minimum en route altitude” means the altitude in effect between radio fixes,
which assures acceptable navigational signal coverage and meets obstruction clearance
requirements between those fixes.
10. “Minimum obstruction clearance altitude” means the specified altitude in effect
between radio fixes on VOR airways, off-airways routes, or route segments, which
CHAPTER 170 AIRPORT HEIGHT ZONING REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
- 842 -
meets obstruction clearance requirements for the entire route segment and which
assures acceptable navigational signal coverage only within 22 miles of a VOR.
11. “Runway” means a defined area on an airport prepared for landing and takeoff
of aircraft along its length.
12. “Visual runway” means a runway intended solely for the operation of aircraft
using visual approach procedures with no straight-in instrument approach procedure
and no instrument designation indicated on an FAA approved airport layout plan,
military services approved military airport layout plan, or by any planning document
submitted to the FAA by competent authority.
170.02 AIRPORT ZONES AND AIRSPACE HEIGHT LIMITATIONS. In order to
carry out the provisions of this section, there are hereby created and established certain zones
that are depicted on the Municipal Airport Height Zoning Map. A structure located in more
than one zone of the following zones is considered to be only in the zone with the more
restrictive height limitations. The various zones are hereby established and defined as follows:
1. Horizontal Zone. The land lying under a horizontal plane 150 feet above the
established elevations, the perimeter of which is constructed by (visual runway and nonprecision
instrument utility runways) swinging arcs of 5,000 feet radii from the center
of each end of the primary surface of Runways 17, 35, 8, and 26, and connecting the
adjacent arcs by lines tangent to those arcs. No structure shall exceed 150 feet above
the established airport elevation in the horizontal zone, as depicted on the Municipal
Airport Height Zoning Map.
2. Conical Zone. The land lying under a surface extending outward and upward
from the periphery of the horizontal surface at a slope of 20 feet to one for a horizontal
distance of 4,000 feet. No structure shall penetrate the conical surface in the conical
zone, as depicted on the Municipal Airport Height Zoning Map.
3. Approach Zone. The land lying under the surface longitudinally centered on
the extended runway centerline and extending outward and upward from each end of
the primary surface.
A. Visual Utility Runway (visual other than utility runway and nonprecision
instrument runway). The inner edge of the approach surface is:
(1) 500 feet wide for Runways 17 and 35.
B. Visual Utility Runway (non-precision instrument runways). The outer
edge of the approach zone is:
(1) 2,000 feet for Runways 17 and 35.
C. All Visual Runways (non-precision instrument runways). The
approach zone extends for a horizontal distance of:
(1) 5,000 feet at a slope of 20 to one for Runways 17 and 35.
No structure shall exceed the approach surface to any runway, as depicted on the
Municipal Airport Height Zoning Map.
CHAPTER 170 AIRPORT HEIGHT ZONING REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
- 843 -
4. Transitional Zone. The land lying under those surfaces extending outward and
upward at right angles to the runway centerline and the runway centerline extended at
a slope of seven to one from the sides of the primary surface and from the sides of the
approach surfaces. No structures shall exceed the transitional surface, as depicted on
the Municipal Airport Height Zoning Map.
5. Increase in Elevation of Structures. No structure shall be erected in the County
that raises the published minimum descent altitude for an instrument approach to any
runway, nor shall any structure be erected that causes the minimum obstruction
clearance altitude or minimum en route altitude to be increased on any Federal airway
in the County.
170.03 USE RESTRICTIONS. Notwithstanding any other provisions of 170.02, no use
may be made of land or water within the City or County in such a manner as to interfere with
the operation of any airborne aircraft. The following special requirements shall apply to each
permitted use:
1. Lighting. All lights or illumination used in conjunction with streets, parking,
signs or use of land and structures shall be arranged and operated in such a manner that
it is not misleading or dangerous to aircraft operating from the Municipal Airport or in
the vicinity thereof.
2. Visual Hazards. No operation from any use shall produce smoke, glare, or other
visual hazards within three statute miles of any usable runway of the Municipal Airport.
3. Electronic Interference. No operation from any use in the City or County shall
produce electronic interference with navigation signals or radio communication
between the airport and aircraft.
170.04 LIGHTING. Notwithstanding the provisions of 170.03, the owner of any structure
over two hundred (200) feet above ground level must install on the structure lighting in
accordance with Federal Aviation Administration (FAA), Advisory Circular 70-7460-1K and
amendments. Additionally, any structure constructed after the effective date of this chapter and
exceeding 949 feet above ground level, must install on that structure high intensity white
obstruction lights in accordance with FAA Advisory Circular 7460-1K and amendments. Any
permit or variance granted may be so conditioned as to require the owner of the structure or
growth in question to permit the City or County at its own expense to install, operate, and
maintain thereto such markers or lights as may be necessary to indicate to pilots the presence of
an airspace hazard.
170.05 VARIANCES. Any person desiring to erect or increase the height of any structure,
or to permit the growth of any tree, or to otherwise use property in violation of any section of
this chapter, may apply to the County Board of Adjustment for variance from such regulations.
No application for variance to the requirements of this chapter may be considered by the County
Board of Adjustment unless a copy of the application has been submitted to Sioux Center
Municipal Airport Manager or Aeronautics Director for an opinion as to the aeronautical effects
of such a variance. If the Sioux Center Municipal Airport Manager or Aeronautics Director
does not respond to the Board of Adjustment within 15 days from receipt of the copy of the
application, the Board may make its decision to grant or deny the variance.
CHAPTER 170 AIRPORT HEIGHT ZONING REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
- 844 -
[The next page is 855]
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
- 855 -
CHAPTER 175
ZONING REGULATIONS
EDITOR’S NOTE
The Sioux Center Zoning Ordinance adopted by Ordinance No. SC-O-01-06 and amendments
thereto, contained in a separate volume, are a part of this Code of Ordinances and are in full force
and effect. The following ordinances have been adopted amending the Zoning Regulations of the
City.
ORDINANCE ADOPTED SUBJECT
SC-O-02-14 July 21, 2014 Zoning of Highway Commercial Park – 1st Addition
SC-O-03-14 August 25, 2014 Amend the Zoning Ordinance Text
SC-O-02-15 September 8, 2015 Zoning of Meadow Creek – First Addition
SC-O-06-15 December 29, 2015 Rezoning Three Parcels:
1. From R-3 to HC
2. From Industrial Park to HC
3. From R-2 to R-1
SC-O-08-15 December 15, 2015 Principal Permitted Uses in a Highway Commercial
District
SC-O-01-16 April 13, 2016 Regulating the Size and Placement of Real Estate
Signs
SC-O-03-16 June 20, 2016 Rezoning from R-2 to HC
SC-O-04-16 September 19. 2016 Zoning of the Bloemendaal Parcel (RS)
SC-O-05-16 September 12, 2016 Zoning of Meadow Creek – Second Addition (R-1)
SC-O-01-17 March 30, 2017 Principal Permitted Uses in a General Commercial
District
SC-O-04-17 July 6, 2017 Zoning of Highway Commercial Creek – Second
Addition
SC-O-05-17 August 15, 2017 Rezoning from R-3 to HC
SC-O-08-17 November 6, 2017 Rezoning from RS to GI
SC-O-01-18 February 19, 2018 Zoning of Industrial Park Addition
SC-O-04-18 June 7, 2018 Rezoning from Industrial Park to HC
SC-O-05-18 May 7, 2018 Principal Permitted Uses in a Planned Unit
Development (South Ridge Estates) District
SC-O-08-18 September 19, 2018 Zoning of Meadow Creek – Third Addition (R-1)
SC-O-09-18 September 19, 2018 Zoning of Woodbridge Addition (R-2)
SC-O-10-18 October 10, 2018 Rezoning from Highway Commercial to R-3
CHAPTER 175 ZONING REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
- 856 -
° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° °
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
-i-
CODE OF ORDINANCES
CITY OF SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
TABLE OF CONTENTS
GENERAL CODE PROVISIONS
CHAPTER 1 - CODE OF ORDINANCES ............................................................................................ 1
CHAPTER 2 - CHARTER ...................................................................................................................... 9
CHAPTER 3 - MUNICIPAL INFRACTIONS ................................................................................... 11
CHAPTER 5 - OPERATING PROCEDURES ................................................................................... 21
CHAPTER 6 - CITY ELECTIONS ..................................................................................................... 29
CHAPTER 8 - INDUSTRIAL PROPERTY TAX EXEMPTIONS .................................................. 41
CHAPTER 9 - URBAN RENEWAL .................................................................................................... 43
CHAPTER 10 - LOCAL OPTION SALES AND SERVICES TAX ................................................. 45
CHAPTER 11 - HOTEL AND MOTEL TAX .................................................................................... 55
ADMINISTRATION, BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
CHAPTER 15 - MAYOR ...................................................................................................................... 75
CHAPTER 16 - MAYOR PRO TEM ................................................................................................... 77
CHAPTER 17 - CITY COUNCIL ........................................................................................................ 79
CHAPTER 18 - CITY CLERK ............................................................................................................ 85
CHAPTER 19 - CITY TREASURER .................................................................................................. 89
CHAPTER 20 - CITY ATTORNEY .................................................................................................... 91
CHAPTER 21 - CITY MANAGER ...................................................................................................... 93
TABLE OF CONTENTS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
-ii-
ADMINISTRATION, BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS (continued)
CHAPTER 22 - LIBRARY BOARD OF TRUSTEES ....................................................................... 95
CHAPTER 23 - PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION ......................................................... 99
CHAPTER 24 - PARK BOARD ......................................................................................................... 101
CHAPTER 25 - RECREATION AND ARTS COUNCIL ............................................................... 115
CHAPTER 26 - HERITAGE BOARD .............................................................................................. 121
POLICE, FIRE AND EMERGENCIES
CHAPTER 30 - POLICE DEPARTMENT ....................................................................................... 151
CHAPTER 35 - FIRE DEPARTMENT ............................................................................................ 161
CHAPTER 36 - HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCE SPILLS .................................................................. 171
CHAPTER 37 - DISASTER SERVICES .......................................................................................... 175
CHAPTER 38 - EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES DEPARTMENT .................................. 177
PUBLIC OFFENSES
CHAPTER 40 - PUBLIC PEACE ...................................................................................................... 201
CHAPTER 41 - PUBLIC HEALTH AND SAFETY ........................................................................ 205
CHAPTER 42 - PUBLIC AND PRIVATE PROPERTY ................................................................. 215
CHAPTER 45 - ALCOHOL CONSUMPTION AND INTOXICATION ...................................... 245
CHAPTER 46 - MINORS ................................................................................................................... 247
CHAPTER 47 - PARK REGULATIONS .......................................................................................... 251
NUISANCES AND ANIMAL CONTROL
CHAPTER 50 - NUISANCE ABATEMENT PROCEDURE ......................................................... 271
CHAPTER 51 - JUNK AND JUNK VEHICLES ............................................................................. 275
CHAPTER 55 - ANIMAL PROTECTION AND CONTROL ........................................................ 301
TABLE OF CONTENTS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
-iii-
TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES
CHAPTER 60 - ADMINISTRATION OF TRAFFIC CODE ......................................................... 331
CHAPTER 61 - TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES .......................................................................... 335
CHAPTER 62 - GENERAL TRAFFIC REGULATIONS ............................................................... 337
CHAPTER 63 - SPEED REGULATIONS ........................................................................................ 343
CHAPTER 64 - TURNING REGULATIONS .................................................................................. 351
CHAPTER 65 - STOP OR YIELD REQUIRED .............................................................................. 353
CHAPTER 66 - LOAD AND WEIGHT RESTRICTIONS ............................................................. 355
CHAPTER 67 - PEDESTRIANS ........................................................................................................ 357
CHAPTER 68 - ONE-WAY TRAFFIC ............................................................................................. 359
CHAPTER 69 - PARKING REGULATIONS .................................................................................. 361
CHAPTER 70 - TRAFFIC CODE ENFORCEMENT PROCEDURES ........................................ 375
CHAPTER 75 - ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLES AND SNOWMOBILES ........................................ 385
CHAPTER 76 - BICYCLE REGULATIONS ................................................................................... 389
CHAPTER 77 - GOLF CARTS .......................................................................................................... 391
CHAPTER 80 - ABANDONED VEHICLES .................................................................................... 405
WATER
CHAPTER 90 - WATER SERVICE SYSTEM ................................................................................ 431
CHAPTER 91 - WATER METERS ................................................................................................... 441
CHAPTER 92 - WATER RATES ...................................................................................................... 443
CHAPTER 93 - WATER CONSERVATION ................................................................................... 455
SANITARY SEWER AND STORM SEWER
CHAPTER 95 - SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM .............................................................................. 471
CHAPTER 96 - BUILDING SEWERS AND CONNECTIONS ..................................................... 481
TABLE OF CONTENTS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
-iv-
SANITARY SEWER AND STORM SEWER (continued)
CHAPTER 97 - USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS ................................................................................... 483
CHAPTER 98 - PRIVATE SEPTIC SYSTEMS .............................................................................. 493
CHAPTER 99 - SEWER SERVICE CHARGES ............................................................................. 494
CHAPTER 100 - BENEFITED SEWER DISTRICTS .................................................................... 496
CHAPTER 101 - STORM WATER DRAINAGE UTILITY .......................................................... 503
GARBAGE AND SOLID WASTE
CHAPTER 105 - SOLID WASTE CONTROL ................................................................................ 525
CHAPTER 106 - COLLECTION OF SOLID WASTE ................................................................... 529
FRANCHISES AND OTHER SERVICES
CHAPTER 110 - MUNICIPAL NATURAL GAS UTILITY .......................................................... 551
CHAPTER 111 - MUNICIPAL ELECTRIC UTILITY .................................................................. 555
CHAPTER 112 - CABLE TELEVISION DISTRIBUTION NETWORK REGULATIONS ..... 561
REGULATION OF BUSINESS AND VOCATIONS
CHAPTER 120 - LIQUOR LICENSES AND WINE AND BEER PERMITS .............................. 631
CHAPTER 121 - CIGARETTE AND TOBACCO PERMITS ....................................................... 635
CHAPTER 122 - PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS AND TRANSIENT MERCHANTS .................... 639
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
CHAPTER 135 - STREET USE AND MAINTENANCE ................................................................ 675
CHAPTER 136 - SIDEWALK REGULATIONS ............................................................................. 677
CHAPTER 137 - VACATION AND DISPOSAL OF STREETS ................................................... 681
CHAPTER 138 - STREET GRADES ................................................................................................ 683
TABLE OF CONTENTS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
-v-
BUILDING AND PROPERTY REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 140 - USE OF PUBLIC PROPERTY AND RIGHT-OF-WAY .................................. 701
CHAPTER 141 - SUBSURFACE MOISTURE DRAINAGE REGULATIONS ........................... 707
CHAPTER 142 - CONTROL OF STORM WATER DRAINAGE ................................................ 709
CHAPTER 145 - DANGEROUS BUILDINGS ................................................................................. 725
CHAPTER 147 - RENTAL INSPECTION PROGRAM ................................................................. 735
CHAPTER 150 - BUILDING NUMBERING ................................................................................... 751
CHAPTER 151 - TREES ..................................................................................................................... 753
CHAPTER 155 - BUILDING CODES ............................................................................................... 775
ZONING AND SUBDIVISION
CHAPTER 165 - SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS ......................................................................... 811
CHAPTER 170 - AIRPORT HEIGHT ZONING REGULATIONS .............................................. 841
CHAPTER 175 - ZONING REGULATIONS ................................................................................... 855
INDEX
APPENDIX:
USE AND MAINTENANCE OF THE CODE OF ORDINANCES ....................................................1
SUGGESTED FORMS:
DANGEROUS BUILDINGS - FIRST NOTICE ....................................................................................7
DANGEROUS BUILDINGS - NOTICE OF HEARING ......................................................................8
DANGEROUS BUILDINGS - RESOLUTION AND ORDER ............................................................9
NOTICE TO ABATE NUISANCE .......................................................................................................10
NOTICE OF REQUIRED SEWER CONNECTION ..........................................................................11
NOTICE OF HEARING ON REQUIRED SEWER CONNECTION ...............................................12
RESOLUTION AND ORDER FOR REQUIRED SEWER CONNECTION ...................................13

City of Sioux Center, Iowa Zoning Ordinance
Prepared by: NW IA Planning & Development 1
2014
Zoning
Ordinance
City of Sioux Center, Iowa Zoning Ordinance
Prepared by: NW IA Planning & Development 2
Basic Provisions ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ 8
Zoning Districts Established ------------------------------------------------------------------------- 10
Definitions/Use Classifications ---------------------------------------------------------------------- 14
Section 3.1. DEFINITIONS ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ 14
General Description of RESIDENTIAL USE TYPES: ------------------------------------------------------------- 26
General Description of COMMERCIAL USE TYPES: ----------------------------------------------------------- 27
General Description of INDUSTRIAL USE TYPES: ------------------------------------------------------------ 31
General Description of CIVIC USE TYPES: --------------------------------------------------------------------- 32
General Description of AGRICULTURAL USE TYPES: ------------------------------------------------------- 33
AG - Agriculture District ------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 36
RS - Residential Suburban District ----------------------------------------------------------------- 40
R-l - Single Family Residential District ------------------------------------------------------------ 44
R-2 - Medium Density Residential District ------------------------------------------------------- 48
R-3 - Multi-Family Residential District ------------------------------------------------------------ 52
MH - Mobile Home District ---------------------------------------------------------------------------- 56
PO – Professional Office District -------------------------------------------------------------------- 62
GC - General Commercial District ------------------------------------------------------------------- 64
HC - Highway Commercial District ----------------------------------------------------------------- 68
GI – General Industrial District ---------------------------------------------------------------------- 72
IP – Industrial Park District -------------------------------------------------------------------------- 76
BR – Bioscience/Research District ----------------------------------------------------------------- 80
PUD - Planned Unit Development District -------------------------------------------------------- 84
MU-PUD – Mixed-Use Planned Unit Development District ----------------------------------- 90
Sunrise Trails First Addition ------------------------------------------------------------------------- 96
Sunrise Trails Second Addition ------------------------------------------------------------------- 100
Additional Area, Yard and Height Regulations ------------------------------------------------ 104
17.1. INTENT ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 104
17.2. LOT OF RECORD -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 104
17.3. MULTIPLE PRINCIPAL STRUCTURES PER LOT ------------------------------------------------------- 104
17.4. YARD REGULATIONS -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 104
17.5. FENCES AND HEDGES ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 105
17.6. BUILDINGS TO HAVE ACCESS --------------------------------------------------------------------------- 106
17.7. USE OF PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAYS ----------------------------------------------------------------------- 106
17.8. BLOCK FRONTAGE CONTINUITY ----------------------------------------------------------------------- 106
17.9. HEIGHT MODIFICATIONS -------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 106
Additional Use Regulations ------------------------------------------------------------------------- 108
18.1 INTENT ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ 108
18.2 ACCESSORY BUILDINGS --------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 108
City of Sioux Center, Iowa Zoning Ordinance
Prepared by: NW IA Planning & Development 3
18.3 TEMPORARY USES --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 109
18.4 ADULT-ORIENTED ESTABLISHMENT REGULATIONS --------------------------------------------- 110
18.5 HOME OCCUPATIONS ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 113
18.6 RECREATIONAL VEHICLES ------------------------------------------------------------------------------ 114
18.7 MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS FOR RESIDENTIAL STRUCTURES --------------------------------- 114
18.8 RESIDENTIAL OCCUPANCY STANDARDS ------------------------------------------------------------ 115
18.9 DESIGN (ARCHITECTURAL) STANDARDS ------------------------------------------------------------ 117
18.10 PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT (PUD) – APPLICATION AND APPROVAL ------------------ 118
Site Plans ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ 122
19.1 SCALE -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 122
19.2 LEGAL INFORMATION ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 122
19.3 SITE PLAN -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 122
Off Street Parking and Loading Space ----------------------------------------------------------- 124
20.1 INTENT ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ 124
20.2 GENERAL PARKING AREA AND SURFACE REQUIREMENTS ------------------------------------- 124
20.3 OFF STREET PARKING REQUIREMENTS ------------------------------------------------------------- 125
20.4 COMPUTATION OF PARKING SPACES --------------------------------------------------------------- 126
20.5 LOCATION AND TYPE OF PARKING ------------------------------------------------------------------- 126
20.6 OFF STREET LOADING REQUIREMENTS ------------------------------------------------------------- 127
Sign Regulations --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 128
21.1 INTENT ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ 128
21.2 DEFINITIONS ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 128
21.3 REQUIREMENTS ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ 130
21.4 SPECIAL EXCEPTIONS ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ 132
21.5 ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS --------------------------------------------------------------------------- 132
21.6 GENERAL SIGN PROVISIONS --------------------------------------------------------------------------- 133
21.7 PERMITS REQUIRED ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 134
21.8 ADDITIONAL SIGN REGULATIONS – PERMITTED SIGNS ----------------------------------------- 135
21.9 UNSAFE AND UNLAWFUL SIGNS --------------------------------------------------------------------- 135
21.10 EXEMPTIONS --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 136
21.11 REMOVAL OF SIGNS ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ 137
District Buffers Required --------------------------------------------------------------------------- 138
22.1 INTENT ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ 138
22.2 CONDITIONS FOR REQUIRING A BUFFER ----------------------------------------------------------- 138
22.3 PERMISSIVE BUFFERS ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 138
22.4 BURDEN OF PROVISION OF A BUFFER -------------------------------------------------------------- 139
22.5 WAIVER OF BUFFER REQUIREMENT ----------------------------------------------------------------- 139
Open Space Requirements -------------------------------------------------------------------------- 140
23.1 INTENT ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 140
23.2 OPEN SPACE REQUIREMENTS ------------------------------------------------------------------------- 140
Nonconformities --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 142
24.1 INTENT ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ 142
24.2 NONCONFORMING USES OF LAND ------------------------------------------------------------------ 142
24.3 NONCONFORMING LOT OF RECORD ---------------------------------------------------------------- 143
24.4 NONCONFORMING STRUCTURES -------------------------------------------------------------------- 143
City of Sioux Center, Iowa Zoning Ordinance
Prepared by: NW IA Planning & Development 4
24.5 NONCONFORMING USES OF STRUCTURES AND LAND ----------------------------------------- 143
24.6 REPAIRS AND MAINTENANCE ------------------------------------------------------------------------- 144
24.7 USES UNDER EXCEPTION PROVISIONS NOT NONCONFORMING USES --------------------- 144
24.8 CHANGE OF TENANCY OR OWNERSHIP ------------------------------------------------------------- 144
Special Exceptions ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ 146
25.1 REQUIREMENTS ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ 146
25.2 JURISDICTION --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 146
25.3 APPLICATION FOR SPECIAL EXCEPTION PERMIT -------------------------------------------------- 146
25.4 PROCEDURES ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 147
25.5 STANDARDS ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 147
25.6 REVOCATION ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 148
25.7 SUPPLEMENTAL STANDARDS ------------------------------------------------------------------------- 149
25.8 SUPPLEMENTAL STANDARDS-WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES ------------ 149
Enforcement -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 166
26.1 ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICER ----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 166
26.2 ZONING COMPLIANCE ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 166
26.3 ZONING PERMITS REQUIRED -------------------------------------------------------------------------- 166
26.4 APPLICATION FOR ZONING COMPLIANCE PERMIT ----------------------------------------------- 166
26.5 CONSTRUCTION/USE TO BE AS PROVIDED IN APPLICATION, PLANS & PERMIT ---------- 167
26.6 FEES ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 167
26.7 SPECIAL EXCEPTIONS ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ 167
26.8 ADMINISTRATIVE APPEALS ---------------------------------------------------------------------------- 167
Violation and Penalty -------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 168
27.1 VIOLATION AND PENALTY ------------------------------------------------------------------------------ 168
27.2 RESTRAINING ORDER ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ 168
Planning and Zoning Commission ---------------------------------------------------------------- 170
28.1 CONFIRMATION OF THE PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION ---------------------------- 170
28.2 TERMS OF OFFICE ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 170
28.3 PROCEEDINGS OF THE PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION ------------------------------ 170
28.4 POWERS AND DUTIES ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 170
48.5 DECISIONS OF THE PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION ----------------------------------- 171
Board of Adjustment --------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 172
29.1 CONFIRMATION OF EXISTING BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT --------------------------------------- 172
29.2 PROCEEDINGS OF THE BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT ------------------------------------------------- 172
29.3 HEARINGS, APPEALS, AND NOTICE ------------------------------------------------------------------ 172
29.4 STAY OF PROCEEDINGS --------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 173
29.5 POWERS AND DUTIES ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 173
29.6 VARIANCES ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 173
29.7 DECISIONS OF THE BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT ------------------------------------------------------- 175
29.8 APPEALS FROM THE BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT --------------------------------------------------- 175
Changes and Amendments -------------------------------------------------------------------------- 176
30.1 PROCEDURES ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 176
30.2 INITIATION ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 176
30.3 APPLICATION FOR CHANGE IN ZONING DISTRICT BOUNDARIES ----------------------------- 177
30.4 PUBLIC HEARING ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 178
City of Sioux Center, Iowa Zoning Ordinance
Prepared by: NW IA Planning & Development 5
30.5 PROTEST PROVISION ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ 178
30.6 NEW APPLICATION --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 178
City of Sioux Center, Iowa Zoning Ordinance
Prepared by: NW IA Planning & Development 6
ARTICLE OF ADOPTION
ORDINANCE NO. SC-O-1-06
REPLACES ORDINANCE NO. SC-0-1-91 AND AMENDMENTS THERETO
ZONING ORDINANCE OF THE CITY OF
SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
AN ORDINANCE to regulate and restrict the location and use of buildings, structures, and land for
trade, industry, residence, and other purposes; to regulate and restrict the height of buildings and
structures, the number and size of buildings and other structures; to establish the size of yards
and courts and other open spaces; to establish minimum lot areas; to regulate the density of
population and the percentage of lot that may be occupied; to require off-street parking; to
regulate the location, size, and number of signs; to divide the City into districts for such
purposes; to provide for the administration and enforcement of its provisions; to confirm the
Board of Adjustment; to prescribe penalties for the violation of its provisions, all in accordance
with Chapter 414, Code of Iowa; and to be known, and cited as "The Zoning Ordinance of the
City of Sioux Center, Iowa".
WHEREAS, the City Council of the City of Sioux Center, Iowa deems it necessary to prevent and to
lessen congestion in the streets and highways; to secure safety from fire, flood, and panic and
other dangers; to protect the public health and general welfare; to provide adequate light and air;
to prevent the overcrowding of land; to avoid undue concentration of population; to facilitate the
adequate provision of transportation, water, sewerage, schools, parks, and other public
requirements; to conserve the value of buildings, and encourage the most appropriate use of land
throughout the City, all in accordance with a Comprehensive Plan,
NOW THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF SIOUX
CENTER, IOWA:
City of Sioux Center, Iowa Zoning Ordinance
Prepared by: NW IA Planning & Development 7
Effective Date
31.1 EFFECTIVE DATE.
This ordinance shall be in full effect from and after its adoption and publication as required by law
Adoption:
ORDINANCE NO. SC-O-01-06
ZONING ORDINANCE OF THE CITY OF SIOUX CENTER, IOWA
NOW THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED BY THE
CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF SIOUX CENTER:
Passed and Approved this 18th day of , 2006.
Mayor, City of Sioux Center
Sioux Center City Clerk
I hereby certify that the foregoing was published as ordinance no. in the City of Sioux Center, Iowa
on the ____ day of ____________, 2006
City of Sioux Center, Iowa Zoning Ordinance
Prepared by: NW IA Planning & Development 8
ARTICLE I
Basic Provisions
Article 1: Basic Provisions
Section 1.1. Short Title
Section 1.2. Jurisdiction
Section 1.3. Repeal and Saving Clause
Section 1.4. Validity and Severability Clause
Section 1.5. Conflict with Other Laws
Section 1.1. SHORT TITLE
This Ordinance shall be known and may be cited and referenced to as: “The City of Sioux Center
Zoning Ordinance," to the same effect as if the full title were stated.
Section 1.2. JURISDICTION
In accordance with the provisions of Chapter 414 of the Code of Iowa and amendatory acts thereto, this
Ordinance is adopted by the City of Sioux Center, Iowa governing the zoning of all lands within the
corporate limits of the City.
Section 1.3. REPEAL AND SAVINGS CLAUSE
Effective on the effective date of this ordinance the City of Sioux Center Zoning Ordinance No. SC-
0-1-91 and amendments thereto is repealed. The repeal of said ordinance shall not have the effect to
release or relinquish any penalty, forfeiture or liability incurred under said ordinance or any part
thereof, and such ordinance and all parts thereof shall be treated as still remaining in force for the
purpose of instituting or sustaining any proper action or prosecution for the enforcement of such
penalty, forfeiture or liability.
Section 1.4. VALIDITY AND SEVERABILITY CLAUSE
If any court of competent jurisdiction shall declare any part of this ordinance to be invalid, such
ruling shall not affect any other provisions of this ordinance not specifically included in said ruling.
If any court of competent jurisdiction shall declare invalid the application of any provision of this
ordinance to a particular land, parcel, lot, district, use, building or structure, such ruling shall not
affect the application of said provision to any other land, parcel, lot, district, use, building or structure
not specifically included in said ruling.
Section 1.5. CONFLICT WITH OTHER LAWS
1) Where any condition imposed by any provision of this ordinance upon the use of any lot,
building or structure is either more restrictive or less restrictive than any comparable condition
imposed by any other provision of this ordinance or by the provision of an ordinance adopted
under any other law, or by provision of any Statute, the provision which is more restrictive or
which imposes a higher standard or requirement shall apply.
2) This ordinance is not intended to abrogate or annul any easement, covenant or other private
agreement provided that where any provision of this ordinance is more restrictive or imposes a
higher standard or requirement than such easement, covenant or other private agreement, the
provision of this ordinance shall govern.
City of Sioux Center, Iowa Zoning Ordinance
Prepared by: NW IA Planning & Development 9
City of Sioux Center, Iowa Zoning Ordinance
Prepared by: NW IA Planning & Development 10
ARTICLE II
Zoning Districts Established
Article 2: Zoning Districts Established
Section 2.1. Zoning Districts Map
Section 2.2. Interpretations of Districts Boundaries
Section 2.3. Road or Public Right-of-Way Vacation
Section 2.4. Annexed Territory
Section 2.5. Application of Regulations
Section 2.1. ZONING DISTRICTS MAP
The City Council shall cause to be prepared and approved, an official Zoning Districts Map showing
the various districts, which may be changed or corrected from time to time as recommended by the
Planning Commission and enacted by the City Council. The map shall be kept up to date by the
Zoning Administrator and will be placed in a convenient place in the municipal office of the City of
Sioux Center for reference at any time.
1) Districts: The City Council shall divide the Official Zoning Map of the City into districts or
zones, as follows:
AG – Agricultural Districts
RS – Suburban Residential
R-1 – Single Family Residential District
R-2 – Medium Density Residential District
R-3 – Multiple Family Residential District
MH – Mobile Home District
PO – Professional Office District
GC – General Commercial District
HC – Highway Commercial District
GI – General Industrial District
IP – Industrial Park District
BR – Bioscience/Research District
PUD – Planned Unit Development District
2) Boundaries: The boundaries of these districts are indicated and established as shown upon maps
designated as the Official Zoning Map of Sioux Center, Iowa, which, with all their notations,
designations, references, and other matters shown thereon, shall be as much a part of this zoning
Ordinance as if fully described and set forth herein.
Amendments, supplements, or changes of the boundaries of districts as shown on the Official
Zoning Map shall be made by an Ordinance amending this Zoning Ordinance. The amending
Ordinance shall refer to the Official Zoning Map and shall set out the identification of the area
affected by legal description, and identify the zoning district as the same exists and the new district
designation applicable to said property. Said Ordinance shall, after adoption and publication, be
recorded by the City Clerk as other Ordinances and a certified copy thereof be attached to the
Official Zoning Map. Such amendatory Ordinance shall, however, not repeal or reenact said map,
but only amend it. The Official Zoning Map, together with amending Ordinances, shall be the final
authority as to the current zoning status of land areas, buildings, and other structures in the city.
City of Sioux Center, Iowa Zoning Ordinance
Prepared by: NW IA Planning & Development 11
3) Official Map: The Official Zoning Map shall be on file in a convenient place in the municipal
office of the City of Sioux Center and all references hereafter to said official map shall mean the
map just referred to, said map by this reference being made a part of this Zoning Title. The
Official Zoning Map shall be identified by the Mayor and attested by the City Clerk.
In the event that the Official Zoning Map becomes damaged, destroyed, lost or difficult to interpret
because of use or the nature of number of changes and additions, the City Council may, by
resolution, adopt a new Official Zoning Map which shall supersede the prior Official Zoning Map.
The new Official Zoning Map may correct drafting or other errors of omission in the prior Official
Zoning Map, but no such corrections shall have the effect of amending the original Official Zoning
Ordinance or any subsequent amendments thereof.
Section 2.2. INTERPRETATION OF DISTRICT BOUNDARIES
Where uncertainty exists as to a district’s boundaries as shown on the Official Zoning Map, the
following rules shall apply.
1) Boundaries indicated as approximately following the center lines of streets, highways, alleys or
other public right-of-ways shall be construed to follow such center lines;
2) Boundaries indicated as approximately following platted lot lines shall be construed as following
such lot lines;
3) Boundaries indicated as approximately following section lines, quarter section lines, or quarterquarter
section lines shall be construed as following such lines;
4) Boundaries indicated as approximately following city limits shall be construed as following such
city limits;
5) Boundaries indicated as approximately following the center line of streams, rivers, canals, lakes or
other bodies of water shall be construed as following such center lines;
6) Boundaries indicated as parallel to or extensions of features indicated in subsections 1-5 above shall
be so construed. Distances not specifically indicated on the Official Zoning Map shall be determined
by the scale of the map.
7) Where physical or cultural features existing on the ground are at variance with those shown on the
Official Zoning Map, or in other circumstances not covered by subsection 1-6 above, the Board of
Adjustment shall interpret the district boundaries.
Section 2.3. ROAD OR PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY VACATION
Whenever any road, street, or other public right-of-way is vacated by the official action of the City
Council, the Zoning District(s) adjoining each side of such road or public right-of-way shall
automatically extend to the center of such vacation and all area included in such vacation shall then and
thenceforth be subject to all appropriate regulations of the extended district.
Section 2.4. ANNEXED TERRITORY
Upon the annexation of any land into the City of Sioux Center, the City Council, upon recommendation
of the Sioux Center Planning and Zoning Commission, shall determine which zoning district shall be
applicable to the annexed land.
City of Sioux Center, Iowa Zoning Ordinance
Prepared by: NW IA Planning & Development 12
Section 2.5. APPLICATION OF REGULATIONS
No structures or building or part thereof shall be erected, constructed, reconstructed; remodeled,
converted, altered, enlarged, extended, raised, moved or used, and no land shall be used except in
conformity with the regulations herein prescribed for the district in which such building or land may
be situated and until a zoning compliance permit has been issued by the Zoning Administrator as
provided herein.
1) The principal building on a lot shall front on a street or a public place.
2) No yard or lot existing at the time of passage of this ordinance shall be reduced in dimension or area
below the minimum required by this ordinance. No yard, off-street parking or loading space, or
other open space provided about any building for the purpose of complying with the provisions
of this ordinance shall be considered as providing a yard, off-street parking or loading space, or
open space for any other building, structure, or use; nor shall the lot area per family be reduced in
any manner except in conformity with the area regulations herein established for the district in
which such building is located.
3) The depths of front yards or rear yards and width of side yards shall be measured from the lot line
to the nearest point of the adjacent building wall of the building under consideration.
4) No lot shall hereafter be so reduced in area that any required yard, court or other open space will
be smaller than is prescribed in this Article for the district in which it is located.
5) No accessory building in the rear of any principal building on the same interior or corner lot shall
be used for residential purposes.
6) Any portion of a building that is covered by a roof shall be considered as a part of the building.
7) Every building hereafter erected or structurally altered shall be located on a lot as herein defined and
in no case shall there be more than one (1) principal building on one (1) lot unless otherwise
provided in this ordinance.
8) No building shall be erected or structurally altered to the extent specifically provided hereinafter
except in conformity with the off-street parking and loading regulations of this ordinance.
These regulations shall be required in addition to any applicable State and City health and building
regulations.
City of Sioux Center, Iowa Zoning Ordinance
Prepared by: NW IA Planning & Development 13
City of Sioux Center, Iowa Zoning Ordinance
Prepared by: NW IA Planning & Development 14
ARTICLE III
Definitions/Use Classifications
Article 3: Definitions/Use Classifications
Section 3.1. Definitions
Section 3.2. Use Classifications
Section 3.1. DEFINITIONS
For the purpose of interpreting this ordinance, certain words, terms and expressions are herein
defined. Words used in the present tense include the future; the singular number includes the plural
and the plural includes the singular; the word “may” is discretionary and the word “shall” is always
mandatory; the word “person” includes a firm, association, organization, partnership, trust, company,
or corporation as well as an individual; the words “used” or “occupied” include the words intended,
designed or arranged to be used or occupied.
1. ACCESSORY USE (OR STRUCTURE): A building or use which:
1) is subordinate to and serves a principal building or use;
2) is subordinate in area, extent, or purpose to the principal building or use served;
3) contributes to the comfort, convenience, or necessity of occupants of the principal building
or principal use; and
4) is located on the same zoning lot as the principal building or use.
2. ADDITION: Any construction which increases the site coverage, height, length, width, or gross
floor area of a structure.
3. ALLEY: A public or private thoroughfare not more than twenty feet (20') in width, for the use of
vehicles, which affords only a secondary means of access to abutting properties.
4. ALTERATION: Any change in the supporting members of a building, such as bearing walls,
partitions, columns, beams or girders. The enlargement of the size or height of a building
shall be construed to be a structural alteration.
5. APARTMENT: A single room or set of rooms occupied as a dwelling which is part of a multi-family
structure.
6. ATTACHED: Having one or more walls common with a principal building, or joined to a
principal building by a covered porch or passageway, the roof of which is a part or extension
of a principal building.
7. BASEMENT: A story partly underground but having at least one-half (1/2) of its height above the
curb level, and also one half (1/2) of its height above the highest level of the adjoining
ground. A basement shall be counted as a story under the provisions of this Code.
8. BED & BREAKFAST ESTABLISHMENT: A Private, owner-occupied housing unit which provides
up to five (5) sleeping rooms for rent to the general public. Meals shall only be served to those
taking lodging in the facility and the owners and employees of the operation. Individual units
which are designed to be rented shall contain no cooking facilities.
City of Sioux Center, Iowa Zoning Ordinance
Prepared by: NW IA Planning & Development 15
9. BILLBOARD: A billboard, shall include all structures, regardless of the material used in
construction, that are erected, maintained or used for public display of posters, painted signs,
or wall signs, whether the structure be placed on the wall or freestanding. Billboards include
pictures or other pictorial reading material which advertises a business or attraction which is
not carried on, manufactured, grown, or sold on the premises where the said signs or
billboards are located.
10. BLOCK: That property abutting on one side of a street, and lying within the two nearest intercepting
or intersecting streets or lying within the nearest intercepting or intersecting streets and
unsubdivided acreage or railroad right-of-way.
11. BUILDABLE AREA: The portion of a lot or parcel remaining after required yard setbacks have
been provided.
12. BUILDING: A structure that is completely enclosed by a roof and by solid exterior walls along
whose outside faces can be traced an unbroken line for the complete perimeter of the structure,
which is permanently affixed to a lot or lots, and used or intended for shelter, support, or
enclosure of persons, animals or property of any kind. When separated by division walls from
the ground up without openings, each portion of such structure shall be deemed a separate
building. The word "building" includes the word "structure".
13. BUILDING, ACCESSORY: A building which is subordinate to the primary building on the
same lot, not attached thereto and used for purposes customarily incidental to those of the
primary building. Private detached garages are considered accessory buildings.
14. BUILDING, HEIGHT OF: The vertical distance from the average natural grade at the building
line to the highest point of the roof. Where a dwelling is situated on a lot with more than one
grade or level, the measurements shall be taken from the main entrance elevation.
15. BUILDING, PRINCIPAL: The building in which the primary use of the lot or parcel is conducted.
16. BUILDING LINE: The setback distance from the front property line, rear lot line, and side lot
lines as provided in the Ordinance.
17. BUILDING WALL: The wall of the principal building forming a part of the main structure. The
foundation walls of enclosed porches or piazzas, steps, walks and retaining wall or similar
structures, shall not be considered as building walls under the provisions of this Code.
18. BULK REGULATIONS: The combinations of controls that establish the maximum size of a
building and its location on the lot. Components of bulk regulations include: size and height of
building; location of exterior walls at all levels with respect to lot lines, streets, or other
buildings; building coverage; gross floor area of building in relation to the lot area; open space;
and amount of lot area provided per dwelling unit.
19. BUSINESS (OR COMMERCIAL): The engaging in the purchase, sale, or exchange of goods or
services, or the operation for the profit of offices or recreational amusement enterprises.
20. CARPORT: Space for the housing or storage of vehicles and enclosed on not more than 2 sides
by walls, and is attached to and considered a part of the principal building.
City of Sioux Center, Iowa Zoning Ordinance
Prepared by: NW IA Planning & Development 16
21. CELLAR: A story having more than one-half (1/2) of its height below the curb level, or below
the highest level of the adjoining ground. A cellar shall not be considered as a story for the
purpose of this Code.
22. CHILD DAY CARE: The care, supervision, or guidance of a child under eighteen years of age
by a person other than the parent, guardian, relative, or custodian for periods of less than
twenty-four hours per day, on a regular basis in a place other than the child’s home.
23. CHILD DAY CARE CENTER: A facility providing child day care for seven (7) or more
children for compensation but not defined as a group day care home.
24. CITY: The City of Sioux Center, Iowa
25. CLUB OR LODGE (PRIVATE): An association of persons for the promotion of some nonprofit
object who are bonafide members paying annual dues, which owns, hires, or leases a building,
or portion thereof. The use of such premises being restricted to members and their guests. It
shall be permissible to serve food and meals to members and their guests on such premises
provided adequate dining room space and kitchen facilities are available and are operated in
compliance with State and Municipal laws.
26. COMMISSION (OR PLANNING COMMISSION): The Sioux Center Planning and Zoning
Commission.
27. CONDOMINIUM: A building, or group of buildings, in which the dwelling units, offices, or
floor area are owned independently, and whereas the structure, common areas, and facilities
are owned by all of the owners on a proportional, undivided basis.
28. COTTAGE: A small single unit structure used for vacation or vacationers occupancy.
29. COUNCIL: The Sioux Center City Council.
30. DECK: An unenclosed, roofless structure adjoined to the principal building. Decks higher than
twelve (12) inches above the average grade of the ground shall also be subject to required yard
setbacks.
31. DETACHED: Fully separated from any other building, or joined to another building by
structural members not constituting an enclosed or covered space.
32. DISTRICT: A part, zone, or geographic area within the city within which certain zoning or
development regulations apply.
33. DRIVEWAY: A permanently surfaced area providing vehicular access between a street and an
off-street parking or loading area.
34. DUPLEX: A building containing two single-family dwelling units totally separated from each
other by an unpierced wall extending from ground to roof. See DWELLING, TWO FAMILY.
35. DWELLING: Any house, building, or mobile home, or portion thereof intended to be occupied
as the place of habitation of human beings, either permanently or transiently.
City of Sioux Center, Iowa Zoning Ordinance
Prepared by: NW IA Planning & Development 17
36. DWELLING, EXISTING RELOCATED RESIDENTIAL: A residence which presently exists and
is proposed to be relocated upon a lot within a subdivision of Sioux Center, Iowa.
37. DWELLING, SINGLE FAMILY: A detached building that is arranged, designed for or occupied
as the primary residence of one (1) single family, having no party wall in common with an
adjacent house or houses and is surrounded by open space or yards.
38. DWELLING, TWO FAMILY: A detached building that is arranged, designed for or occupied as
the residences of two (2) families living independently of each other with separate
housekeeping and cooking facilities for each. See also: DUPLEX.
39. DWELLING, MULTIPLE FAMILY: An apartment house or dwelling used or intended to be
used or occupied as the residence of three (3) or more families living independently of each
other, with separate housekeeping and cooking facilities for each.
40. EASEMENT: A grant of one or more of the property rights by the property owner to and/or for
use by the public, a corporation, or another person or entity.
41. ENCROACHMENT: Any obstruction or illegal or unauthorized intrusion in a delineated
floodway, right-of-way, or on adjacent land.
42. ESSENTIAL SERVICES: The erection, construction, alteration or maintenance by public utilities
or governmental agencies of underground or over-head gas, electrical or water transmission or
distribution systems, including poles, wires, mains, drains, sewers, pipes, conduits, cables, fire
alarm boxes, police call boxes, traffic signals, hydrants, and other similar equipment and
accessories in connection with and necessary for the furnishing of adequate service by such
public utilities, governmental agencies, and/or for the public health, safety or general welfare,
but not including buildings.
43. FAÇADE: The exterior walls of a building exposed to public view or that wall viewed by
persons not within the building.
44. FAMILY: See Section 18.8 “Maximum Residential Occupancy” part 1(e).
45. FARM: An area of ten (10) acres or more which is used for the growing of the usual farm
products such as vegetables, fruits, trees and grain, and their storage on the premises, as well
as the raising thereon of the usual farm poultry and animals. The term "farm" includes the
operating of such an area for one (1) or more of the above uses including the necessary
accessory uses for treating or storing produce; provided, however, that the operation of
accessory uses shall be secondary to the normal farming activities and provided further that
farming does not include the commercial feeding of animals or poultry.
46. FENCE: Any artificially constructed barrier of approved fencing material or combination of
materials erected to enclose or screen areas of land.
47. FLOODPLAIN: The channel and relatively flat area adjoining the channel of a natural stream or
river that has been or may be covered by flood waters.
City of Sioux Center, Iowa Zoning Ordinance
Prepared by: NW IA Planning & Development 18
48. FLOOR AREA: The square feet of floor space within the outside line of walls, including the total
of all space on all floors of a building. Floor area shall not include porches, garages, or space
in a basement or cellar that is not finished living space or used for storage or other incidental
uses.
49. FRONTAGE: All the property on one side of a street between two intersecting streets (crossing or
terminating), measured along the line of the street, or if the street is dead ended, then all of the
property abutting on one side between an intersecting street and the dead end of the street.
50. GARAGE: An accessory building or portion of a building used only for the enclosed parking of
or storage of one or more motor vehicles by the occupants of the premises or the leasing of
space as provided herein, including covered parking space or carport; but in which no
business services or industry connected with motor vehicles is carried on other than leasing
of space.
51. GRADE: The lowest horizontal elevation of a finished surface of the ground, paving, or
sidewalk at a point where the height is to be measured.
52. HOME OCCUPATION: An accessory occupation or profession conducted entirely within a
dwelling unit by the inhabitants thereof.
A Home occupation:
a. Is carried on in a residential dwelling unit;
b. Is carried on by a member of the family residing in the dwelling unit;
c. Is clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the dwelling unit for residential purposes;
d. Does not employ more than one (1) full time employee (FTE) outside the immediate
family;
e. Has no exterior display, no exterior storage of materials, and no other exterior indication of
the home occupation or variation from the residential character of the principal building,
other than one (1) exterior sign located on private property, off of the public right-of-way, or
fifteen (15') from the curb, whichever is further; in which sign shall not exceed four (4)
square feet in area, shall not exceed four (4) feet in height, and shall not have flashing lights
or be artificially lighted.
f. Shall not occupy more than 30 percent of the area of one (1) floor of the dwelling unit;
g. Does not produce offensive or objectionable noise, vibration, smoke, dust, odors, heat, or
glare rendering such building or premises objectionable to the residential character of the
neighborhood;
h. Does not generate traffic in greater volumes that would normally be expected in a
residential area.
53. HOUSE TRAILER: See MOBILE HOME
54. HOUSEHOLD: A family living together in a single dwelling unit, with common access to all
living and eating areas and all areas and facilities within the dwelling unit.
55. HOUSING UNIT: See DWELLING
56. INCIDENTAL: Subordinate and minor in significance and bearing a reasonable relationship
with the primary use.
City of Sioux Center, Iowa Zoning Ordinance
Prepared by: NW IA Planning & Development 19
57. INDUSTRY: Those fields of economic activity including forestry, fishing, hunting, and
trapping; mining; construction; manufacturing; transportation, communication, electric, gas,
and sanitary services; and wholesale trade.
58. INSTITUTION: A building or premises occupied by a non-profit corporation or establishment
for public use.
59. JUNK (OR SALVAGE): Any old scrap copper, brass, rope, rags, batteries, paper, trash, rubber
debris, waste appliances, furniture, equipment, building demolition materials or structural
steel materials. This definition shall also include junked, dismantled, or wrecked motor
vehicles, or parts of motor vehicles, and iron, steel or other old or scrap ferrous or nonferrous
material. Junk shall also mean waste, yard waste not stored in an approved manner as
determined by the City of Sioux Center, reclaimable material or debris, whether or not stored
or used in conjunction with dismantling, processing, salvage, storage, baling, disposal or
other use or disposition.
60. JUNK VEHICLE OR JUNK MACHINERY: See Title V of Article 12-93 through 12-95 of the
Sioux Center Municipal Code.
61. JUNKYARD (or SALVAGE YARD): Any open area of any lot or parcel where waste, discarded
or salvaged materials are bought, sold, exchanged, baled or packed, disassembled, kept,
stored or handled, including scrap metals or scrap materials, or the abandonment or
dismantling of machinery, motor vehicles, or other vehicles, or parts thereof.
62. LAND USE: A description of how land is occupied or utilized.
63. LANDSCAPED: An area devoted to or developed predominantly with plant material or natural
landscape features, including lawn, ground cover, gardens, trees, shrubs, and other plant
materials; and also including accessory decorative outdoor landscape elements such as pools,
fountains, water features, paved or decorated surfaces or rock, stone, brick, block or similar
material (excluding driveways, parking, loading, or storage areas), and sculptural elements,
provided that the use of brick, stone aggregate, or other inorganic materials shall not
predominate over the use of plant materia1.
64. LOADING SPACE: An area used for loading or unloading of goods from a vehicle in
connection with the use of the site on which such space in located.
65. LOT AREA: The net horizontal area within bounding front, side and rear lot lines, providing
access to a street and excluding any public or private easement or right of way providing
access to another lot not to exclude utility easements.
66. LOT: A parcel of land as established by plat, subdivision, or as otherwise permitted by law,
under one ownership, which may be owned, used, developed, or built upon, having its
frontage upon one (1) or more streets or an officially approved public place.
67. LOT, CORNER: A lot fronting on two (2) intersecting streets.
68. LOT, INTERIOR: A lot other than a corner lot.
City of Sioux Center, Iowa Zoning Ordinance
Prepared by: NW IA Planning & Development 20
69. LOT, THROUGH: An interior lot having
frontage on two parallel, or
approximately parallel streets and also
known as a double frontage lot.
70. LOT (or BUILDING) COVERAGE:
The area of a lot covered by buildings
or roofed areas, but excluding
incidental projecting eaves and
gutters, balconies, and similar features
and excluding ground level paving,
landscaping, and open recreational
facilities.
71. LOT DEPTH: The distance from the
front lot line to the rear lot line. In the
case of a lot of irregular shape, the
mean depth shall be the lot depth.
72. LOT OF RECORD: A lot of which is a
part of a subdivision, the plat of
which has been recorded in the office
of the County of Recorder of Sioux
County, Iowa; or a lot or parcel of
land, the deed or valid contract of sale
of which was recorded in the office of
the County Recorder of Sioux
County, Iowa prior to the effective
date of this Ordinance.
73. LOT WIDTH: The distances between the side lot lines. In the case of a lot of irregular shape, the
mean width shall be the lot width.
74. LOT LINES: The lines bounding a lot.
75. LOT LINE, FRONT: In the case of an interior lot abutting on only one street, the "front lot line"
is the street line of such lot. In the case of any other lot, the front lot line will be such street
line as is located in front of the main entrance to the principal structure.
76. LOT LINE, REAR: That boundary line that is opposite and most distant from the front lot line.
77. LOT LINE, SIDE: Any boundary lines not a front line or a rear line.
78. MANUFACTURED HOUSING: A factory-built structure which is manufactured or constructed
under the authority of 42 U.S.C. Sec. 5403, Federal Manufactured Home Construction and
Safety Standards, and is to be used as a place for human habitation, but which is not
constructed with a permanent hitch or other device allowing it to be moved other than for the
purpose of moving it to a permanent site, and which does not have permanently attached to
its body and frame any wheels or axles. For the purpose of these regulations, a manufactured
City of Sioux Center, Iowa Zoning Ordinance
Prepared by: NW IA Planning & Development 21
home shall have been built after June 15, 1976 and shall bear a seal certifying that it is in
compliance with the Federal Manufactured Housing Construction Act of 1974. A mobile
home is not a manufactured home unless it has been converted to real property and is taxed
as a site-built dwelling. For the purposes of these regulations, manufactured homes shall be
considered the same as any site built single-family detached dwelling.
79. MANUFACTURED HOUSING CONVERTED TO REAL ESTATE: An unencumbered
manufactured home which has been attached to a permanent foundation on real estate owned
by the manufactured home owner, which has had any vehicular or other transportation frame
modified or destroyed, rendering it impossible to reconvert it to a manufactured home and
which has been inspected by the assessor, the manufactured home title, registration, and
license collected from the owner and property entered on the tax rolls of the Sioux County
Assessor.
80. MOBILE HOME: Any vehicle without motive power used or so manufactured or constructed as
to permit its being used as a conveyance upon the public streets and highways and so
designed, constructed, or reconstructed as will permit the vehicle to be used as a place for
human habitation by one or more persons; but shall also include any such vehicle with
motive power not registered as a motor vehicle. See Also: RECREATIONAL VEHICLE.
81. MOBILE HOME PARK: Any site, lot, field or tract of land under single ownership upon which
two (2) or more occupied mobile homes are placed and connected to utilities, either free of
charge or for revenue, for nontransient purposes; and shall also include any buildings,
structures, tent, vehicle or enclosure used or intended for use as part of the equipment of such
mobile home park.
82. MOBILE HOME SPACE: An area within a designated mobile home park which is designed for
and designated as the location for a single mobile home and the exclusive use of its
occupants.
83. MODULAR HOME: Factory-built housing certified as meeting the State Building Code as
applicable to modular housing. Once certified by the State, modular homes shall be subject to
the same standards as site-built homes.
84. NONCONFORMING USE: A lawful use of any land, building, or structure, other than a sign,
that does not conform with currently applicable use regulations, but which complied with use
regulations in effect at the time the use was established.
85. NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE: A structure or building in size, dimensions, or location of
which was lawful prior to the adoption, revision, or amendment to the zoning Ordinance
codified in this title, but which fails to conform to present requirements of the zoning district.
86. OCCUPANCY (or OCCUPIED): The residing of an individual or individuals overnight in a
dwelling unit or the storage or use of equipment, merchandise, or machinery in any public,
commercial, or industrial building.
87. OFFICIAL (ZONING) MAP: An ordinance in map form adopted by the governing body that
conclusively shows the location of zoning districts boundaries, proposed streets, public areas,
and other data referencing the distinction and separation of zoned land uses.
City of Sioux Center, Iowa Zoning Ordinance
Prepared by: NW IA Planning & Development 22
88. PARKING AREA: An area on a lot or within a building, or both, including none or more parking
spaces together with driveways, aisles, turning and maneuvering areas, clearances, and
similar features, and meeting the requirements established by this Ordinance. Parking areas
shall include parking lots, garages, and parking structures.
89. PARKING LOT: An off-street, ground level open area usually improved for the temporary
storage of motor vehicles. See also: PARKING AREA.
90. PARKING SPACE: An area, enclosed or unenclosed, having dimensions of not less than nine (9)
feet by twenty (20) feet (180 sq. ft.) plus necessary maneuvering space for the parking of a
motor vehicle, and connected with a street or alley by a surfaced driveway which affords
satisfactory ingress and egress for automobiles. Space required for maneuvering, incidental to
parking or unparking, shall not encroach upon any public right-of-way. Driveways for one and
two family structures may be considered as parking spaces. When four (4) or more
automobile parking spaces are to be grouped as a common facility, meeting a requirement of
this definition, the individual car spaces plus the area necessary for driveways shall total not
less than 315 square feet per car space.
91. PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT (PUD): An area of minimum contiguous size specified in
this Ordinance developed according to plan as a single entity and containing one or more
structures or land uses with appurtenant or adjacent common areas.
92. PORCH, OPEN: A roofed structure, open on two (2) or more sides, projecting from the front,
side or rear wall of the building.
93. PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USE: See USE: 1. Principal Permitted Use.
94. PROHIBITED USE: Any use that is not permitted in a zoning district.
95. PROPERTY: A lot, parcel, or tract of land together with the buildings and structures located
thereon.
96. PUBLIC NOTICE: A publication of the time and place of any public hearing typically not less
than four (4) or not more than twenty (20) days prior to the date of said hearing in one
newspaper of general circulation in the City. In the instances of publications amending or
adopting changes to this Ordinance, the public notice notification period is not less than
seven (7) or not more than twenty (20) days prior to the date of said public hearing.
97. RECREATIONAL VEHICLE: A vehicle or structure so designed and constructed in such a
manner as will permit occupancy thereof as sleeping quarters for one or more persons, or the
conduct of any business or profession, occupation, trade (or use as a selling or advertising
device), or for sporting or recreational purposes. A recreational vehicle is so designed that it
is or may be mounted on wheels and used as a conveyance on highways or city streets,
propelled or drawn by its own or other motive power, except a device used exclusively upon
stationary rails or tracks. Such a vehicle shall be customarily or ordinarily used for, but not
limited to, vacationing, recreational purposes, travel trailers, pick-up campers, camping
trailers, motor coach homes, or converted trucks and/or buses; and not used as a place of
human habitation for more than ninety (90) days in any twelve (12) month period, or it shall
be classed as a mobile home.
City of Sioux Center, Iowa Zoning Ordinance
Prepared by: NW IA Planning & Development 23
98. RESIDENTIAL CONVENIENCE SERVICE: A use or activity of a commercial nature
conducted as an accessory use to multiple family residential or mobile home park residential
use, and intended solely for the convenience of residents thereof.
99. ROADSIDE STAND: A temporary structure, unenclosed, and so designed and constructed that
the structure is easily portable or can be readily moved, and which is adjacent to a road and
used for the sale of farm products produced or grown on the premises.
100. ROOMS, HABITABLE: A room which provides the required area and window area to provide
necessary light and ventilation of occupants, and shall be clean and sanitary at all times.
101. SALVAGE YARD: See JUNKYARD.
102. SETBACK: The distance between any lot line and the supporting walls or structures of any
building or deck more than 12” above grade.
103. SETBACK LINE: A line within a lot parallel to and measured from a corresponding lot line,
forming the boundary of a required yard and defining that minimum distance between the
building and property line which buildings and structures may not be placed.
104. SIGN: An identification, description, illustration, or device which is affixed to or represented
directly or indirectly upon a building, structure or land and which directs attention to a
product, place, activity, person, institution or business; provided, however the following shall
not be included in the application of the sign regulations as described in Article XXI of this
ordinance.
a. Signs not exceeding two (2) square feet in area and bearing only property numbers, post
box numbers, names of occupants of the premises or other identification of premises not
having commercial connotations;
b. Flags and insignias of any government except when displayed in connection with
commercial promotion;
c. Legal notices, identification, informational or directional signage erected or required by
governmental bodies.
d. Integral decorative or architectural features of buildings, except letters, trademarks,
moving parts, or moving lighting;
e. Signs directing and guiding traffic and parking on private property, but bearing not
advertising matter.
105. SIGN AREA: That area enclosed by one contiguous line, connecting the extreme points or
edges of a sign. The area shall be determined by using the largest area or silhouette visible at
any one time from any one point. This does not include the main supporting sign structure.
106. SITE PLAN: A plan, prepared to scale, showing accurately and with complete dimensioning,
all of the buildings, structures and uses, and the principal site development features including
parking, access, and landscaping and screening, proposed for a specific parcel of land.
107. SPOT ZONING: Rezoning of a lot or parcel of land to benefit an owner for a use incompatible
with surrounding land uses and that does not further the comprehensive plan.
108. SPRAWL: Uncontrolled growth, usually of a low-density nature, in previously rural areas and
some distance from existing development and infrastructure.
City of Sioux Center, Iowa Zoning Ordinance
Prepared by: NW IA Planning & Development 24
109. STORY: That part of any building comprised between any floor and the floor or attic next
above; the first story of a building is the lowest story having at least one-half (1/2) of its
height above the highest level of adjoining ground.
110. STREET: A public or private thoroughfare that affords the primary means of access to abutting
property.
111. STREET, FRONT: The street or public place upon which a plot abuts. If a plot abuts upon
more than one street or public place it shall mean the street in front of the principal or
primary entrance to the building.
112. STREET, PUBLIC: A public thoroughfare twenty feet (20') or more in width.
113. STREET (OR ROAD) LINE: The dividing line between a lot, tract or parcel of land and a
contiguous road, street or alley.
114. STRUCTURAL ALTERATION: Any replacement or changes in the type of construction or in
the supporting members of a building beyond ordinary repairs and maintenance; such as
bearing walls or partitions, columns, beams or girders.
115. STRUCTURE: A combination of materials to form a construction for use, occupancy, or
ornamentation whether installed on, above, or below the surface of land or water.
116. SUBSTANDARD LOT (OR NONCONFORMING LOT): A lot of record that does not comply
with currently applicable minimum area, width, or depth requirements for the zoning district in
which it is located, but which complied or was conforming with applicable requirements when it
was placed on record prior to the enactment of this zoning Ordinance.
117. TEMPORARY STRUCTURE: A structure without any foundation or footings and that is
removed when the designated time period, activity, or use has ceased.
118. TOWNHOUSE: A one-family dwelling in a row of at least three such units in which each unit
has its own front and/or rear access to the outside, no unit is located over another unit, and
each unit is separated from any other unit by one or more vertical common fire-resistant
walls.
119. TOWNHOUSE LOT: That portion of the total development site of a townhouse residential use
intended for separate ownership as the location of a single townhouse and associated private
yard area.
120. USE: The conduct of an activity or the performance of a function or operation, on a site or in a
building or facility.
a. Principal Permitted Use: Any use permitted as a matter of right when conducted in accord
with the regulations established by this Ordinance; of which fulfills the primary function
of a household, establishment, institution, or other entity.
b. Special Exception Use: A use allowable solely on a discretionary and conditional basis
subject to a Special Exception Use Permit, and to all other regulations established by this
Ordinance.
City of Sioux Center, Iowa Zoning Ordinance
Prepared by: NW IA Planning & Development 25
c. Accessory Use: A use or activity that is incidental to and customarily associated with a
specific principal use on the same site.
121. VACANCY: Any unoccupied land, structure, or part thereof that is available and suitable for
occupancy.
122. VALUATION: The estimated cost to replace a building; based on current cost of replacement.
123. VARIANCE: The relaxation of the terms of the zoning Ordinance where such variance will
not be contrary to the public interest and where, owing to conditions and peculiarity of the
property and not the results of actions of the applicant, a literal enforcement of the zoning
regulations would result in an unnecessary and undue hardship. A variance is authorized only
for height, area, and size of structure or size of yards and open spaces. Establishment or
expansion of a use otherwise prohibited shall not be allowed by variance, nor shall a variance
be granted because of the presence of nonconformities in the zoning district or uses in an
adjoining zoning district.
124. YARD: A required open space on a lot adjoining a lot line, containing only landscaping and
such uses and facilities as may be permitted by this Ordinance. In measuring a yard for the
purpose of determining the depth of a front yard or rear yard, the least distance between the lot
line and the principle building shall be used. In measuring a yard for the purpose of determining
the width of a side yard, the least distance between the lot line and the nearest permitted building
shall be used.
a. Front Yard: A required yard extending
across the full width of a lot and
measured between the front lot line
and the building wall or other
supporting element thereof, other than
the projection of typical steps. In the
case of corner lots, the front yard shall
be considered as the yard adjacent to
the street where the principal building
has its main entrance.
b. Interior Yard: Any required yard, not
adjacent to a street, which is
determined on the basis of an interior
lot line.
c. Rear Yard: A required yard extending
across the full width of a lot and
measured between the rear lot line and
the building or any projections other
than steps or unenclosed balconies, but
excluding any area located within the
street side yard of a corner lot. On both
corner lots and interior lots the opposite
end of the lot from the front yard shall
be considered the rear yard.
City of Sioux Center, Iowa Zoning Ordinance
Prepared by: NW IA Planning & Development 26
d. Side Yard: A required yard extending the depth of a lot from the front yard to the rear yard
and measured between the side lot line and the nearest building. In the case of a corner lot,
the street side yard shall extend from the front yard to the rear lot line.
125. ZONING: The delineation of districts and the establishment of regulations governing the use,
placement, spacing, and size of land and buildings.
126. ZONING ADMINISTRATOR: The administrative officer appointed by the City Council of the
City of Sioux Center, Iowa to administer and ensure compliance with the Zoning Ordinance
and issue zoning permits.
127. ZONING COMPLIANCE PERMIT: A permit issued in conjunction with and as part of the
building permit as overseen and enforced by the Sioux Center Code Enforcement Officer as
required in this ordinance, as a condition precedent to the commencement of a use, or the
erection, construction, reconstruction, restoration, alteration, conversion, or installation of a
structure or building; acknowledging the proposed use, building, or structure complies with
the provisions of the zoning Ordinance or authorized variance.
Section 3.2. USE CLASSIFICATIONS
The purpose of the Use Classifications shall be to provide a consistent set of terms encompassing and
defining uses permitted or specially excepted in the various districts, and to provide a procedure for
determination of the applicable use classification of any activity not clearly within any defined use
classification.
In event of any question as to the appropriate use classification of any existing or proposed use or
activity, the Zoning Administrator shall have the authority to determine the classification, subject to
the right of appeal pursuant to Article XXVI. In making such determinations, the Zoning
Administrator shall consider the characteristics of the use in question, and consider any functional,
product, service, or physical requirements common with or similar to uses cited as examples of use
classifications.
General Description of RESIDENTIAL USE TYPES:
Residential use types include the occupancy of living accommodations on primarily nontransient
basis or institutional living arrangements, but excluding those providing forced residence such as
asylums and prisons.
a. Condominium Residential: The use of a site for three (3) or more multiple family dwelling
units intended for separate ownership, together with common area serving all dwelling units.
b. Duplex Residential: The use of a site for two (2) single family dwelling units on a single lot
or parcel.
c. Group Residential: The residential occupancy of living accommodations by groups of more
than three (3) persons not defined as a family on a weekly or longer basis. Typical uses
include fraternity or sorority houses, dormitories, residence halls, or boarding houses.
d. Kennel, Private: Any building or land designed or arranged for the care of no more than a
combined total of 3 dogs or and cats belonging to the owner of the principal structure, kept
for purposes of show, hunting, or pets.
City of Sioux Center, Iowa Zoning Ordinance
Prepared by: NW IA Planning & Development 27
e. Mobile Home Residential: The residential occupancy of mobile homes by families on a
weekly or longer basis. Uses only include mobile home parks or mobile home subdivisions.
f. Multiple Family Residential: The use of a site for three (3) or more multiple family dwelling
units, within one or more buildings.
g. Relocated Residential: An existing, previously built residential structure, intended for
occupancy, which has been moved into the community from a location outside of Sioux
Center, or an existing residential structure which has been relocated from another location
from within the City of Sioux Center to a new residential site. A relocated residential
structure does not include the moving of a new manufactured, modular or mobile home into
the city. Relocated residential properties shall submit a route plan, photographs of the
building to be moved, and an application for building permit prior to moving a building or
structure into Sioux Center.
h. Residential Care Services: A use, other than a hospital or convalescent facility, providing
care for ambulatory persons in a residential environment, including overnight occupancy or
extended care.
i. Single Family Residential: The use of a site for only one single family dwelling unit.
j. Townhouse Residential: The use of a site for three (3) or more townhouse dwelling units,
constructed with common or adjacent walls and each located on a separate ground parcel
within the total development site.
General Description of COMMERCIAL USE TYPES:
Commercial use types include the sale, rental, service, and distribution of goods; and the
provision of services other than those classified as industrial or civic uses.
a. Administrative and Business Offices: Office of private firms or organizations, which are
primarily used for the provision of executive, management, or administrative services.
Typical uses include administrative offices, and services including real estate, insurance,
property management, investment, personnel, travel, secretarial services, telemarketing,
photocopy and reproduction, and offices of public utilities or associations.
b. Agricultural Sales and Services: Establishments or places of business engaged in sale from
the premises of feed, grain, fertilizers, pesticides and similar goods or in the provision of
agriculturally related services with incidental storage on lots other than where the service is
rendered. Typical uses include nurseries, hay, feed and grain stores, and tree service firms.
c. Automotive and Equipment Services: Establishments or places of business primarily engaged
in automotive-related or heavy equipment sales or services. The following are automotive
and equipment use types:
i. Automotive Washing: Washing and cleaning of automobiles, related light equipment, and
trucks. Typical uses include auto laundries, car washes, or truck washes. Does not include
large truck cleanouts or wash outs.
ii. Service Station: Provision of fuel, lubricants, parts and accessories, and incidental
services to motor vehicles.
iii. Commercial Off-Street Parking: Parking of motor vehicles on a temporary basis within
privately owned off-street parking facility, other than accessory to a principal use.
City of Sioux Center, Iowa Zoning Ordinance
Prepared by: NW IA Planning & Development 28
Typical uses include commercial parking lots or parking garages.
iv. Automotive Rentals: Rental of automobiles, noncommercial trucks, trailers, and
recreational vehicles. Typical uses include auto rental agencies, trailer rental agencies,
and taxicab parking and dispatching.
v. Automotive Sales: Sales or rental of automobiles, noncommercial truck, motorcycles,
motor homes, recreational vehicles or boats, including incidental storage, maintenance,
and servicing. Typical uses include new and used car dealerships, motorcycle dealerships,
and boat, trailer, and recreational vehicle dealerships.
vi. Equipment Sales: Sale or rental of trucks, tractors, construction equipment, agricultural
implements, mobile homes and similar heavy equipment, including incidental storage,
maintenance, and servicing. Typical uses include truck dealerships, construction
equipment dealerships, and mobile home sales establishments.
vii. Automotive Repair Services: Repair of automobiles, noncommercial truck, motorcycles,
motor homes, recreational vehicles or boats, including the sale, installation, and servicing
of equipment and parts. Typical uses include new and used car dealerships, motorcycle
dealerships, and boat, trailer, and recreational vehicle dealerships.
viii. Equipment Repair Services: Repair of trucks, tractors, construction equipment,
agricultural implements, and similar heavy equipment. Typical uses include truck repair
garages, tractor and farm implement repair services, and machine shops, but exclude
dismantling or salvage.
ix. Vehicle Storage: Long term storage of operating or non-operating vehicles. Typical uses
include storage of private parking tow-a-ways or impound yards, but excludes
dismantling or salvage.
d. Building Maintenance Services: Establishments primarily engaged in the provision of
maintenance and custodial services to firms rather than individuals. Typical uses include
janitorial, landscape maintenance, or window cleaning services.
e. Business Support Services: Establishments or places of business primarily engaged in the
sale, rental or repair of equipment and supplies used by office, professional and service
establishments to the firms themselves rather than to individuals, but exclude automotive,
construction and farm equipment. Typical uses include office equipment and supply firms,
small business machine repair shops or hotel equipment and supply firms.
f. Business or Trade School: A use providing education or training in business, commerce,
language, or other similar activity or occupational pursuit, and not otherwise defined as a
home occupation, college or university, or public or private educational facility.
g. Cocktail Lounge: A use engaged in the preparation and retail sales of alcoholic beverages for
consumption on the premises, including taverns, bars, cocktail lounges, and similar uses.
h. Commercial Recreation: Establishments or places primarily engaged in the provision of
sports, entertainment, or recreation for participants or spectators. The following are
commercial recreation use types:
i. Indoor Sports and Recreation: Uses conducted within an enclosed building. Typical uses
include bowling alleys, billiard parlors, ice and roller skating rinks, penny arcades.
ii. Outdoor Sports and Recreation: Uses conducted in open or partially enclosed or screened
City of Sioux Center, Iowa Zoning Ordinance
Prepared by: NW IA Planning & Development 29
facilities. Typical uses include driving ranges, miniature golf courses, golf courses,
swimming pools, tennis courts, and racquetball courts.
iii. Indoor Entertainment: Predominantly spectator uses conducted within an enclosed
building. Typical uses include motion picture theaters, meeting halls, and dance halls.
iv. Outdoor Entertainment: Predominantly spectator uses conducted in open facilities.
Typical uses include sports arenas, racing facilities, amusement parks.
i. Communications Services: Establishments primarily engaged in the provision of broadcasting
and information relay services accomplished through the use of electronic and telephonic
mechanisms but excludes those classified as Major Utility Facilities. Typical uses include
telecommunication services; radio, television, cellular and other similar receiving antennas,
towers, or structures; and fiber optic lines and transmission facilities.
j. Construction Sales and Services: Establishments or places of business primarily engaged in
construction activities and incidental storage on lots other than construction sites as well as
the retail or wholesale, from the premises, of materials used in construction of building or
other structures other than retail sale of paint, fixtures and hardware; but excludes those
classified as one of the Automotive and Equipment Services use types. Typical uses include
building materials stores, tool and equipment rental or sales, or building contractors.
k. Consumer Repair Services: Establishments primarily engaged in repair services to
individuals or households rather than firms, but excluding automotive and equipment uses.
Typical uses include appliance repair, watch/jewelry repair, or musical instrument repair.
l. Convenience Storage: Storage services primarily for personal effects and household goods
within enclosed storage areas having individual access, but excluding use as workshops,
hobby shops, manufacturing, or commercial activity. Typical uses include mini-warehousing.
m. Financial Services: Establishments primarily engaged in the provision of financial and
banking services. Typical uses include banks, savings and loan institutions, loan and lending
activities, and similar services.
n. Food Sales: Establishment or places of business primarily engaged in the retail sale of food
or household products for home consumption. Typical uses include groceries, delicatessens,
meat markets, retail bakeries, and candy shops.
o. Funeral Services: Establishments engaged in undertaking services such as preparing the
human dead for burial and arranging and managing funerals. Typical uses include funeral
homes or mortuaries.
p. General Retail Sales: Sale or rental of commonly used goods, and merchandise for personal or
household use, but excludes those classified more specifically in this Section inclusive. Typical
uses include department stores, apparel stores, furniture stores, or establishments providing the
following Products or services: household cleaning and maintenance products; drugs, cards,
and stationery, notions, books, tobacco products, cosmetics, and specialty items; flowers,
plants, hobby materials, toys and handcrafted items; apparel, jewelry, fabrics, and like items;
cameras, photography services, household electronic equipment, records, sporting equipment,
kitchen utensils, home furnishing and appliances, art supplies and framing, arts and antiques,
paint and wallpaper, carpeting and floor covering, interior decorating services, office supplies;
bicycles; and automotive parts and accessories (excluding service and installation)
q. Kennel, public: A commercial establishment in which four (4) or more dogs, cats or
City of Sioux Center, Iowa Zoning Ordinance
Prepared by: NW IA Planning & Development 30
domesticated animals at least four (4) months of age are housed, groomed, bred, boarded,
trained, or sold, all for a fee or compensation. Typical uses include boarding kennels, pet
motels, or dog training centers.
r. Laundry Sales: Establishments primarily engaged in the provision of laundering, dry
cleaning, or dyeing services other that those classified as Personal Services. Typical uses
include bulk laundry and cleaning plants, diaper services, or linen supply services.
s. Liquor Sales: Establishments or places of business engaged in retail sale for consumption off
the premises of alcoholic beverages. Typical uses include state liquor stores, bottle shops, or
any licensed sales for off-site consumption.
t. Medical Offices: A use providing consultation, diagnosis, therapeutic, preventative, or
corrective personal treatment services by doctors, dentists, medical and dental laboratories,
and similar practitioners of medical and healing arts licensed for practice by the State of Iowa.
u. Personal Improvement Services: Establishments primarily engaged in the provision of
informational, instructional, personal improvement and similar services of nonprofessional
nature. Typical uses include photography studios, driving schools, health or physical fitness
studios, reducing salons, dance studios, handicraft and hobby instruction.
v. Personal Services: Establishments or places of business primarily engaged in the provision of
frequently or recurrently needed services of a personal nature. Typical uses include beauty
and barbershops, seamstress, tailor, shoe repair shops, and self-service laundry or apparel
cleaning services.
w. Pet Services: Retail sales and grooming of dogs, cats, birds, fish, and similar small animals
customarily used as household pets. Typical uses include pet stores, dog bathing and clipping
salons, or pet grooming shops.
x. Professional Office: Any building or use providing professional or consulting services in the
fields of law, architecture, design, engineering, accounting, and similar licensed professions.
z. Restaurant (Convenience): A use engaged in the preparation and retail sale of food and
beverages, excluding alcoholic beverages, for on premise consumption. Typical uses include
soda fountains, ice cream parlors, sandwich shops, cafes, and coffee shops.
aa. Restaurant (General): A use engaged in the preparation and retail sales of food and
beverages, including sale of alcoholic beverages when conducted as an accessory or
secondary feature and producing less than 50 percent of the gross income. A general
restaurant may include live entertainment. Typical uses include restaurants, coffee shops,
dinner houses, and similar establishments with incidental alcoholic beverage service.
bb. Scrap and Salvage Services: Places of business primarily engaged in the storage, sale,
dismantling or other processing of used or waste materials which are not intended for reuse.
Typical uses include automotive wrecking yards, junkyards or salvage yards.
cc. Stables: Boarding, breeding or raising of horses not owned by the occupants of the premises
or riding of horses by other than the occupants of the premises or their non-paying guests.
Typical uses include boarding stables or public stables.
dd. Veterinary Services: Veterinary services for animals. Typical uses include pet clinics, dog
and cat hospitals, and veterinary hospitals.
City of Sioux Center, Iowa Zoning Ordinance
Prepared by: NW IA Planning & Development 31
ee. Visitor Habitation: Establishments primarily engaged in the provision of lodging services on
a less-than-weekly basis with incidental food, drink and other sales and services intended for
the convenience of guests. The following are visitor habitation use types:
i. Campground: Facilities or an area providing spaces for two (2) or more travel trailers,
camping trailers, or tent sites for temporary occupancy with necessary incidental services,
sanitation and recreation facilities to serve the traveling public. Typical uses include
campgrounds, recreational vehicle parks, and trailer or tourist camps.
i. Hotel, Motel, Motor Court, Motor Lodge: Any building or group of buildings containing
guest rooms primarily intended for temporary occupancy, so laid out as to provide space
for parking vehicles. Such building(s) may include quarters for the use of operating
personnel. Typical uses may also include transient boarding houses.
General Description of INDUSTRIAL USE TYPES:
Industrial use types include the on-site extraction or production of goods by methods not
agricultural, and storage and distribution of products.
a. Basic Industry: A use engaged in the basic processing and manufacturing of materials or
products predominantly from extracted or raw materials, or a use engaged in storage of, or
manufacturing processes utilizing flammable or explosive materials, or storage or
manufacturing processes which potentially involve hazardous or commonly recognized
offensive conditions.
b. Biotechnology Production and/or Manufacturing: Facilities, warehouses, and production or
assembly plants engaged in the active production, manufacturing, packaging, and distribution
of products generally associated with the fields of animal or human biotechnology.
c. Custom Manufacturing: Establishments primarily engaged in the on-site production of goods
by hand manufacturing which involves only the use of hand tool or (domestic) mechanical
equipment and the incidental direct sale to consumers of only those goods produced on-site.
Typical uses include ceramic studios, candle making shops or custom jewelry.
d. Light Manufacturing: A use engaged in the manufacture, predominantly from previously
prepared materials, of finished products or parts, including processing, fabrication, assembly,
treatment, and packaging of such products, and incidental storage, sales, and distribution of
such products, but excluding basic industrial processing.
e. Research and Production Services: Establishments primarily engaged in research of an
industrial or scientific nature, including animal or human products testing. Typical uses
include animal or human research laboratories, research and development firms, or animal or
human pharmaceutical research labs.
f. Resource Extraction: A use involving the on-site extraction of surface mineral products or
natural resources. Typical extractive uses are quarries, borrow pits, sand and gravel
operations, oil and gas extraction, and mining operations.
g. Stockyards: Stockyard services involving the temporary keeping of livestock for slaughter,
market or shipping. Typical uses include stockyards or animal sales or auction yards.
h. Warehousing and Distribution: Establishments or places of business primarily engaged in
City of Sioux Center, Iowa Zoning Ordinance
Prepared by: NW IA Planning & Development 32
wholesaling, storage, distribution and handling of materials and equipment other than live
animals and plants. The following are warehousing use types:
i. Limited Warehousing and Distribution: Wholesaling, storage and warehousing services
within enclosed structures. Typical uses include wholesale distributors, storage
warehouses or moving and storage firms.
ii. General Warehousing and Distribution: Open-air storage, distribution and handling of
materials and equipment. Typical uses include grain elevators or open storage yards.
General Description of CIVIC USE TYPES:
Civic use types include the performance of utility, educational, recreational, cultural, medical,
protective, governmental, and other uses which are strongly vested with public or social
importance.
b. Aviation Facilities: Landing fields, aircraft parking and service facilities, and related
facilities for operation, service, fueling, repair, storage, charter, sales, and rental of aircraft.
c. Cemetery: Land used or intended to be used for the burial of the dead and dedicated for
cemetery purposes, including columbiums, crematoriums, mausoleums and mortuaries when
operated in conjunction with and within the boundary of such cemetery.
d. Club or Lodge: A use providing meeting, recreational, or social facilities for private or nonprofit
association, primarily for use by member and guests.
e. College and University Facilities: An educational institution of higher learning which offers
a course of study designed to culminate in the issuance of a degree.
f. Community Recreation: A recreational facility for use by residents and guests of a residential
development or limited residential neighborhood, including indoor and outdoor facilities.
g. Convalescent Services: A use providing bed care and in-patient services for persons
requiring regular medical attention, but excluding facilities providing surgical or emergency
medical services, or treatment of alcoholism, drug addiction, or mental disease.
h. Cultural Services: A library, museum, art gallery, or similar nonprofit use affording display,
preservation and exhibition of objects of permanent interest in the arts and sciences.
i. Day Care Services (Limited): A facility, or use of a dwelling unit or portions thereof, for
full-time care of six (6) or fewer individuals at one time.
j. Day Care Center: A facility, or use of a building or portion thereof, for daytime care of
seven (7) or more individuals. This term may include nursery schools, pre-schools, day care
centers or children or adults, and similar uses.
k. Detention Facilities: A publicly operated use providing housing and care for individuals
confined by law.
l. Government/Public Services: Offices, administrative, clerical, governmental, or public
services that deal directly with the citizen. Typical uses include federal, state, county, and
city offices, postal facilities, or other public or non-profit organizations directly benefiting the
general public.
m. Guidance Services: A use providing counseling, guidance, recuperative, vocational, or
City of Sioux Center, Iowa Zoning Ordinance
Prepared by: NW IA Planning & Development 33
similar services to persons requiring rehabilitation assistance as a result of mental illness
alcoholism, detention, drug addiction, or similar condition on a residential or daytime basis.
n. Hospital Services: A facility providing medical, psychiatric, or surgical services for sick or
injured persons primarily on an inpatient and emergency treatment, diagnostic services,
training, research, administration, and services to patients, employees, or visitors.
o. Local Utility Services: Essential services which are necessary to support principal
development and involve only minor structures such as lines and poles.
p. Maintenance and Service Facilities: A facility supporting maintenance, repair, vehicular or
equipment servicing, materials storage, and similar activities, including equipment service
centers and similar uses having characteristics of commercial services or contracting or
industrial activities.
q. Major Utility Facilities: Communication towers, antennas, generating plants, electrical
switching facilities and primary substations, refuse collection or disposal facilities, water and
wastewater treatment plants and similar facilities of public use, and firms having potentially
significant impact upon surrounding uses.
r. Military Installations: Military facilities of federal or state governments.
s. Park and Recreation Services: Publicly owned and operated parks, playgrounds, recreation
facilities, open spaces, camping grounds, golf courses, country clubs, golf driving ranges,
archery ranges and swimming pools.
t. Primary/Secondary Educational Facilities: A public, private, or parochial school offering
instruction at the elementary, junior and senior high school levels.
u. Public Assembly: Publicly owned or operated facilities for major public assembly,
recreation, sports, amusement or entertainment, including civic or community auditoriums,
sports stadiums, convention facilities, fairgrounds, and exhibition facilities.
v. Railroads Facilities: Railroad yards, equipment servicing facilities, and terminal facilities.
w. Religious Assembly: A use located in a permanent building and providing regular organized
religious worship and religious education incidental thereto, excluding primary or secondary
educational facilities.
x. Safety Services: Facilities for public safety and emergency services, including police and fire
protection services and emergency medical and ambulance services.
z. Transportation Terminal: A facility for loading, unloading, and interchange of passengers,
baggage, and incidental freight or package between modes of transportation, including bus
terminals, railroad stations, airport terminals, and public transit facilities.
General Description of AGRICULTURAL USE TYPES:
Agricultural use types include the on-site production of plant and animal products by agricultural
methods.
a. Commercial Farm Operation: An area that is used for the growing of the usual farm products
as well as the raising of farm animals including cattle, swine and sheep. This definition shall
include the raising of animals or production of animal products such as eggs or dairy products,
City of Sioux Center, Iowa Zoning Ordinance
Prepared by: NW IA Planning & Development 34
on an agricultural or commercial basis. Typical uses include grazing, ranching, dairy farming,
poultry farming, and the raising of fur bearing animals.
b. Crop Production: The raising and harvesting of tree crops, row crops, or field crops on an
agricultural or commercial basis, including incidental packing and processing.
c. Horticulture: The growing of horticultural and floricultural specialties, such as flowers,
shrubs, or trees intended for ornamental or landscaping purposes, but excluding retail sales.
d. Residential Animal Raising (Recreational): Limit the keeping of animals on a noncommercial,
non-profit basis. Restrictions on this type of use include three (3) large animals
per acre (e.g. horses, sheep and cattle, etc); twenty-five (25) small fowl or animals per acre
(e.g. chickens, rabbits, ducks, ferrets, etc.); five (5) large fowl per acre (e.g. turkeys, geese,
peacocks, etc.).
e. Support Housing: The occupancy of any living accommodations by one (1) agricultural
employee and their family, without regard to duration, which occurs exclusively in
association with the performance of agricultural labor, on the same property as the support
housing.
City of Sioux Center, Iowa Zoning Ordinance
Prepared by: NW IA Planning & Development 35
City of Sioux Center, Iowa Zoning Ordinance
Prepared by: NW IA Planning & Development 36
ARTICLE IV
AG - Agriculture District
Article 4: Agriculture District
Section 4.1. Intent
Section 4.2. Principal Permitted Uses
Section 4.3. Special Exception Uses
Section 4.4. Permitted Accessory Uses and Structures
Section 4.5. Site Development Regulations
Section 4.6. Off-Street Parking and Loading Space
Section 4.7. Sign Regulations
Section 4.8. Zoning Permits Required
Section 4.1. Intent
The intent of the Agricultural District is to preserve land best suited for agriculture from the
encroachment of incompatible uses and to preserve in agricultural use land suited to eventual
development in other uses until such time as streets, utilities and other community facilities may be
provided or programmed as to ensure the orderly and beneficial conversion of these lands to
non-agricultural use.
Section 4.2. PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USES
Within the Agricultural District, unless otherwise provided, no building or land shall be used for
other than one or more of the following principal permitted uses:
Agriculture Uses Residential Uses Civic Uses
Farms
Horticulture
Crop production
Residential Animal Raising
(recreational)
Single Family Residential
- when it is the owner or renter of
a farm or associated with
agricultural purposes.
- A maximum of two (2) single
family residential properties per
agricultural property.
Cemetery
Local Utility Services
Railroad Facilities
Publicly Owned Facilities
Irrigation and Flood Control
Religious Assembly
Safety Services
City of Sioux Center, Iowa Zoning Ordinance
Prepared by: NW IA Planning & Development 37
Section 4.3. SPECIAL EXCEPTION USES
The following uses may be permitted in the Agricultural District subject to provisions of Articles
XXV and XXIX of this ordinance, and with specific conditions and requirements subject to approval
of the Board of Adjustment intended to make them compatible with and acceptable to adjacent uses.
Agriculture Uses Residential Uses Industrial Uses
Commercial Farm Operation
Agricultural support housing
Existing Relocated Residential
- when it is the owner or renter of
a farm or associated with
agricultural purposes.
- A maximum of two (2) single
family residential properties per
agricultural property.
Resource Extraction
Scrap and Salvage Services
Commercial Uses Civic Uses
Agricultural Sales and Services
Commercial Recreation
- Outdoor Sports and Recreation
- Outdoor Entertainment
Veterinary Services
Visitor Habitation
- Campground
Stables
Kennel, public
Communication Services
Aviation Facilities
Major Utility Facilities
Park and Recreation Services
Primary/Secondary Educational Facilities
Public Assembly
Section 4.4. PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES
The following accessory uses and structures shall be permitted.
1. Private garage or carport
2. Private parking lots
3. One (1) family residence including one mobile home if used by; the farm owner or operator;
member of the immediate family; or an employee working on the premises
4. Private utility sheds or garden buildings not used for commercial purposes
5. Temporary buildings for uses incidental to construction, in which buildings shall be removed
upon completion or abandonment of construction.
6. Roadside stands for the sale of agricultural produce grown on the premises.
7. Kennel, private
8. Home occupations
9. Accessory uses and structures normally incidental and subordinate to the principal permitted uses
and structures.
In any case, permitted accessory uses shall not be the principal structure on any lot, and accessory
uses are to remain incidental and secondary in size, use, and nature to the principal permitted use.
City of Sioux Center, Iowa Zoning Ordinance
Prepared by: NW IA Planning & Development 38
Section 4.5. SITE DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS
The following requirements shall be provided for light and open space around permitted and special
exception uses and structures in the Agricultural District, and subject to modifications contained in
Article XVII -“Additional Yard, Area, and Height Requirements.”
Lot Area - 5 acres - minimum lot area
Lot Width - 300 feet - minimum lot width
Residential Density - Not more than (2) two principal dwelling units per lot,
including agricultural support housing
Height - 35 feet maximum height for dwellings and
non-farming buildings and structures
No limitation for agricultural buildings provided that
no structure shall be permitted to extend into approach
zones, clear zones or other restricted air space required
for the protection of any public airport.
Front Yard - 50 feet - minimum required setback
Side Yard - 25 feet - minimum required setback
Rear Yard - 50 feet - minimum required setback
No minimum requirements for local utility facilities and essential services, except that buildings or
other above ground structures or devices constructed in support of utilities or essential services must
comply with minimum yard setback requirements.
All residential dwelling units must be constructed in compliance with the “Minimum Requirements
for Residential Structures” regulations outlined in Section 18.6.
Section 4.6. Off-Street Parking and Loading Space
Off-street parking and loading requirements shall be required for activities in the Agricultural District in
accordance with the provisions of Article XX of this ordinance.
Section 4.7. Sign Regulations
Sign regulations shall be required for activities in the Agricultural District in accordance with the
provisions of Article XXI of the ordinance.
Section 4.8. Zoning Permits Required
Zoning permits shall be required in accordance with the provisions of Section 26.3.
City of Sioux Center, Iowa Zoning Ordinance
Prepared by: NW IA Planning & Development 39
City of Sioux Center, Iowa Zoning Ordinance
Prepared by: NW IA Planning & Development 40
ARTICLE V
RS - Residential Suburban District
Section 5: Residential Suburban District
Section 5.1. Intent
Section 5.2. Principal Permitted Uses
Section 5.3. Special Exception Uses
Section 5.4. Permitted Accessory Uses and Structures
Section 5.5. Site Development Regulations
Section 5.6. Off-Street Parking and Loading Space
Section 5.7. Sign Regulations
Section 5.8. Zoning Permits Required
Section 5.1. Intent
The intent of the Residential Suburban District is to provide for a transitional area between agricultural
and urban land uses to be applied in areas contiguous to or in close proximity to developed areas.
Section 5.2. PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USES
Within the Residential Suburban District, unless otherwise provided, no building or land shall be
used for other than one or more of the following principal permitted uses:
Residential Uses Civic Uses Agricultural Uses
Single Family Residential
Park and Recreation Services
Local Utility Services
Publicly Owned Facilities
Religious Assembly
Horticulture
Residential Animal Raising
(recreational)
Section 5.3. SPECIAL EXCEPTION USES
These uses may be permitted in the Residential Suburban District subject to provisions of Articles
XXV and XXIX of this ordinance, and with specific conditions and requirements subject to approval
of the Board of Adjustment intended to make them compatible with and acceptable to adjacent uses.
Residential Uses Civic Uses Commercial Uses
Existing Relocated
Residential Structure
Residential Care Services
Two Family Residential
Hospital Services
Primary/Secondary Education
Daycare Services (limited)
Safety Services
Aviation Facilities
Major Utility Facilities
Cemetery
Riding stables
Communication Services
City of Sioux Center, Iowa Zoning Ordinance
Prepared by: NW IA Planning & Development 41
Section 5.4. PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES
The following accessory uses and structures shall be permitted.
1. Private garages or carports
2. Private recreational facilities for use by residents (swimming pools, trampolines, play equipment).
3. Patios, cabanas, porches, gazebos, and incidental household storage buildings
4. Private greenhouses, not operated for commercial purposes
5. Radio, television, satellite dish, and other similar receiving antennas for residential purposes
6. Solar collectors
7. Home occupations
8. Private Parking Lots
9. Kennel, private
10. Roadside stands for the sale of agricultural produce grown on the premises
11. Temporary buildings or uses incidental to construction, which buildings shall be removed upon
the completion or abandonment of construction work, and in compliance with Section 18.3
12. Other necessary and customary accessory buildings or uses in compliance with Section 18.2, and
as determined by the Zoning Administrator to be appropriate, incidental, and subordinate to a
principal permitted and special exception uses and structures.
Section 5.5. SITE DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS
The following requirements shall be provided for light and open space around permitted and special
exception uses and structures in the Suburban Residential District, and subject to modifications
contained in Article XVII -“Additional Yard, Area, and Height Requirements.”
Lot Area - 20,000 square feet - minimum lot area
Lot Width - 100 feet - minimum lot width except at entry points
off cul-de-sacs.
Residential Density - Not more than one (1) dwelling unit per lot.
Height - 35 feet - maximum height
Front Yard - 40 feet - minimum required setback
Side Yard - 25 feet - minimum required setback
Rear Yard - 25 feet - minimum required setback
No minimum requirements for local utility facilities and essential services, except that buildings or
other above ground structures or devices constructed in support of utilities or essential services must
comply with minimum yard setback requirements.
All residential dwelling units must be constructed in compliance with the “Minimum Requirements
for Residential Structures” regulations outlined in Section 18.6. Manufactured or mobile homes
placed in designated residential subdivisions must be converted to real property in conformance with
section 135D.26 of the Code of Iowa
Section 5.6. Off-Street Parking and Loading Space
Off-street parking and loading requirements shall be required for activities in the Suburban Residential
District in accordance with the provisions of Article XX of this ordinance.
City of Sioux Center, Iowa Zoning Ordinance
Prepared by: NW IA Planning & Development 42
Section 5.7. Sign Regulations
Sign regulations shall be required for activities in the Suburban Residential District in accordance with
the provisions of Article XXI of the ordinance.
Section 5.8. Zoning Permits Required
Zoning permits shall be required in accordance with the provisions of Section 26.3.
City of Sioux Center, Iowa Zoning Ordinance
Prepared by: NW IA Planning & Development 43
City of Sioux Center, Iowa Zoning Ordinance
Prepared by: NW IA Planning & Development 44
ARTICLE VI
R-l - Single Family Residential District
Section 6: Single Family Residential District
Section 6.1. Intent
Section 6.2. Principal Permitted Uses
Section 6.4. Special Exception Uses
Section 6.4 Permitted Accessory Uses and Structures
Section 6.5. Site Development Regulations
Section 6.6. Off-Street Parking and Loading Space
Section 6.7. Sign Regulations
Section 6.8. Zoning Permits Required
Section 6.1. Intent
The intent of the Single Family Residential District is to provide for low to medium density residential
development with a limited number of institutional or civic and recreational facilities permitted.
Section 6.2. PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USES
Within the (R-1) Single Family Residential District, unless otherwise provided, no building or land
shall be used for other than one or more of the following principal permitted uses:
Residential Uses Civic Uses
Single Family Residential
Park and Recreation Services
Local Utility Services
Religious Assembly
Section 6.3. SPECIAL EXCEPTION USES
The following uses and structures may be permitted in the (R-1) Single Family Residential District
subject to provisions of Articles XXV and XXIX of this Ordinance, and with specific conditions and
requirements subject to approval of the Board of Adjustment intended to make them compatible with
and acceptable to adjacent uses.
Residential Uses Civic Uses Commercial Uses
Existing Relocated Residential
Structure
Two Family Residential
Private Parking Lots
Residential Care Services
College & University Facilities
Cultural Facilities
Day Care Services (Limited)
Government/Public Services
Hospital Services
Major Utility Facilities
Primary/Secondary Educational
Facilities
Safety Services
Communication Services
Funeral Services
City of Sioux Center, Iowa Zoning Ordinance
Prepared by: NW IA Planning & Development 45
Section 6.4. PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES
The following accessory uses and structures shall be permitted.
1. Private garages or carports
2. Private recreational facilities for use by residents (swimming pools, trampolines, play equipment)
3. Patios, cabanas, porches, gazebos, and incidental household storage buildings
4. Private greenhouses, not operated for commercial purposes
5. Radio, television, satellite dish, and other similar receiving antennas for residential purposes
6. Solar collectors
7. Home occupations
8. Kennel, private
9. Temporary buildings for uses incidental to construction, which buildings shall be removed upon
the completion or abandonment of construction work, and in compliance with Section 18.3.
10. Other necessary and customary accessory uses and structures determined by the Zoning
Administrator to be appropriate, incidental, and subordinate to a principal and special exception
uses and structures
Section 6.5. SITE DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS
The following requirements shall be provided for light and open space around permitted and special
exception uses and structures in the (R-1) Single Family Residential District, and subject to
modifications contained in Article XVII “Additional Yard, Area, and Height Requirements” of the
Ordinance.
Lot Area - Single Family 8,000 square feet - minimum lot area
Two Family 12,000 square feet – minimum lot area
Lot Width - 80 feet - minimum lot width, except at entry points
off cul-de-sacs.
Residential Density - Not more than one (1) dwelling unit per lot.
Height - 35 feet - maximum height
Front Yard - 35 feet - minimum required setback
Side Yard - 10 feet - minimum required setback
Rear Yard - 25 feet - minimum required setback
No minimum requirements for local utility facilities and essential services, except that buildings or
other above ground structures or devices constructed in support of utilities or essential services must
comply with minimum yard setback requirements.
All residential dwelling units must be constructed in compliance with the “Minimum Requirements
for Residential Structures” regulations outlined in Section 18.6.
Manufactured or mobile homes placed in designated residential subdivisions must be converted to
real property in conformance with section 135D.26 of the Code of Iowa
City of Sioux Center, Iowa Zoning Ordinance
Prepared by: NW IA Planning & Development 46
Section 6.6. Off-Street Parking and Loading Space.
Off-street parking and loading requirements shall be required for activities in the (R-1) Single Family
Residential District in accordance with the provisions of Article XX of this Ordinance.
Section 6.7. Sign Regulations
Sign regulations shall be required for activities in the (R-1) Single Family Residential District in
accordance with the provisions of Article XXI of the Ordinance.
Section 6.8. Zoning Permits Required
Zoning permits shall be required in accordance with the provisions of Section 26.3 of this Ordinance.
City of Sioux Center, Iowa Zoning Ordinance
Prepared by: NW IA Planning & Development 47
City of Sioux Center, Iowa Zoning Ordinance
Prepared by: NW IA Planning & Development 48
ARTICLE VII
R-2 - Medium Density Residential District
Section 7: Medium Density Residential District
Section 7.1. Intent
Section 7.2. Principal Permitted Uses
Section 7.3. Special Exception Uses
Section 7.4 Permitted Accessory Uses and Structures
Section 7.5. Site Development Regulations
Section 7.6. Off-Street Parking and Loading Space
Section 7.7. Sign Regulations
Section 7.8. Zoning Permits Required
Section 7.1. Intent
The intent of the Medium Density Residential District is to provide for living areas within the City for
development of townhouse and condominium dwellings, residential care services, and group residential
facilities, along with single family dwellings which are compatible in character and density.
Section 7.2. PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USES
Within the (R-2) Medium Density Residential District, unless otherwise provided, no building or
land shall be used for other than one or more of the following principal permitted uses:
Residential Uses Civic Uses
Condominium Residential
Single Family Residential
Townhouse Residential
Two Family Residential
Day Care Services (Limited)
Governmental/Public Services
Local Utility Services
Park and Recreation Services
Primary/Secondary Educational Facilities
Religious Assembly
Section 7.3. SPECIAL EXCEPTION USES.
The following uses and structures may be permitted in the (R-2) Medium Density Residential District
subject to provisions of Articles XXV and XXIX of this ordinance, and with specific conditions and
requirements subject to approval of the Board of Adjustment intended to make them compatible with
and acceptable to adjacent uses.
Residential Uses Commercial Uses
Existing Relocated Residential Structure
Group Residential
Private Parking Lots
Residential Care Services
Communication Services
Funeral Services
Medical Offices
Professional Office
Visitor Habitation - Bed & Breakfast Inn
City of Sioux Center, Iowa Zoning Ordinance
Prepared by: NW IA Planning & Development 49
Civic Uses
Cemetery
College and University Facilities
Convalescent Services
Cultural Services
Day Care Center
Hospital Services
Major Utility Facilities
Public Assembly
Safety Services
Section 7.4. PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES
The following accessory uses and structures shall be permitted.
1. Private garages or carports
2. Private recreational facilities for use by residents (swimming pools, trampolines, play equipment)
3. Patios, cabanas, porches, gazebos, and incidental household storage buildings
4. Private greenhouses, not operated for commercial purposes
5. Radio, television, satellite dish, and other similar receiving antennas for residential purposes
6. Solar collectors
7. Home occupations
8. Kennel, private
9. Temporary buildings for uses incidental to construction, and in compliance with Section 18.3.
10. Other necessary and customary accessory uses and structures determined by the Zoning
Administrator to be appropriate, incidental, and subordinate to a principal and special exception
uses and structures
Section 7.5. SITE DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS
The following requirements shall be provided for light and open space around permitted and special
exception uses and structures in the (R-2) Medium Density Residential District, and subject to
modifications contained in Article XVII “Additional Yard, Area, and Height Requirements” of the
ordinance.
Minimum Lot Area - 8,000 square feet
+ 2,500 square feet for each additional dwelling unit
Minimum Lot Width - 80 feet, except at entry points off cul-de-sacs.
Height - 35 feet
Front Yard - 35 feet - minimum required setback
Side Yard - 10 feet - minimum required setback
Rear Yard - 25 feet - minimum required setback
No minimum requirements for local utility facilities and essential services, except that buildings or
other above ground structures or devices constructed in support of utilities or essential services must
comply with minimum yard setback requirements.
All residential dwelling units must be constructed in compliance with the “Minimum Requirements
for Residential Structures” regulations outlined in Section 18.6.
City of Sioux Center, Iowa Zoning Ordinance
Prepared by: NW IA Planning & Development 50
Manufactured or mobile homes placed in designated residential subdivisions must be converted to
real property in conformance with section 135D.26 of the Code of Iowa
Section 7.6. Off-Street Parking and Loading Space
Off-street parking and loading requirements shall be required for activities in the Medium Density
Residential District in accordance with the provisions of Article XX of this ordinance.
Section 7.7. Sign Regulations
Sign regulations shall be required for activities in the Medium Density Residential District in accordance
with the provisions of Article XXI of the ordinance.
Section 7.8. Zoning Permits Required
Zoning permits shall be required in accordance with the provisions of Section 26.3 of this ordinance.
City of Sioux Center, Iowa Zoning Ordinance
Prepared by: NW IA Planning & Development 51
City of Sioux Center, Iowa Zoning Ordinance
Prepared by: NW IA Planning & Development 52
ARTICLE VIII
R-3 - Multi-Family Residential District
Section 8: Multi-Family Residential District
Section 8.1. Intent
Section 8.2. Principal Permitted Uses
Section 8.3. Special Exception Uses
Section 8.4 Permitted Accessory Uses and Structures
Section 8.5. Site Development Regulations
Section 8.6. Off-Street Parking and Loading Space
Section 8.7. Sign Regulations
Section 8.8. Zoning Permits Required
Section 8.1. Intent
The intent of the Multi-Family Residential District is to provide for living areas within the City for
development of multiple family dwellings and single family dwellings which are compatible in character
and density with the multiple family residential environment.
Section 8.2. PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USES
Within the (R-3) Multi-Family Residential District, unless otherwise provided, no building or land
shall be used for other than one or more of the following principal permitted uses:
Residential Uses Civic Uses Commercial Uses
Condominium Residential
Group Residential
Multiple Family Residential
Residential Care Services
Townhouse Residential
Two Family Residential
Governmental/Public Services
Local Utility Services
Park and Recreation Services
Religious Assembly
Day Care Center
Day Care Services (limited)
Visitor Habitation
- Bed & Breakfast Inn
Section 8.3. SPECIAL EXCEPTION USES
The following uses and structures may be permitted in the (R-3) Multi-Family Residential District
subject to provisions of Articles XXV and XXIX of this Ordinance, and with specific conditions and
requirements subject to approval of the Board of Adjustment intended to make them compatible with
and acceptable to adjacent uses.
Residential Uses Commercial Uses
Existing Relocated Residential Structure
New Single Family Dwellings
Private Parking Lots
Communication Services
Funeral Services
Medical Offices
Personal Services
Professional Office
City of Sioux Center, Iowa Zoning Ordinance
Prepared by: NW IA Planning & Development 53
Civic Uses
Cultural Services
Hospital Services
Major Utility Facilities
Postal Facilities
Safety Services
Cemeteries
College & University Facilities
Hospital Services
Primary/Secondary Educational Facilities
Section 8.4. PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES
The following accessory uses and structures shall be permitted.
1. Private detached garages or carports
2. Private recreational facilities for use by residents (swimming pools, trampolines, play equipment)
3. Patios, cabanas, porches, gazebos, and incidental household storage buildings
4. Private greenhouses not operated for commercial purposes
5. Radio, television, satellite dish, and other similar receiving antennas for residential purposes
6. Solar collectors
7. Home occupations
8. Kennel, private
9. Temporary buildings for uses incidental to construction, which buildings shall be removed upon
the completion or abandonment of construction work, and in compliance with Section 18.3.
10. Other necessary and customary accessory uses and structures determined by the Zoning
Administrator to be appropriate, incidental, and subordinate to a principal and special exception
uses and structures.
Section 8.5. SITE DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS
The following requirements shall be provided for light and air around permitted and special
exception uses and structures in the (R-3) Multi-Family Residential District, and subject to
modifications contained in Article XVII “Additional Yard, Area, and Height Requirements” of the
ordinance.
Minimum Lot Area - 10,000 square feet
+ 1,500 square feet for each additional dwelling unit
Minimum Lot Width - 100 feet, except at entry points off cul-de-sacs.
Height - 35 feet
Front Yard - 35 feet - minimum required setback
Side Yard - 10 feet - minimum required setback
Rear Yard - 25 feet - minimum required setback
No minimum requirements for local utility facilities and essential services, except that buildings or
other above ground structures or devices constructed in support of utilities or essential services must
comply with minimum yard setback requirements.
All residential dwelling units must be constructed in compliance with the “Minimum Requirements
for Residential Structures” regulations outlined in Section 18.6.
City of Sioux Center, Iowa Zoning Ordinance
Prepared by: NW IA Planning & Development 54
Manufactured or mobile homes placed in designated residential subdivisions must be converted to
real property in conformance with section 135D.26 of the Code of Iowa
Section 8.6. Off-Street Parking and Loading Space
Off-street parking and loading requirements shall be required for activities in the (R-3) Multi Family
Residential District in accordance with the provisions of Article XX of this ordinance.
Section 8.7. Sign Regulations
Sign regulations shall be required for activities in the (R-3) Multi Family Residential District in
accordance with the provisions of Article XXI of the ordinance.
Section 8.8. Zoning Permits Required
Zoning permits shall be required in accordance with the provisions of Section 26.3 of this ordinance.
City of Sioux Center, Iowa Zoning Ordinance
Prepared by: NW IA Planning & Development 55
City of Sioux Center, Iowa Zoning Ordinance
Prepared by: NW IA Planning & Development 56
ARTICLE IX
MH - Mobile Home District
Section 9: Mobile Home District
Section 9.1. Intent
Section 9.2. Principal Permitted Uses
Section 9.3. Special Exception Uses
Section 9.4 Permitted Accessory Uses and Structures
Section 9.5. Site Development Regulations
Section 9.6. Mobile Home Park Requirements
Section 9.7. Zoning Permits Required
Section 9.1. Intent
The intent of the Mobile Home District is to regulate the location and placement of mobile homes and
mobile home parks within the City of Sioux Center.
Section 9.2. PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USES
Within the Mobile Home District, unless otherwise provided in this Article, no building or land shall
be used for other than one or more of the following principal permitted uses:
Residential Uses Civic Uses
Mobile Home Residential
Local Utility Services
Park and Recreation Services
Section 9.3. SPECIAL EXCEPTION USES
The following uses and structures may be permitted in the Mobile Home District subject to
provisions of Articles XXV and XXIX of this ordinance, and with specific conditions and
requirements subject to approval of the Board of Adjustment intended to make them compatible with
and acceptable to adjacent uses.
Civic Uses Commercial Uses
Religious Assembly
Primary/Secondary Educational Facilities
Safety Services
Communication Services
Section 9.4. PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES
The following accessory uses and structures shall be permitted.
1. Private detached garage or carport
2. Private recreational facilities for use by residents (swimming pools, trampolines, play equipment)
3. Patios, cabanas, porches, gazebos, and incidental household storage buildings
4. Private greenhouses, not operated for commercial purposes
5. Radio, television, satellite dish, and other similar receiving antennas for residential purposes
6. Solar collectors
7. Home occupations
City of Sioux Center, Iowa Zoning Ordinance
Prepared by: NW IA Planning & Development 57
8. Kennel, private
9. Temporary buildings for uses incidental to construction, and in compliance with Section 18.3.
10. Other necessary and customary accessory uses and structures determined by the Zoning
Administrator to be appropriate, incidental, and subordinate to a principal and special exception
uses and structures
Section 9.5. SITE DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS
The following requirements shall be provided for light and air around permitted and special
exception uses and structures in the Mobile Home District, and subject to modifications contained in
Article XVII “Additional Yard, Area, and Height Requirements” of the ordinance.
Mobile Home Park Area - Two (2) acres – minimum park area
Mobile Home Lot Area - 5,000 square feet - minimum lot area
Mobile Home Lot Width - 40 feet – minimum lot width
Residential Density - Not more than one (1) dwelling unit per mobile
home lot
Height - 35 feet
Front Yard - 35 feet - minimum required setback
Side Yard - 5 feet and 10 feet alternating minimum required
setback, one distance on each side of the lot
Rear Yard - 15 feet - minimum required setback if the rear yard
is buffered according to Article XXII, otherwise the
rear yard setback is 25 feet.
Mobile Home Park boundary - 35 feet – minimum required setback for mobile homes
Public Street or Highway Right-of-way - 75 feet – minimum required setback for mobile homes
No minimum requirements for local utility facilities and essential services, except that buildings or
other above ground structures or devices constructed in support of utilities or essential services must
comply with minimum yard setback requirements.
Furthermore, Mobile Home lots and parks shall be developed in conformance with the following
Mobile Home Park Requirements outlined in Section 9.6 below.
Section 9.6. MOBILE HOME PARK REQUIREMENTS
Each Mobile Home Park shall be developed in conformance with the regulations listed below.
1) Development Plan: The following information shall be shown on the development plan or
submitted in writing with it:
a. The name of the proposed mobile home park;
b. Names, addresses and telephone numbers of the developer or his/her representative;
c. Location of the mobile home park, giving the subdivision and lot numbers;
d. A map of the entire area scheduled for development, if the proposed development is a portion
of a larger holding intended for subsequent development;
e. Location map showing the relationship of the proposed development and the adjacent tracts;
City of Sioux Center, Iowa Zoning Ordinance
Prepared by: NW IA Planning & Development 58
f. Present land use and existing zoning of the proposed development and adjacent tracts;
g. Interior streets, streets, street names, right-of-way and roadway widths;
h. All lot lines and open spaces with dimensions shown;
i. Topographic contours shall be shown on the plan at five (5) foot intervals where slope is
greater than 10% and two (2) foot intervals where slope is 10% or less;
j. Delineation of all improvements required in this section.
k. Location, dimensions, capacity, and FEMA approved design for the mobile home park’s
tornado/storm shelter.
2) Permitted accessory uses and requirements thereof:
a. Accessory buildings or structures under park management supervision shall be used only as
office space, storage, laundry facilities, recreation facilities, garage storage or other necessary
service for park residents’ use only. No accessory building or structure shall exceed twentyfive
(25) feet in height; and shall meet the requirements of other applicable codes and
Ordinances;
b. A mobile home may be displayed and offered for sale, provided that the mobile home is
situated on a permanent pad within the mobile home park;
c. One (1) identification sign approved in conjunction with the final site plan approval of the
mobile home park. In no case shall such sign be larger than sixty (60) square feet in surface
area nor have any moving parts nor stand higher than ten (10) feet from the ground to the top
of the sign. Such sign shall be no closer to the public right-of-way line than thirty (30) feet
d. No more than one (1) entry and/or one (1) exit sign at each access drive onto the public rightof-
way, approved in conjunction with the final site plan approval of the mobile home park. In
no case shall the sign be larger than two (2) square feet in surface area, nor have any moving
parts, nor stand higher than five (5) feet from the ground to the top of the sign
e. Not more than one (1) local street sign at a local intersection of such park, which identifies
the local street by name, the sign approved in conjunction with the final site plan approval of
the mobile home park. In no case shall the sign be larger than one (1) square foot in surface
area per local street name, nor stand higher than seven (7) feet from the ground to the top of
the sign.
3) Required development standards:
a. Each mobile home site shall have front, side and rear yards, and a double front yard setback
will be required on corner lots;
b. Each mobile home within such park shall contain a flush toilet, sleeping accommodations, a
tub or shower bath, kitchen facilities and plumbing and electrical connections designed for
attachment to appropriate external systems and so attached;
c. For the purpose of this section, yard width shall be determined by measurement from the
mobile home face (side) to its site boundary from which every point shall not be less than the
minimum width herein provided. Open patios shall be disregarded in determining yard widths.
Enclosed all weather patios and carports shall be included in determining yard widths. The
front yard is that yard which runs from the hitch end of the mobile home to the nearest lot line.
The rear yard is at the opposite end of the mobile home and side yards are at right angles to the
front and rear ends;
City of Sioux Center, Iowa Zoning Ordinance
Prepared by: NW IA Planning & Development 59
d. A mobile home shall not be permitted to occupy single or multiple sites if either its length or
width would cause it to occupy the space required by yard setback dimensions;
e. Each mobile home shall be supported by a permanent foundation, constructed as a permanent
continuous perimeter, pier, or post foundation, as approved by the City Building Department.
Foundation piers or posts will be so constructed, graded, and placed to be durable and
adequate for the support of the maximum anticipated load during all seasons.
f. Alternative pad and support mechanisms (in lieu of item e) may be approved upon request if
accompanied by sketches or other documentation;
g. Storage of goods and articles underneath any mobile home shall be prohibited;
h. Accessory structures shall be defined as in Article 3.1 number 1 and must adhere to the
guidelines set forth in Article 18 unless otherwise modified by this article.
1. May be no closer than 5 feet to any lot line
2. May not be larger than 120 sq. ft.
3. Must be free standing and may not be attached to the principal building in any fashion.
i. If a temporary foundation or permanent pier or post foundation is provided, uniform skirting
of each mobile home base shall be required, within thirty (30) days after initial placement,
such skirting shall be of twenty (20) gauge noncorrosive metal or aluminum or material of
equal strength and so constructed and attached to the mobile home so as to deter and prevent
entry of rodents and insects;
j. On-site outdoor laundry space of adequate area and suitable location shall be provided if park
is not furnished with indoor dryers. Where outdoor drying space is required or desired,
individual clothes drying facilities on each site of the collapsible umbrella type of hanging
apparatus shall be allowed;
k. All mobile homes within such parks shall be suitably connected to sewer and water services
provided at each site. All sanitary sewer facilities, including plumbing connections to each
mobile home site, shall be constructed so that all facilities and lines are protected from
freezing, from bumping or from creating any type of nuisance or health hazard. Sewage
facilities shall be of such capacity to adequately serve all users of park at peak periods.
Running water from a tested and approved supply, designed for a minimum flow of two
hundred (200) gallons per day per site shall be piped to each unit. All sanitary sewer and
water facilities shall conform to minimum state and county health regulations. Storm
drainage facilities shall be so constructed as to protect those who reside in the mobile home
park as well as property owners adjacent to the park. Such facilities shall be of such capacity
to insure rapid drainage and prevent accumulation of stagnant pools of water;
l. Community disposal of garbage and trash containers shall be placed in a conveniently located
similarly designed enclosed structure(s) or dumpster. The removal of trash shall take place
not less than once a week. Individual incinerators shall be prohibited;
m. Every mobile home shall be equipped at all times with fire extinguishing equipment and a
smoke detector in good working order of such type and size so as to satisfy regulations of the
State Fire Marshall and the local Fire District;
n. All electric, telephone, and other lines from supply poles outside the park or other sources to
each mobile home site shall be underground;
o. Any common fuel oil storage shall be centrally located in underground tanks, at a distance
away from any mobile home sites as it is found to be safe. All fuel lines leading to park and
City of Sioux Center, Iowa Zoning Ordinance
Prepared by: NW IA Planning & Development 60
to mobile home sites shall be underground and so designed as to conform to any County or
State Code that is found to be applicable. When separate meters are installed, each shall be
located in a uniform manner. The use of fuel oil or propane gas storage tanks to supply each
unit separately is prohibited;
p. A recreation space of at least three hundred (300) square feet of land per mobile home site in
the park shall be developed and maintained by the management. This area shall not be less
than one hundred (100) feet in its smallest dimension and its boundary no further than five
hundred (500) feet from any site served. Streets, sidewalks, parking areas and accessory
buildings are not included as recreation space in computing the necessary area;
q. All roads, driveways and motor vehicle parking spaces shall be paved and constructed as to
handle all anticipated peak loads, and adequately drained and lighted for safety and ease of
movement of pedestrians and vehicles. All road and driveways shall have curbs and gutters;
r. Two automobile parking spaces shall be provided within one hundred and fifty (150) feet of
each mobile home site. In such park there shall be provided additional parking spaces in
number not less than the number of sites within such park for central storage of all
recreational type vehicles including trucks rated not more than one (1) ton. Said parking area
shall be properly screened as not to be a nuisance, and such central storage shall not be closer
than fifty (50) feet to any mobile home when such storage is allowed in the park. Each
parking space shall have a minimum width of eight (8) feet and nineteen (19) feet in length.
s. One (1) visitor parking space shall be provided for every two (2) mobile home sites and said
parking shall be located within three hundred (300) feet of the site it is intended to serve;
t. Required standards for roadways, parking and traffic:
MOTOR VEHICLE PARKING TRAFFIC USE MIN. PAVEMENT WIDTH.
(curb face to curb face)
Parking prohibited 2-way road 22 feet
Parallel parking (1 side only) 1-way road 22 feet
Parking prohibited 1-way road 22 feet
Parallel parking (2 sides) 1-way road 31 feet
Parallel parking (2 sides) 2-way road 36 feet
u. When a cul-de-sac is provided, the radius of such roadway loop shall be a minimum of one
hundred (100) feet, curb face to curb face, with the drive length a maximum of three hundred
(300) feet;
v. Walkways shall not be less than four (4) feet in width excepting that walkways designed for
common use of not more than three mobile home sites shall be not less than three (3) feet in
width. Walkways shall be constructed with materials approved by the Board of Adjustment;
w. Park owners and management are required to maintain the physical and natural facilities and
features of the park in neat, orderly, and safe manner.
x. A FEMA approved storm/tornado shelter, adequate in size to accommodate all residents of
the park, shall be provided in each mobile home park.
Section 9.7. Zoning Permits Required
Zoning permits shall be required in accordance with the provisions of Section 26.3 of this ordinance.
City of Sioux Center, Iowa Zoning Ordinance
Prepared by: NW IA Planning & Development 61
City of Sioux Center, Iowa Zoning Ordinance
Prepared by: NW IA Planning & Development 62
ARTICLE X
PO – Professional Office District
Section 10: Professional Office District
Section 10.1. Intent
Section 10.2. Principal Permitted Uses
Section 10.3. Special Exception Uses
Section 10.4 Permitted Accessory Uses and Structures
Section 10.5. Site Development Regulations
Section 10.6. Off-Street Parking and Loading Space
Section 10.7. Sign Regulations
Section 10.8. Zoning Permits Required
Section 10.1. Intent
The intent of the Professional Office District is to provide for areas to attract desirable and stable
professional/office development to be developed in harmony with adjacent properties and land uses.
Section 10.2. PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USES
Within the Professional Office District, unless otherwise provided, no building or land shall be used
for other than one or more of the following principal permitted uses:
Commercial Uses Civic Uses
Personal Improvement Services
Personal Services
Professional Office
Administrative Services
Local Utility Services
Residential Uses
Additions to or reconstruction of single family dwellings (no new single family dwellings)
Section 10.3. SPECIAL EXCEPTION USES
The following uses and structures may be permitted in the Professional Office District subject to
provisions of Articles XXV and XXIX of this ordinance, and with specific conditions and
requirements subject to approval of the Board of Adjustment intended to make them compatible with
and acceptable to adjacent uses.
Commercial Uses Civic Uses
Funeral Services
Restaurants (Convenience)
Restaurants (General)
Visitor Habitation
- Hotel/Motel
Cemetery
Daycare (Limited)
Daycare Center
Major Utility Facilities
Private Parking Lots
Religious Assembly
City of Sioux Center, Iowa Zoning Ordinance
Prepared by: NW IA Planning & Development 63
Section 10.4. PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES
The following accessory uses and structures shall be permitted.
1. Essential Services
2. Temporary buildings for uses incidental to construction, which buildings shall be removed upon
the completion or abandonment of the work, and in compliance with Section 18.3.
3. Accessory buildings and structures normally incidental and subordinate to the permitted uses or
special exceptions, as permitted in Section 18.2.
4. Other necessary and customary uses and structures determined by the Zoning Administrator to be
appropriate, incidental, and subordinate in size, use, and nature.
Section 10.5. SITE DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS
The following requirements shall be provided for light and open space around permitted and special
exception uses and structures in the Professional Office District, and subject to modifications
contained in Article XVII “Additional Yard, Area, and Height Requirements” of the Ordinance.
Minimum Lot Area - 14,000 square feet
Minimum Lot Width - 100 feet
Maximum Height - 35 feet
Front Yard - 50 feet - minimum required setback
Side Yard - 10 feet - minimum required setback
Rear Yard - 25 feet - minimum required setback
No minimum requirements for local utility facilities and essential services, except that buildings or
other above ground structures or devices constructed in support of utilities or essential services must
comply with minimum yard setback requirements.
Section 10.6. Off-Street Parking and Loading Space
Off-street parking and loading requirements shall be required for activities in the Professional Office
District in accordance with the provisions of Article XX of this ordinance.
Section 10.7. Sign Regulations
Sign regulations shall be required for activities in the Professional Office District in accordance with the
provisions of Article XXI of the ordinance.
Section 10.8. Zoning Permits Required
Zoning permits shall be required in accordance with the provisions of Section 26.3 of this ordinance.
City of Sioux Center, Iowa Zoning Ordinance
Prepared by: NW IA Planning & Development 64
ARTICLE XI
GC - General Commercial District
Section 11: General Commercial District
Section 11.1. Intent
Section 11.2. Principal Permitted Uses
Section 11.3. Special Exception Uses
Section 11.4 Permitted Accessory Uses and Structures
Section 11.5. Site Development Regulations
Section 11.6. Open-air Sales, Display and Storage
Section 11.7. Off-Street Parking and Loading Space
Section 11.8. Sign Regulations
Section 11.9. Zoning Permits Required
Section 11.1. PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USES
The intent of the General Commercial District is to provide for a commercial area to serve the
general shopping needs of the retail trade area and to permit uses which will strengthen the Central
Business District as the center of trade, commerce, services, government, and cultural activity.
Section 11.2. PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USES
Within the General Commercial District, unless otherwise provided, no building or land shall be used
for other than one or more of the following principal permitted uses:
Commercial Uses Civic Uses
Administrative and
Business Offices
Automotive Rentals
Automotive Repair Services
Automotive Washing
Building Maintenance Services
Business Support Services
Communication Services
Consumer Repair Services
Convenience Store
Equipment Sales
Equipment Repair Services
Financial Services
Food Sales
Funeral Services
General Retail Sales
Commercial Recreation
- Indoor Sports and Recreation
- Indoor Entertainment
Laundry Services
Medical Offices
Personal Services
Personal Improvement Services
Professional Offices
Research Services
Restaurant (Convenience)
Restaurant (General)
Service Station
Visitor Habitation
- Hotel/Motel
Administrative Services
Club or Lodge
Day Care Services (limited)
Local Utility Services
Maintenance and Service
Facilities
Park and Recreation Services
Postal Facilities
Safety Services
Transportation Terminal
Residential Uses
Additions to or reconstruction of single family dwellings (no new single family dwellings)
City of Sioux Center, Iowa Zoning Ordinance
Prepared by: NW IA Planning & Development 65
Section 11.3. SPECIAL EXCEPTION USES
The following uses and structures may be permitted in the General Commercial District subject to
provisions of Articles XXV and XXIX of this ordinance, and with specific conditions and
requirements subject to approval of the Board of Adjustment intended to make them compatible with
and acceptable to adjacent uses.
Commercial Uses Civic Uses
Agricultural Sales and Services
Automotive Sales
Business or Trade School
Cocktail Lounge
Construction Sales and Services
Convenience Storage
Kennel, public
Liquor Sales
Pet Services
Vehicle Storage
Veterinary Services
Religious Assembly
Private Parking Lots
Cultural Services
Day Care Center
Detention Facilities
Guidance Services
Hospital Services
Primary/Secondary Educational Facilities
Public Assembly
Convalescent Services
Major Utility Facilities
Industrial Uses
Custom Manufacturing
Limited Warehousing and Distribution
Section 11.4. PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES
The following accessory uses and structures shall be permitted.
1. Essential Services
2. Temporary buildings for uses incidental to construction, which buildings shall be removed upon
the completion or abandonment of the work, and in compliance with Section 18.3.
3. Any other commercial use type that is not listed as a permitted use in the same district, and
complies with all the following criteria.
a. Operated primarily for the convenience of employees, clients, or customers of the principal use.
b. Occupies less than 10 percent of the total floor area of the principal use.
c. Located and operated as an integral part of the principal use and does not comprise a separate
business use or activity.
4. Accessory buildings and structures normally incidental and subordinate to the permitted uses or
special exceptions, as permitted in Section 18.2.
5. Other necessary and customary uses and structures determined by the Zoning Administrator to be
appropriate, incidental, and subordinate in size, use, and nature.
City of Sioux Center, Iowa Zoning Ordinance
Prepared by: NW IA Planning & Development 66
Section 11.5. SITE DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS
The following requirements shall be provided for light and open space around permitted and special
exception uses and structures in the General Commercial District, and subject to modifications
contained in Article XVII “Additional Yard, Area, and Height Requirements” of the ordinance.
Minimum Lot Area - 4,000 square feet
Minimum Lot Width - 50 feet
Maximum Height - 40 feet
Front Yard - No minimum required setback
Side Yard - None, except 5 feet minimum setback only if
abutting a residential district
Rear Yard - None, except 20 feet minimum setback only if
abutting a dedicated alley or public street
No minimum requirements for local utility facilities and essential services, except that buildings or
other above ground structures or devices constructed in support of utilities or essential services must
comply with minimum yard setback requirements.
Section 11.6. Open-air Sales, Display and Storage
All open-air sales display and storage for used auto sales and storage, new auto sales and storage,
new and used farm implement and equipment sales and storage, new and used truck, machinery, or
equipment sales and storage, shall comply with the following minimum requirements:
1. The side and rear lot lines, when abutting residential properties, will be screened with a wall or
fence with its surface at least fifty (50) percent solid and at least seven (7) feet in height. The
fence shall not be required to extend beyond the front yard set back line;
2. All lighting or lighted facilities shall be arranged so that they do not focus or glare directly on
adjacent residential properties, or public streets, thereby creating a traffic hazard;
3. No lighted flashing signs, or revolving beacon lights shall be permitted;
4. The open-air area shall be maintained to be reasonably free of weeds, debris, trash and other
objectionable materials.
Section 11.7. Off-Street Parking and Loading Space
Off-street parking and loading requirements shall be required for activities in the General Commercial
District in accordance with the provisions of Article XX of this ordinance.
Section 11.8. Sign Regulations
Sign regulations shall be required for activities in the General Commercial District in accordance with
the provisions of Article XXI of the ordinance.
Section 11.9. Zoning Permits Required
Zoning permits shall be required in accordance with the provisions of Section 26.3 of this ordinance.
City of Sioux Center, Iowa Zoning Ordinance
Prepared by: NW IA Planning & Development 67
City of Sioux Center, Iowa Zoning Ordinance
Prepared by: NW IA Planning & Development 68
ARTICLE XII
HC - Highway Commercial District
Article 12: Highway Commercial District
Section 12.1. Intent
Section 12.2. Principal Permitted Uses
Section 12.3. Special Exception Uses
Section 12.4. Permitted Accessory Uses and Structures
Section 12.5. Site Development Regulations
Section 12.6. Additional Regulations
Section 12.7. Open-air Sales, Display and Storage
Section 12.8. Off-Street Parking and Loading Space
Section 12.9. Sign Regulations
Section 12.10. Zoning Permits Required
Section 12.1. Intent
The intent of the Highway Commercial District is predominately for commercial and selected
industrial activities of a service nature which typically have operating and traffic generation
characteristics requiring location on a major trafficway. Site development regulations and
performance standards are intended to ensure adequate access to and from all uses.
Section 12.2. PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USES
Within the Highway Commercial District, unless otherwise provided, no building or land shall be
used for other than one or more of the following principal permitted uses
Agricultural Uses Residential Uses
Horticulture
Crop Production
Additions to or reconstruction of single family dwellings (no new
single family dwellings)
Civic Uses
Administrative Services
Ambulance Services
Club or Lodge
Day Care Center
Local Utility Services
Maintenance & Service Facilities
Park and Recreation Services
Postal Facilities
Public Assembly
Commercial Uses
Agricultural Sales and Services
Automotive Rentals
Automotive Sales
Automotive Repair Services
Automotive Washing
Building Maintenance Services
Business Support Services
Business or Trade School
Commercial Recreation
- Indoor Sports & Recreation
- Indoor Entertainment
Communication Services
Commercial Nursery
Construction Sales & Services
Consumer Repair Services
Convenience Storage
Convenience Store
Equipment Sales
Equipment Repair Services
Financial Services
Food Sales
Funeral Services
General Retail Sales
Indoor Sports and Recreation
Indoor Entertainment
Laundry Services
Medical Offices
Personal Improvement Services
Personal Services
Pet Services
Professional Offices
Research Services
Restaurant (Convenience)
Restaurant (General)
Service Station
Vehicle Storage
Visitor Habitation-Hotel/Motel
Factory Built Housing Sales
City of Sioux Center, Iowa Zoning Ordinance
Prepared by: NW IA Planning & Development 69
Section 12.3. SPECIAL EXCEPTION USES
The following uses and structures may be permitted in the Highway Commercial District subject to
provisions of Articles XXV and XXIX of this ordinance, and with specific conditions and requirements
subject to approval of the Board of Adjustment intended to make them compatible with and
acceptable to adjacent uses.
Commercial Uses Civic Uses
Cocktail Lounge
Commercial Off-Street Parking Lots
Commercial Recreation
- Outdoor Sports and Recreation
- Outdoor Entertainment
Kennel, public
Liquor Sales
Veterinary Services
Cemetery
Cultural Services
Detention Facilities
Guidance Services
Hospital Services
Primary/Secondary Educational Facilities
Private Parking Lots
Public Assembly
Religious Assembly
Safety Services
Transportation Terminals
Industrial Uses
Custom Manufacturing
General Warehousing and Distribution
Limited Warehousing and Distribution
Section 12.4. PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES
The following accessory uses and structures shall be permitted.
1. Essential Services
2. Temporary buildings for uses incidental to construction, which buildings shall be removed upon
the completion or abandonment of the work, and in compliance with Section 18.3.
3. Any other commercial use type that is not listed as a permitted use in the same district, and
complies with all the following criteria.
a. Operated primarily for the convenience of employees, clients, or customers of the principal use.
b. Occupies less than 10 percent of the total floor area of the principal use.
c. Located and operated as an integral part of the principal use and does not comprise a separate
business use or activity.
4. Accessory buildings and structures normally incidental and subordinate to the permitted uses or
special exceptions, as permitted in Section 18.2.
5. Other necessary and customary uses and structures determined by the Zoning Administrator to be
appropriate, incidental, and subordinate in size, use, and nature.
City of Sioux Center, Iowa Zoning Ordinance
Prepared by: NW IA Planning & Development 70
Section 12.5. SITE DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS.
The following requirements shall be provided for light and open space around permitted and special
exception uses and structures in the Highway Commercial District, and subject to modifications
contained in Article XVII “Additional Yard, Area, and Height Requirements” of the ordinance,
except as provided by Section 12.6.
Minimum Lot Area - 14,000 square feet
Minimum Lot Width - 100 feet
Maximum Height - 35 feet - No structure shall be permitted to extend into
approach zones, clear zones or restricted air
space required for the protection of any
public airport.
Front Yard - 50 feet - minimum required setback
Side Yard - 10 feet – minimum required setback
Rear Yard - 25 feet – minimum required setback
Buffer/Open Space Requirements - See Articles XXII and XXIII.
No minimum requirements for local utility facilities and essential services, except that buildings or
other above ground structures or devices constructed in support of utilities or essential services must
comply with minimum yard setback requirements.
Section 12.6. Additional Regulations
Any residential use properties in the (HC) Commercial District shall be subject to the site
development regulations identified in Section 8.5. in lieu of any corresponding regulation identified
above in Section 12.5.
Section 12.7. Open-air Sales, Display and Storage
All open-air sales display and storage for used auto sales and storage, new auto sales and storage,
new and used farm implement and equipment sales and storage, new and used truck, machinery, or
equipment sales and storage, shall comply with the following minimum requirements:
5. The side and rear lot lines, when abutting residential properties, will be screened with a wall or
fence with its surface at least fifty (50) percent solid and at least seven (7) feet in height. The
fence shall not be required to extend beyond the front yard set back line;
6. All lighting or lighted facilities shall be arranged so that they do not focus or glare directly on
adjacent residential properties, or public streets, thereby creating a traffic hazard;
7. No lighted flashing signs, or revolving beacon lights shall be permitted;
8. The open-air area shall be maintained to be reasonably free of weeds, debris, trash and other
objectionable materials.
Section 12.8. Off-Street Parking and Loading Space
Off-street parking and loading requirements shall be required for activities in the General Commercial
District in accordance with the provisions of Article XX of this ordinance.
City of Sioux Center, Iowa Zoning Ordinance
Prepared by: NW IA Planning & Development 71
Section 12.9. Sign Regulations
Sign regulations shall be required for activities in the General Commercial District in accordance with
the provisions of Article XXI of the ordinance.
Section 12.10. Zoning Permits Required
Zoning permits shall be required in accordance with the provisions of Section 26.3 of this ordinance.
City of Sioux Center, Iowa Zoning Ordinance
Prepared by: NW IA Planning & Development 72
ARTICLE XIII
GI – General Industrial District
Article 13: Light Industrial District
Section 13.1. Intent
Section 13.2. Principal Permitted Uses
Section 13.3. Special Exception Uses
Section 13.4. Permitted Accessory Uses and Structures
Section 13.5. Site Development Regulations
Section 13.6. Open-air Sales, Display and Storage
Section 13.7. Off-Street Parking and Loading Space
Section 13.8. Sign Regulations
Section 13.9. Zoning Permits Required
Section 13.1. Intent
The intent of the General Industrial District is to provide for a wide range of industrial uses and
structures.
Section 13.2. PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USES
Only the following principal uses and structures shall be permitted in the General Industrial District
except those uses which by reason of the emission of odor, dust, fumes, smoke, noise and other
obnoxious characteristics would be injurious to the public health, safety, and general welfare of the
community.
Industrial Uses Commercial Uses
Basic Industry
Custom Manufacturing
General Warehousing and Distribution
Light Manufacturing
Limited Warehousing and Distribution
Administrative and Business Offices
Agricultural Sales and Services
Automotive Rentals
Automotive Repair Services
Automotive Sales
Automotive Washing
Building Maintenance Services
Business Support Services
Business or Trade School
Communications Services
Construction Sales and Service
Convenience Storage
Convenience Store
Equipment Sales
Equipment Repair Services
Laundry Services
Research Services
Vehicle Storage
Civic Uses
Administrative Services
Aviation Facilities
Local Utility Services
Maintenance and Service Facilities
Park and Recreation Services
City of Sioux Center, Iowa Zoning Ordinance
Prepared by: NW IA Planning & Development 73
Section 13.3. SPECIAL EXCEPTION USES
The following uses and structures may be permitted in the General Industrial District subject to
provisions of Articles XXV and XXIX of this ordinance, and with specific conditions and requirements
subject to approval of the Board of Adjustment intended to make them compatible with and
acceptable to adjacent uses.
Industrial Uses Commercial Uses
Resource Extraction
Adult-oriented Establishments
(See Section 18.4. for regulations)
Commercial Recreation
- Outdoor Sports and Recreation
- Outdoor Entertainment
Kennels, public
Scrap and Salvage Services
Veterinary Services
Civic Uses
Railroad Facilities
Major Utility Service
Public Assembly
Safety Services
Transportation Terminals
Private Parking Lots
Section 13.4. PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES
The following accessory uses and structures shall be permitted.
1. Essential Services
2. Temporary buildings for uses incidental to construction, which buildings shall be removed upon
the completion or abandonment of the construction work, and in compliance with Section 18.3.
3. Any commercial use type or any other industrial use type that is not a permitted use in the same
district, and complies with all the following criteria:
a. Operated primarily for the convenience of employees, clients, or customers of the principal use.
b. Occupies less than 25 percent of the total floor area of the principal use.
c. Located and operated as an integral part of the principal use and does not comprise a separate
business use or activity.
4. Accessory buildings and structures normally incidental and subordinate to the permitted uses or
special exceptions, as permitted in Section 18.2.
5. Other necessary and customary uses and structures determined by the Zoning Administrator to be
appropriate, incidental, and subordinate in size, use, and nature.
City of Sioux Center, Iowa Zoning Ordinance
Prepared by: NW IA Planning & Development 74
Section 13.5. SITE DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS
The following requirements shall be provided for light and open space around permitted and special
exception uses and structures in the General Commercial District, and subject to modifications
contained in Article XVII “Additional Yard, Area, and Height Requirements” of the ordinance.
Minimum Lot Area - 14,000 square feet
Minimum Lot Width - 100 feet
Maximum Height - None, except 35 feet if property abuts a
residential district
No structure shall be permitted to extend into
approach zones, clear zones or restricted air space
required for the protection of any public airport.
Front Yard - 50 feet - minimum required setback
Side Yard - 10 feet - minimum required setback
Rear Yard - 25 feet - minimum required setback
Buffer/Open Space Requirements - See Articles XXII and XXIIII.
No minimum requirements for local utility facilities and essential services, except that buildings or
other above ground structures or devices constructed in support of utilities or essential services must
comply with minimum yard setback requirements.
Section 13.6. Open-air Sales, Display and Storage
All open-air sales display and storage for used auto sales and storage, new auto sales and storage,
new and used farm implement and equipment sales and storage, new and used truck, machinery, or
equipment sales and storage, shall comply with the following minimum requirements:
9. The side and rear lot lines, when abutting residential properties, will be screened with a wall or
fence with its surface at least fifty (50) percent solid and at least seven (7) feet in height. The
fence shall not be required to extend beyond the front yard set back line;
10. All lighting or lighted facilities shall be arranged so that they do not focus or glare directly on
adjacent residential properties, or public streets, thereby creating a traffic hazard;
11. No lighted flashing signs, or revolving beacon lights shall be permitted;
12. The open-air area shall be maintained to be reasonably free of weeds, debris, trash and other
objectionable materials.
Section 13.7. Off-Street Parking and Loading Space
Off-street parking and loading requirements shall be required for activities in the General Commercial
District in accordance with the provisions of Article XX of this ordinance.
Section 13.8. Sign Regulations
Sign regulations shall be required for activities in the General Commercial District in accordance with
the provisions of Article XXI of the ordinance.
Section 13.9. Zoning Permits Required
Zoning permits shall be required in accordance with the provisions of Section 26.3 of this ordinance.
City of Sioux Center, Iowa Zoning Ordinance
Prepared by: NW IA Planning & Development 75
City of Sioux Center, Iowa Zoning Ordinance
Prepared by: NW IA Planning & Development 76
ARTICLE XIV
IP – Industrial Park District
Article 14: Heavy Industrial District
Section 14.1. Intent
Section 14.2. Principal Permitted Uses
Section 14.3. Special Exception Uses
Section 14.4. Permitted Accessory Uses and Structures
Section 14.5. Site Development Regulations
Section 14.6. Open-air Sales, Display and Storage
Section 14.7. Off-Street Parking and Loading Space
Section 14.8. Sign Regulations
Section 14.9. Zoning Permits Required
Section 14.1. Intent
The intent of the Industrial Park District is to provide for industrial uses in a planned industrial
development.
Section 14.2. PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USES
Only the following principal uses and structures shall be permitted in the Industrial Park District, except
those uses which by reason of the emission of odor, dust, fumes, smoke, noise, and other obnoxious
characteristics would be injurious to the public health, safety and general welfare of the community;
Industrial Uses Commercial Uses
Basic Industry
Custom Manufacturing
Light Manufacturing
Limited Warehousing and Distribution
Administrative and Business Offices
Agricultural Sales and Services
Automotive Washing
Building Maintenance Services
Business Support Services
Communications Services
Construction Sales and Services
Convenience Storage
Equipment Sales
Equipment Repair Services
Vehicle Storage
Civic Uses
Aviation Facilities
Local Utility Services
Major Utility Services
Maintenance and Service Facilities
Park and Recreation Services
Railroad Facilities
City of Sioux Center, Iowa Zoning Ordinance
Prepared by: NW IA Planning & Development 77
Section 14.3. SPECIAL EXCEPTION USES
The following uses and structures may be permitted in the Industrial Park District subject to provisions
of Articles XXV and XXIX of this ordinance, and with specific conditions and requirements subject to
approval of the Board of Adjustment intended to make them compatible with and acceptable to
adjacent uses.
Industrial Uses
General Warehousing and Distribution
Civic Uses
Administrative Services
Public Assembly
Safety Services
Transportation Terminals
Limited commercial/retail uses may be permitted by special exception use within the Industrial Park
District when intended to serve the needs of a business’ tenants/employees only. Such special
exception commercial/retail uses would include: eatery, café, health club, convenience store, bakery
shop, gift shop, post office substation, photo studio, barbershop/stylist, or other appropriate use as
determined by the Board of Adjustment.
Section 14.4. PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES
The following accessory uses and structures shall be permitted.
1. Essential Services
2. Temporary buildings for uses incidental to construction, which buildings shall be removed upon
the completion or abandonment of the construction work, and in compliance with Section 18.3.
3. Any commercial use type or any other industrial use type that is not a permitted use in the same
district, and complies with all the following criteria:
a. Operated primarily for the convenience of employees, clients, or customers of the principal use.
b. Occupies less than 25 percent of the total floor area of the principal use.
c. Located and operated as an integral part of the principal use and does not comprise a separate
business use or activity.
4. Accessory buildings and structures normally incidental and subordinate to the permitted uses or
special exceptions, as permitted in Section 18.2.
5. Other necessary and customary uses and structures determined by the Zoning Administrator to be
appropriate, incidental, and subordinate in size, use, and nature.
City of Sioux Center, Iowa Zoning Ordinance
Prepared by: NW IA Planning & Development 78
Section 14.5. SITE DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS
The following requirements shall be provided for light and open space around permitted and special
exception uses and structures in the General Commercial District, and subject to modifications
contained in Article XVII “Additional Yard, Area, and Height Requirements” of the ordinance.
Minimum Lot Area - 43,560 square feet (1 acre)
Minimum Lot Width - 150 feet
Maximum Height - None, except 35 feet if property abuts a residential or
mobile home district
No structure shall be permitted to extend into
approach zones, clear zones or restricted air space
required for the protection of any public airport.
Front Yard - 50 feet - minimum required setback
Side Yard - 10 feet - minimum required setback
Rear Yard - 25 feet - minimum required setback
Buffer/Open Space Requirements - See Articles XXII and XXIII.
No minimum requirements for local utility facilities and essential services, except that buildings or
other above ground structures or devices constructed in support of utilities or essential services must
comply with minimum yard setback requirements.
Section 14.6. Open-air Sales, Display and Storage
All open-air sales display and storage for used auto sales and storage, new auto sales and storage,
new and used farm implement and equipment sales and storage, new and used truck, machinery, or
equipment sales and storage, shall comply with the following minimum requirements:
13. The side and rear lot lines, when abutting residential properties, will be screened with a wall or
fence with its surface at least fifty (50) percent solid and at least seven (7) feet in height. The
fence shall not be required to extend beyond the front yard set back line;
14. All lighting or lighted facilities shall be arranged so that they do not focus or glare directly on
adjacent residential properties, or public streets, thereby creating a traffic hazard;
15. No lighted flashing signs, or revolving beacon lights shall be permitted;
16. The open-air area shall be maintained to be reasonably free of weeds, debris, trash and other
objectionable materials.
Section 14.7. Off-Street Parking and Loading Space.
Off-street parking and loading requirements shall be required for activities in the General Commercial
District in accordance with the provisions of Article XX of this ordinance.
Section 14.8. Sign Regulations.
Sign regulations shall be required for activities in the General Commercial District in accordance with
the provisions of Article XXI of the ordinance.
Section 14.9. Zoning Permits Required.
Zoning permits shall be required in accordance with the provisions of Section 26.3 of this ordinance.
City of Sioux Center, Iowa Zoning Ordinance
Prepared by: NW IA Planning & Development 79
City of Sioux Center, Iowa Zoning Ordinance
Prepared by: NW IA Planning & Development 80
ARTICLE XV
BR – Bioscience/Research District
Article 15: Bioscience/Research District
Section 15.1. Intent
Section 15.2. Locational Criteria
Section 15.3. Principal Permitted Uses
Section 15.4. Special Exception Uses
Section 15.5. Permitted Accessory Uses and Structures
Section 15.6. Site Development Regulations
Section 15.7. Screening Requirements
Section 15.8 Off-Street Parking and Loading Space
Section 15.9. Sign Regulations
Section 15.10. Zoning Permits Required
Section 15.1. Intent
The intent of the Bioscience/Research District is to provide for scientific research, development, and
testing which are customarily located on large, landscaped sites and the operation of which does not
produce objectionable noise, odor, visual or other negative environmental effects. The
Bioscience/Research District shall encourage planned development business parks and/or research
facility parks to encourage the establishment of large scale bioscience or other research centers
promoting employment in clean, light industries, research facilities, and professional office centers that
meet high aesthetic standards.
Section 15.2. Locational Criteria
The Bioscience/Research Districts may be established adjacent to existing Industrial Park Districts or
General Industrial Districts, as well as in undeveloped areas of the city that are indicated on the city’s
comprehensive land use plan as appropriate for bioscience or research facilities.
Section 15.3. PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USES
Only the following principal uses and structures shall be permitted in the Bioscience/Research District.
Industrial Uses Commercial Uses
Agricultural Research
Enclosed Animal Research/Laboratory
Scientific Research, Testing or Development
Facilities
Limited Warehousing and Distribution
Research and Production Services
Administrative and Business Offices
Professional Office
Civic Uses
College and University Facilities
Government/Public Services
Local Utility Services
City of Sioux Center, Iowa Zoning Ordinance
Prepared by: NW IA Planning & Development 81
Section 15.4. SPECIAL EXCEPTION USES
The following uses and structures may be permitted in the Bioscience/Research District subject to
provisions of Articles XXV and XXIX of this ordinance, and with specific conditions and requirements
subject to approval of the Board of Adjustment intended to make them compatible with and
acceptable to adjacent uses.
Industrial Uses Commercial Uses
Animal Confinement or Containment Facilities for
research purposes only
Biotechnology Production and/or Manufacturing
General Warehousing and Distribution
Communication Services
Stables
Limited commercial/retail uses may be permitted by special exception use within the
Bioscience/Research District when intended to serve the needs of a business’ tenants/employees
only. Such special exception commercial/retail uses would include: eatery, café, health club,
convenience store, bakery shop, gift shop, post office substation, photo studio, barbershop/stylist, or
other appropriate use as determined by the Board of Adjustment.
Section 15.5. PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES
The following accessory uses and structures shall be permitted.
1. Essential Services
2. Temporary buildings for uses incidental to construction, which buildings shall be removed upon
the completion or abandonment of the construction work, and in compliance with Section 18.3.
3. Accessory buildings and structures normally incidental and subordinate to the permitted uses or
special exceptions, as permitted in Section 18.2.
4. Other necessary and customary uses and structures determined by the Zoning Administrator to be
appropriate, incidental, and subordinate in size, use, and nature.
City of Sioux Center, Iowa Zoning Ordinance
Prepared by: NW IA Planning & Development 82
Section 15.6. Site Development Regulations
The following requirements shall be provided for light and air circulation around permitted and
special exception uses in the Bioscience District, and subject to modifications contained in Article
XVII “Additional Yard, Area, and Height Requirements” of the ordinance.
Minimum Lot Area - 2 acres
Minimum Lot Width - 200 feet
Maximum Height - None, except 35 feet if property abuts a
residential district
No structure shall be permitted to extend into
approach zones, clear zones or restricted air space
required for the protection of any public airport.
Front Yard - 50 feet - minimum required setback
Side Yard - 10% of the lot width, not to exceed 50 feet
- minimum required setback
Rear Yard - 50 feet - minimum required setback
No minimum requirements for local utility facilities and essential services, except that buildings or
other above ground structures or devices constructed in support of utilities or essential services must
comply with minimum yard setback requirements.
Section 15.7. Screening Requirements
For the purpose of maintaining a compatible relationship between incompatible land use and for the
purpose of protecting the public investment in streets, highways, and thoroughfares and to promote
the safety and recreational value of public travel and to preserve natural beauty, a screening
requirement is hereby established for the initiation and continuance of all uses included within the
Bioscience/Research District.
A screening wall or fence meeting the requirements outlined in Article XXII-Buffers, of this
ordinance, shall be utilized on all properties including the use of agricultural livestock, animal
confinements, open storage yards, stockyards, or any other open use incorporating the usage, storage,
testing, or holding of live animals.
The screening wall or fence shall be maintained by the owner of the lot containing the use requiring
the screening. Failure to maintain the screening after notice by city staff shall be subject to a zoning
violation as identified in Article XXVII.
Modifying or removing the screening requirement may only be approved by the Board of Adjustment
where existing physical features such as trees or other plant materials, buildings, earthen berms or
hills provide substantial visual separation between Bioscience/Research uses and other lesser intense
uses or the general public traveling along streets, trails, and other public thoroughfares.
Section 15.8. Off-Street Parking and Loading Space
Off-street parking and loading requirements shall be required for activities in the Bioscience/Research
District in accordance with the provisions of Article XX of this ordinance.
City of Sioux Center, Iowa Zoning Ordinance
Prepared by: NW IA Planning & Development 83
Section 15.9. Sign Regulations
Sign regulations shall be required for activities in the Bioscience/Research District in accordance with
the provisions of Article XXI of the ordinance.
Section 15.10. Zoning Permits Required
Zoning permits shall be required in accordance with the provisions of Section 26.3 of this ordinance.
City of Sioux Center, Iowa Zoning Ordinance
Prepared by: NW IA Planning & Development 84
ARTICLE XVI
PUD - Planned Unit Development District
Article 16: Planned Unit Development District
Section 16.1. Purpose
Section 16.2. Authorized Uses
Section 16.3. General Regulations
Section 16.1. Purpose
The PUD, Planned Unit Development District, is intended to accommodate a wide variety of use
types in accordance with the City's Comprehensive Plan. It is the intent of the PUD District to
provide flexibility from use and site development regulations in order to encourage innovative, welldesigned
projects that achieve a high level of environmental sensitivity, energy efficiency, safety,
aesthetics and other community goals. Each application for a PUD shall contain a statement by the
applicant describing how the proposed development departs from the City's standard development
regulations, and how the proposed development, on balance, is an improvement over what otherwise
would be required under the community's standard zoning and land development regulations.
Purposes of this Section are:
1) To encourage a more creative and efficient development of land and its improvements than is
possible under the more restrictive application of zoning requirements.
2) To allow for a mixture of residential units in an integrated and well-planned area.
3) To ensure concentration of open space into more usable areas, and the preservation of the natural
resources of the site including wetlands, woodlands, steep slopes, and scenic areas.
4) Facilitate the economical provision of streets and public utilities.
5) To decrease side yard requirements using zero-lot-line zoning.
Section 16.2. Authorized Uses
No use shall be established and no development shall be permitted in the PUD District unless
approved pursuant to the procedures and standards of Section 18.8. No use shall be approved within
a PUD if it is found by the Planning Commission to be contrary to the Comprehensive Plan or
contrary to the health, safety and general welfare of the present and future residents of the City. The
overall land use makeup of PUDs shall be consistent with the underlying land use designation and
the following standards:
1. Residential PUDs: PUDs to be established on lands designated for residential land uses on the
Comprehensive Plan's Future Land Use Map shall be considered "Residential PUDs". The
following land-use standards shall apply to residential PUDs:
a. Residential and Public/Civic Uses: The Planning Commission may approve any residential and
public/civic uses within residential PUDs. Permitted dwelling units shall include detached,
clustered, semi-detached, attached, or multi-storied structures or combinations thereof.
Customary accessory uses are also permitted.
b. Commercial Uses: In addition to residential and public/civic uses, the Planning Commission
may approve commercial uses within residential PUDs; provided, that:
1) Such uses are supported by a sufficient population within the PUD;
City of Sioux Center, Iowa Zoning Ordinance
Prepared by: NW IA Planning & Development 85
2) Such uses are designed and located in such a manner as to protect the character of the
affected project and surrounding land uses and natural assets; and
3) Such uses do not occupy in total more than 25 percent of the total land area in the PUD.
4) The limitation on commercial uses may be adjusted by the Planning Commission up to a
maximum of 50 percent of the land area based upon an acceptable demonstration by the
applicant that a larger nonresidential allocation is a necessary convenience for a larger
market area. The Planning Commission shall decide whether a demonstrated need exists for
additional nonresidential area after reviewing the applicant's report. Such report shall
analyze the impact of the proposed nonresidential development on the quality and character
of existing and anticipated future residential development within the neighborhood,
including traffic impacts.
2. Commercial PUDs: PUDs to be established on lands designated for commercial, professional
office, biotechnology, business park, or industrial park land uses on the Comprehensive Plan's
Future Land Use Map shall be considered "Commercial PUDs". The following land-use
standards shall apply to Commercial PUDs:
a. Residential and Public/Civic Uses: The Planning Commission may approve any residential and
public/civic uses within commercial PUDs; provided, that the overall density of residential uses
shall not exceed 16 units per acre.
b. Commercial Uses: The Planning Commission may approve any commercial uses within
commercial PUDs.
c. Industrial Uses: The Planning Commission may approve any industrial uses within commercial
PUDs.
3. Mixed-Use PUDs: PUDs to be established on lands designated for both residential and
nonresidential (commercial, professional office, biotechnology, business park or industrial park)
land uses on the Comprehensive Plan's Future Land Use Map shall be considered "mixed-use
PUDs.” Those portions of a mixed-use PUD that have an underlying residential land-use
designation shall be regulated in accordance with the residential PUD standards of subsection 1
of this Section. Those portions of a mixed-use PUD that have another primary non-residential
underlying land-use designation shall be regulated in accordance with the commercial PUD
standards of subsection 2 of this Section.
Section 16.3. General Regulations.
A conditional use permit shall be required of all planned unit developments. The City may approve
the planned unit development only if it is found that the development satisfies all of the following
regulations:
1. Review and Approval Procedure: The plan and review procedure for a PUD shall be as outlined
in Section 18.8 of the “Additional Use Regulations” Article.
2. Conformance with the Comprehensive Plan: The proposed planned unit development is in
conformance with the Comprehensive Plan for Sioux Center. At a minimum, the Planning
Commission shall find that the planned unit development does not conflict with the
Comprehensive Plan with regard to the following:
a. The use will not create an excessive burden on existing parks, schools, streets, and other
public facilities and utilities which serve or are proposed to serve the area.
City of Sioux Center, Iowa Zoning Ordinance
Prepared by: NW IA Planning & Development 86
b. The use is reasonably related to the overall needs of the city and is compatible with the
surrounding land use.
c. The planned unit development is an effective and unified treatment of the development
possibilities on the project site and the development plans provide for the preservation of
unique natural amenities such as streams, stream banks, wooded cover, rough terrain, and
similar areas.
d. The uses proposed will not have an undue and adverse impact on the reasonable enjoyment of
neighboring property, and will not be detrimental to surrounding uses.
3. Coordination with Subdivision Regulations: It is the intent of this ordinance that subdivision
review of the city’s subdivision regulations be carried out simultaneously with the review of a
planned development under this Article of the Zoning Ordinance. The plans required under this
section must be submitted in a form which will satisfy the requirements of the subdivision
regulations for the preliminary and final plats required under those regulations.
4. Ownership and Financing: No application for a PUD shall be accepted or approved unless:
a. One (1) individual has been designated by the property owner(s) to be in control of the
development.
b. Financing is available to the applicant on conditions and in an amount which is sufficient to
assure completion of the planned unit development. To evidence this finding, the applicant
shall submit a written statement of financial feasibility which is accepted by the city.
5. Minimum Site Area: The minimum contiguous site area included in a PUD shall be 10 acres.
Property shall be deemed to be contiguous so long as all parts are under unified control of the
applicant, and all parts abut or are separated by only a road, easement or right of way. A
minimum of two (2) or more principal structures is proposed.
6. Preservation of Natural Features: Mature trees, vegetative cover, watercourses and other natural
site features shall be preserved to the greatest extent possible. Abrupt changes in natural slope
shall be avoided. Preservation shall be directed toward:
a. Enhancing the quality of new development;
b. Protecting the natural environment;
c. Providing buffering between new development and surrounding properties;
d. Preserving the character of existing neighborhoods;
e. Handling of storm water flows in natural channels;
f. Maintaining existing vegetation along stream corridors as water quality filters; and
g. Maintaining upland forest areas.
7. Common Open Space: A minimum of 4 percent of the gross area of every residential PUD
containing 10 or more dwelling units shall be devoted to common open space for the use and
enjoyment of the residents. A minimum of 8 percent of the gross area of every commercial PUD
shall be devoted to common open space for the use and enjoyment of residents. In the case of a
mixed-use PUD, the greater requirement of minimum open space shall apply.
The following areas shall qualify wholly or partially as common open space:
City of Sioux Center, Iowa Zoning Ordinance
Prepared by: NW IA Planning & Development 87
a. Major Recreation Areas: The total area included within an improved recreation area may be
counted as common open space; provided, that it is at least 15,000 square feet in size and is
linked to all dwelling units within the PUD by a continuous pedestrian circulation system of
sidewalks or trails. A golf course may be used to satisfy a maximum of 50 percent of the
common open space requirement.
b. Mini-Parks: The total area contained in mini-parks that have a minimum size of 5,000 square
feet and that include benches, playground apparatus, barbecue pits, fire rings or other approved
recreational amenities may be counted as common open space.
c. Buffers: Natural or man-made buffers, detention basins, or other open spaces.
d. Recreational Buildings: The area occupied by multiple-use recreation buildings or outdoor
recreation facilities, including a golf course, may be counted as common open space.
e. Pedestrian Open Space System: The total area contained in a continuous open space pedestrian
system, not less than 8 feet wide, consisting of permanently maintained walks and trails leading
to a natural amenity, recreation facility or commercial use, offering circulation that is separate
and apart from roads and streets may be counted as common open space.
f. Environmental Features: If natural habitats of significant value or environmentally sensitive
areas are determined to exist, the Planning Commission may require the area so defined to be
left in an undisturbed state and adequately protected or incorporated into the design of the PUD
as a passive recreation area with a minimum of improvements permitted.
8. Maintenance of Common Open Space: Any common open space established by an adopted final
development plan for a PUD shall be subject to the following requirements.
a. Responsibility: The landowner shall establish an organization for ownership and maintenance
of common open space, and that organization shall not be dissolved nor shall it dispose of any
common open space, by sale or otherwise (except to an organization conceived and established
to own and maintain the common open space). The conditions of any transfer shall conform to
the adopted final development plan.
b. Failure to Maintain: In the event that the organization established to own and maintain
common open space shall fail to maintain the common open space in reasonable condition, the
Zoning Administrator shall serve written notice upon such organization defining the
maintenance deficiencies. If such deficiencies of maintenance are not corrected after 30 days,
the Zoning Administrator shall call upon any public or private agency to maintain the common
open space. In such cases, the city shall annually notify Sioux County of the costs of such
maintenance, and the Tax Assessor shall assess the costs proportionally against all properties
within the PUD that have the right of use of the common open space.
9. Arrangement of Structures and Common Area: Structures and common areas shall be arranged
in such a way as to best serve the needs of occupants and/or other users of the proposed
development and minimize adverse effects on surrounding land uses and minimize site grading.
10. Site Design and Buffering: The PUD development site as a whole shall, at a minimum, comply
with the site design and buffer standards of Articles XIX and XXII of this ordinance:
a. Perimeter Screening: Additional buffering beyond minimum requirements shall be provided at
the perimeter of the proposed development where appropriate to reduce noise, glare or other
influences having an adverse impact either on the proposed development or on adjacent land.
City of Sioux Center, Iowa Zoning Ordinance
Prepared by: NW IA Planning & Development 88
b. Interior Screening: Additional landscaping and screening beyond minimum requirements shall
also be provided where appropriate to mitigate adverse impacts; to provide additional shade,
screening and open space in parking areas and roadways and to provide additional shade and
screening around structures and in open space areas.
11. Integrated Architectural Design: The plan for development shall integrate the architectural
design for buildings, structures, landscaping and common open areas.
12. Residential Density: Residential density shall be controlled by the underlying Comprehensive
Plan land use designation. In the case of PUDs with underlying commercial, office or business
park land use designations, a maximum density of 16 units per acre shall apply. Residential
dwelling units permitted by the maximum density standards of this Section may be allocated
among different parcels within the PUD.
13. Neighborhood Relationship and Land Use Compatibility: A PUD shall be harmonious and not
conflict with surrounding neighborhoods and existing natural features. It shall be planned,
designed and constructed so as to avoid undue traffic congestion in the surrounding area and
provide a compatible land use relationship with the surrounding area, making use of
landscaping, screening, natural stream ways as storm water management, open space and the
placement of buildings where appropriate in accordance with accepted land use planning and
design principles.
14. Development Phasing: The timely construction of any PUD authorized under this Article shall be
undertaken to assure full completion of the development in accordance with the adopted
preliminary and final development plan. Each phase of the proposed development must be of
sufficient size, composition, and arrangement so that its construction, marketing, and operation
are feasible as a complete unit, and that provision for and construction of dwelling units and
common open space are balanced and coordinated. In addition, the total development is designed
in such a manner as to form a desirable and unified environment within its own boundaries.
a. Staging of Development: At the time of preliminary development plan approval, the City
Council or Planning Commission may require that a phasing plan be submitted, in which case,
each phase shall be related to surrounding areas and available public facilities in such a manner
that failure to proceed to subsequent phases will not adversely affect those areas or facilities.
Each completed phase shall comply with all applicable standards. The infrastructure, as
installed, shall be sufficient to accommodate each phase of the development.
b. Change of Conditions: The City Council or Zoning Administrator may review approved
development plans to determine if conditions have changed sufficiently to merit their
cancellation. If the Zoning Administrator finds sufficient grounds for reconsideration, the City
Council may revoke the approved development plan.
15. Lighting: All lighting from proposed developments shall be arranged to prevent direct glare or
hazardous interference to adjoining streets or lands.
16. Off-Street Parking and Loading: Off-street parking and loading requirements shall be required for
activities in the Planned Unit Development (PUD) District in accordance with the provisions of
Article XX of this ordinance, unless a deviation from those standards is specifically approved
during the PUD approval process.
City of Sioux Center, Iowa Zoning Ordinance
Prepared by: NW IA Planning & Development 89
17. On-Site Utilities: Underground utilities shall be encouraged and provided wherever possible.
18. Streets:
a. Access onto Adequate Streets: Principal vehicular access to PUDs shall be from primary
arterial or collector streets. Any PUD containing over 50 dwelling units and/or 30,000 square
feet of nonresidential floor space shall provide at least 2 access points, where feasible.
b. Access Point Design: Access points shall be designed to provide smooth flow, controlled
turning movements and minimum hazard to vehicular or pedestrian traffic. Jog-type or nonright
angle intersections shall be avoided to the greatest extent possible.
c. Neighborhood Circulation: Internal roads and external access points should be designed to
encourage neighborhood circulation within the development and with adjacent parcels and to
provide multiple entry points onto primary streets.
19. Other Conditions: The Zoning Administrator and the Planning Commission shall have the
authority to recommend, and the City Council shall have the authority to impose such other
conditions as are necessary to accomplish the purposes of this Ordinance and the Sioux Center
Comprehensive Plan.
City of Sioux Center, Iowa Zoning Ordinance
Prepared by: NW IA Planning & Development 90
ARTICLE XVI.I
MU-PUD – Mixed-Use Planned Unit Development District
South Ridge Estates and Lots 1 & 2 of the Vermeer Subdivision
Section 16.1: Mixed-Use Planned Unit Development
Section 16.1.1. Intent
Section 16.1.2. Authorized Uses
Section 16.1.3. Principal Permitted Uses
Section 16.1.4. Special Exception Uses
Section 16.1.5. Permitted Accessory Uses and Structures
Section 16.1.6. Site Development Regulations
Section 16.1.7. Off-Street Parking and Loading Space
Section 16.1.8. Sign Regulations
Section 16.1.9. Zoning Permits Required
Section 16.1.10. Common Open Space
Section 16.1.1. Intent
The intent of the Mixed-Use Planned Unit Development District (MU-PUD) is to accommodate a wide
variety of use types in accordance with the City’s Comprehensive Plan. It is the intent of the MU-PUD
District to provide flexibility from use and site development regulations in order to encourage
innovative, well-designed projects that achieve a high level of environmental sensitivity, energy
efficiency, safety, aesthetics and other community goals.
Section 16.1.2. Authorized Uses
South Ridge Estates and the Vermeer Subdivision are a MU-PUD and are therefore regulated by
Section 16.2(3) of the Sioux Center Zoning Ordinance. This subdivision will be made up of
residential and commercial uses of which will be described in this article. Residential Uses will be
allowed in Blocks 1-9, 12, and 13 of South Ridge Estates and Lots 1 & 2 of the Vermeer
Subdivision. Commercial Uses will be allowed in Blocks 14 and 15 of South Ridge Estates. It is also
recognized that covenants and design standards apply to South Ridge Estates, which may be more
restrictive than the requirements stated herein.
Section 16.1.3. PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USES
Within the (MU-PUD) Mixed-Use Planned Unit Development District, unless otherwise provided, no
building or land shall be used for other than one or more of the following principal permitted uses.
1. Permitted Principal Uses for Residential Use Areas:
Residential Uses Civic Uses
Single Family Residential
Multi-Family Residential – Blocks 1 and 7 only;
in accordance with Article VIII of this Ordinance
Park and Recreation Services
Local Utility Services
Religious Assembly
City of Sioux Center, Iowa Zoning Ordinance
Prepared by: NW IA Planning & Development 91
2. Permitted Principal Uses for Commercial Use Areas:
Commercial Uses Agricultural Uses
Agricultural Sales and
Services
Automotive Rentals
Automotive Sales
Automotive Repair Services
Automotive Washing
Building Maintenance
Services
Business Support Services
Business or Trade School
Commercial Recreation
- Indoor Sports & Recreation
- Indoor Entertainment
Communications Services
Construction Sales and
Services
Consumer Repair Services
Convenience Storage
Convenience Store
Equipment Sales
Equipment Repair Services
Financial Services
Food Sales
Funeral Services
General Retail Sales
Visitor Habitation
- Hotel/Motel
Indoor Sports and Recreation
Indoor Entertainment
Laundry Services
Medical Offices
Personal Improvement Services
Personal Services
Pet Services
Professional Offices
Research Services
Restaurant (Convenience)
Restaurant (General)
Service Station
Vehicle Storage
Commercial Nursery,
Landscaping or Greenhouse
Factory Built Housing Sales
Horticulture
Crop Production
Civic Uses
Administrative Services
Ambulance Services
Club or Lodge
Day Care Center
Local Utility Services
Maintenance and Service
Facilities
Park and Recreation Services
Postal Facilities
Public Assembly
Section 16.1.4. SPECIAL EXCEPTION USES
The following uses and structures may be permitted in the (MU-PUD) Mixed-Use Planned Unit
Development District subject to provisions of Articles XXV and XXIX of this Ordinance, and with
specific conditions and requirements subject to approval of the Board of Adjustment intended to
make them compatible with and acceptable to adjacent uses.
1. Special Exception Uses for Residential Use Areas:
Residential Uses Civic Uses Commercial Uses
Existing Relocated Residential
Structure
Two Family Residential
(Blocks 2, 8, and 9 only)
Private Parking Lots
Residential Care Services
Multi-Family Residential
(Blocks 2, 8, and 9 only)
College & University Facilities
Cultural Facilities
Day Care Services (Limited)
Government/Public Services
Hospital Services
Major Utility Facilities
Primary/Secondary Educational
Facilities
Safety Services
Communication Services
Funeral Services
City of Sioux Center, Iowa Zoning Ordinance
Prepared by: NW IA Planning & Development 92
2. Special Exception Uses for Commercial Use Areas:
Commercial Uses Civic Uses
Cocktail Lounge
Commercial Off-Street Parking Lots
Commercial Recreation
- Outdoor Sports and Recreation
- Outdoor Entertainment
Kennel, public
Liquor Sales
Veterinary Services
Cemetery
Cultural Services
Detention Facilities
Guidance Services
Hospital Services
Primary/Secondary Educational Facilities
Private Parking Lots
Public Assembly
Religious Assembly
Safety Services
Transportation Terminals
Industrial Uses
Custom Manufacturing
General Warehousing and Distribution
Limited Warehousing and Distribution
Section 16.1.5. PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES
The following accessory uses and structures shall be permitted.
1. Residential Use Areas
11. Private garages or carports
12. Private recreational facilities for use by residents (swimming pools, trampolines, play
equipment)
13. Patios, cabanas, porches, gazebos, and incidental household storage buildings
14. Private greenhouses, not operated for commercial purposes
15. Radio, television, satellite dish, and other similar receiving antennas for residential
purposes
16. Solar collectors
17. Home occupations
18. Kennel, private
19. Temporary buildings for uses incidental to construction, which buildings shall be removed
upon the completion or abandonment of construction work, and in compliance with Section
18.3.
20. Other necessary and customary accessory uses and structures determined by the Zoning
Administrator to be appropriate, incidental, and subordinate to a principal and special
exception uses and structures
2. Commercial Use Areas
a. Essential Services
b. Temporary buildings for uses incidental to construction, which buildings shall be removed
upon the completion or abandonment of the work, and in compliance with Section 18.3.
c. Any other commercial use type that is not listed as a permitted use in the same district, and
complies with all the following criteria.
City of Sioux Center, Iowa Zoning Ordinance
Prepared by: NW IA Planning & Development 93
d. Operated primarily for the convenience of employees, clients, or customers of the
principal use.
e. Occupies less than 10 percent of the total floor area of the principal use.
f. Located and operated as an integral part of the principal use and does not comprise a
separate business use or activity.
d. Accessory buildings and structures normally incidental and subordinate to the permitted uses
or special exceptions, as permitted in Section 18.2.
e. Other necessary and customary uses and structures determined by the Zoning
Administrator to be appropriate, incidental, and subordinate in size, use, and nature.
Section 16.1.6. SITE DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS
The following requirements shall be provided for light and open space around permitted and special
exception uses and structures in the (MU-PUD) Mixed-Use Planned Unit Development District, and
subject to modifications contained in Article XVII “Additional Yard, Area, and Height
Requirements” of the Ordinance.
1. Residential Use Areas
Lot Area - Single Family 8,000 square feet – minimum lot area
Two Family 12,000 square feet – minimum lot area
Lot Width - 80 feet - minimum lot width, except at entry points off cul-desacs.
Residential Density - Not more than one (1) dwelling unit per lot, except Blocks 1
and 7.
Height - 35 feet - maximum height
Front Yard - 35 feet - minimum required setback
Side Yard - 8 feet - minimum required setback
Rear Yard - 25 feet - minimum required setback
All residential dwelling units must be constructed in compliance with the “Minimum
Requirements for Residential Structures” regulations outlined in Section 18.6.
Manufactured or mobile homes placed in designated residential subdivisions must be
converted to real property in conformance with section 135D.26 of the Code of Iowa.
2. Commercial Use Areas
Lot Area - 14,000 square feet – minimum lot area
Lot Width - 100 feet – minimum lot width
Height - 55 feet – maximum height, no structure shall be permitted to
extend into approach zones, clear zones or restricted air
required for the protection of any public airport.
Front Yard - 50 feet - minimum required setback, no minimum for Lot 2,
Block 14
City of Sioux Center, Iowa Zoning Ordinance
Prepared by: NW IA Planning & Development 94
Side Yard - 10 feet – minimum required setback, no minimum for Lot 2
Block 14
Rear Yard - 25 feet – minimum required setback, no minimum for Lot 2,
Block 14
No minimum requirements for local utility facilities and essential services, except that buildings or
other above ground structures or devices constructed in support of utilities or essential services must
comply with minimum yard setback requirements.
Section 16.1.7. Off-Street Parking and Loading Space
Off-street parking and loading requirements shall be required for activities in the (MU-PUD) Mixed-Use
Planned Unit Development District in accordance with the provisions of Article XX of this Ordinance.
Section 16.1.8. Sign Regulations
Sign regulations shall be required for activities in the (MU-PUD) Mixed-Use Planned Unit
Development District in accordance with the provisions of Article XXI of the Ordinance.
Section 16.1.9. Zoning Permits Required
Zoning permits shall be required in accordance with the provisions of Section 26.3 of this Ordinance.
Section 16.1.10. Common Open Space Required
Common Open Space shall be required in accordance with the provisions of Section 16.3 of this
Ordinance.
Definitions:
Common Open Space and/or Areas: Area devoted to the use and enjoyment of residents.
Ownership and Maintenance: Common Open Space and/or Areas will be owned and maintained
by the South Ridge Home Owner’s Association.
City of Sioux Center, Iowa Zoning Ordinance
Prepared by: NW IA Planning & Development 95
City of Sioux Center, Iowa Zoning Ordinance
Prepared by: NW IA Planning & Development 96
ARTICLE XVI.II
R-PUD – Residential Planned Unit Development District
Sunrise Trails First Addition
Section 16.2: Residential Planned Unit Development
Section 16.2.1. Intent
Section 16.2.2. Principal Permitted Uses
Section 16.2.3. Permitted Accessory Uses and Structures
Section 16.2.4. Site Development Regulations
Section 16.2.5. Off-Street Parking and Loading Space
Section 16.2.6. Sign Regulations
Section 16.2.7. Zoning Permits Required
Section 16.2.8. Common Open Space Required
Section 16.2.1. Intent
The intent of the Residential Planned Unit Development District is to provide for a transitional area
between agricultural and urban land uses to be applied in areas contiguous to or in close proximity to
developed areas.
Section 16.2.2. PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USES
Within the Residential Planned Unit Development District, unless otherwise provided, no building or
land shall be used for other than one or more of the following principal permitted uses:
Residential Uses Civic Uses Agricultural Uses
Single Family Residential
Park and Recreation Services
Local Utility Services
Publicly Owned Facilities
Religious Assembly
Daycare Services (limited)
Horticulture
Section 16.2.3. PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES
The following accessory uses and structures shall be permitted.
13. Private garages or carports
14. Private recreational facilities for use by residents (swimming pools, trampolines, play equipment).
15. Patios, cabanas, porches, gazebos, and incidental household storage buildings
16. Private greenhouses, not operated for commercial purposes
17. Radio, television, satellite dish, and other similar receiving antennas for residential purposes
18. Solar collectors
19. Home occupations
a. Shall be subject to Section 18.5 Home Occupations except subsection 2.
(1) Only two (2) unrelated persons living outside the residence and members of the
immediate family may be employed on the premises of the home occupation.
b. One hundred percent (100%) of an accessory building may be used for a home occupation.
20. Private Parking Lots
City of Sioux Center, Iowa Zoning Ordinance
Prepared by: NW IA Planning & Development 97
21. Kennel, private
22. Maximum of two (2) horses may be kept in Block 1, Lots 4-10.
23. Temporary buildings or uses incidental to construction, which buildings shall be removed upon
the completion or abandonment of construction work, and in compliance with Section 18.3
24. Other necessary and customary accessory buildings or uses
a. Shall comply with Section 18.2 except subsection 4(a) and 6, these sections will be replaced
as follows:
(1) Residential accessory buildings shall be limited to a maximum of two (2) total
buildings, not including attached garage. Maximum total square footage for an
accessory building(s) in Block 1 is 2800 square feet. Maximum total square footage
for an accessory building(s) in Block 2 is 2000 square feet.
(2) Detached accessory buildings shall not exceed a height of 30 feet.
Section 16.2.4. SITE DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS
The following requirements shall be provided for light and open space around permitted uses and
structures in the Residential Planned Unit Development District, and subject to modifications
contained in Article XVII -“Additional Yard, Area, and Height Requirements.”
Lot Area - 20,000 square feet - minimum lot area
Lot Width - 100 feet - minimum lot width except at entry points
off cul-de-sacs.
Residential Density - Not more than one (1) dwelling unit per lot.
Height - 35 feet - maximum height
Front Yard - 40 feet - minimum required setback
Side Yard - 10 feet - minimum required setback
Rear Yard - 25 feet - minimum required setback
No minimum requirements for local utility facilities and essential services, except that buildings or
other above ground structures or devices constructed in support of utilities or essential services must
comply with minimum yard setback requirements.
All residential dwelling units must be constructed in compliance with the “Minimum Requirements
for Residential Structures” regulations outlined in Section 18.6. Manufactured or mobile homes
placed in designated residential subdivisions must be converted to real property in conformance with
section 135D.26 of the Code of Iowa
Section 16.2.5. Off-Street Parking and Loading Space
Off-street parking and loading requirements shall be required for activities in the Residential Planned
Unit Development District in accordance with the provisions of Article XX of this ordinance.
Section 16.2.6. Sign Regulations
Sign regulations shall be required for activities in the Residential Planned Unit Development District in
accordance with the provisions of Article XXI of the ordinance.
Section 16.2.7. Zoning Permits Required
Zoning permits shall be required in accordance with the provisions of Section 26.3.
City of Sioux Center, Iowa Zoning Ordinance
Prepared by: NW IA Planning & Development 98
Section 16.2.8. Common Open Space Required
Common Open Space shall be required in accordance with the provisions of Section 16.3. Common Open
Space will be designated on the final plat as “Common Access Easement”.
Definitions:
Common Open Space: Area devoted to the use and enjoyment of residents.
Ownership and Maintenance: Common Open Space areas will be owned and maintained by the
adjacent property owners.
City of Sioux Center, Iowa Zoning Ordinance
Prepared by: NW IA Planning & Development 99
City of Sioux Center, Iowa Zoning Ordinance
Prepared by: NW IA Planning & Development 100
ARTICLE XVI.III
R-PUD – Residential Planned Unit Development District
Sunrise Trails Second Addition
Section 16.3: Residential Planned Unit Development
Section 16.3.1. Intent
Section 16.3.2. Principal Permitted Uses
Section 16.3.3. Permitted Accessory Uses and Structures
Section 16.3.4. Site Development Regulations
Section 16.3.5. Off-Street Parking and Loading Space
Section 16.3.6. Sign Regulations
Section 16.3.7. Zoning Permits Required
Section 16.3.8. Common Open Space Required
Section 16.3.1. Intent
The intent of the Residential Planned Unit Development District is to provide for a transitional area
between agricultural and urban land uses to be applied in areas contiguous to or in close proximity to
developed areas.
Section 16.3.2. PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USES
Within the Residential Planned Unit Development District, unless otherwise provided, no building or
land shall be used for other than one or more of the following principal permitted uses:
Residential Uses Civic Uses Agricultural Uses
Single Family Residential
Park and Recreation Services
Local Utility Services
Publicly Owned Facilities
Daycare Services (limited)
Horticulture
Section 16.3.3. PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES
The following accessory uses and structures shall be permitted.
25. Private garages or carports
26. Private recreational facilities for use by residents (swimming pools, trampolines, play equipment).
27. Patios, cabanas, porches, gazebos, and incidental household storage buildings
28. Private greenhouses, not operated for commercial purposes
29. Radio, television, satellite dish, and other similar receiving antennas for residential purposes
30. Solar collectors
31. Home occupations
c. Shall be subject to Section 18.5 Home Occupations except subsection 2.
(1) Only two (2) unrelated persons living outside the residence and members of the
immediate family may be employed on the premises of the home occupation.
d. One hundred percent (100%) of an accessory building may be used for a home occupation.
32. Private Parking Lots
33. Kennel, private
City of Sioux Center, Iowa Zoning Ordinance
Prepared by: NW IA Planning & Development 101
34. Temporary buildings or uses incidental to construction, which buildings shall be removed upon
the completion or abandonment of construction work, and in compliance with Section 18.3
35. Other necessary and customary accessory buildings or uses
b. Shall comply with Section 18.2 except subsection 4(a) and 6, these sections will be replaced
as follows:
(1) Residential accessory buildings shall be limited to a maximum of two (2) total
buildings, not including attached garage. Maximum total square footage for an
accessory building(s) in Block 1 and Lots 8-18 of Block 2 is 2000 square feet.
Maximum total square footage for an accessory building(s) in Lots 1-7 & 19-31
Block 2 is 2800 square feet.
(2) Detached accessory buildings shall not exceed a height of 25 feet.
Section 16.3.4. SITE DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS
The following requirements shall be provided for light and open space around permitted uses and
structures in the Residential Planned Unit Development District, and subject to modifications
contained in Article XVII -“Additional Yard, Area, and Height Requirements.”
Lot Area - 20,000 square feet - minimum lot area
Lot Width - 100 feet - minimum lot width except at entry points
off cul-de-sacs.
Residential Density - Not more than one (1) dwelling unit per lot.
Height - 35 feet - maximum height
Front Yard - 40 feet - minimum required setback
Side Yard - 10 feet - minimum required setback
Rear Yard - 25 feet - minimum required setback
No minimum requirements for local utility facilities and essential services, except that buildings or
other above ground structures or devices constructed in support of utilities or essential services must
comply with minimum yard setback requirements.
All residential dwelling units must be constructed in compliance with the “Minimum Requirements
for Residential Structures” regulations outlined in Section 18.6. Manufactured or mobile homes
placed in designated residential subdivisions must be converted to real property in conformance with
section 135D.26 of the Code of Iowa
Section 16.3.5. Off-Street Parking and Loading Space
Off-street parking and loading requirements shall be required for activities in the Residential Planned
Unit Development District in accordance with the provisions of Article XX of this ordinance.
Section 16.3.6. Sign Regulations
Sign regulations shall be required for activities in the Residential Planned Unit Development District in
accordance with the provisions of Article XXI of the ordinance.
Section 16.3.7. Zoning Permits Required
Zoning permits shall be required in accordance with the provisions of Section 26.3.
Section 16.3.8. Common Open Space Required
Common Open Space shall be required in accordance with the provisions of Section 16.3. Common Open
City of Sioux Center, Iowa Zoning Ordinance
Prepared by: NW IA Planning & Development 102
Space will be designated on the final plat as “Common Access Easement”.
Definitions:
Common Open Space: Area devoted to the use and enjoyment of residents.
Ownership and Maintenance: Common Open Space areas will be owned and maintained by the
adjacent property owners.
City of Sioux Center, Iowa Zoning Ordinance
Prepared by: NW IA Planning & Development 103
City of Sioux Center, Iowa Zoning Ordinance
Prepared by: NW IA Planning & Development 104
ARTICLE XVII
Additional Area, Yard and Height Regulations
Article 17: Additional Area, Yard and Height Regulations
Section 17.1. Intent
Section 17.2. Lot of Record
Section 17.3. Multiple Principal Structures Per Lot
Section 17.4. Yard Regulations
Section 17.5. Fences and Hedges
Section 17.6. Buildings to Have Access
Section 17.7. Use of Public Right-of-Way
Section 17.8. Block Frontage Continuity
Section 17.9. Height Requirements
17.1. INTENT
The regulations set forth in this Article qualify, supplement or modify the area, yard and height
regulations set forth elsewhere in this Ordinance.
17.2. LOT OF RECORD
Any lot of record at the time of passage of this ordinance having less area or width than herein required
may be used for a dwelling where such uses are permitted as provided in this ordinance subject to the
required setbacks and further provisions of Article XXIV “Nonconformities.”
17.3. MULTIPLE PRINCIPAL STRUCTURES PER LOT
Except in the RS, R-1, and MH residential districts, more than one principal structure, not intended to
be a single family residential structure, may be erected on a lot subject to the following conditions.
1) No principal building shall be located in relation to another principal building on the same lot, or
on an adjacent lot, so as to cause danger from fire;
2) All principal buildings on the lot shall be served by access ways suitable for police, fire, and
emergency vehicles.
3) All of the multiple principal buildings on the same lot shall be accessible via pedestrian
walkways connected to the required parking and emergency accesses for the premises, and to
each principal building.
17.4. YARD REGULATIONS
1) Projecting Overhang or Structure. The ordinary horizontal projection from buildings including
eaves, sills, fascia, parapets, cornices, or other similar architectural features, except for gutters, may
not project or extend more than three (3) feet into a required yard.
2) Yard Encroachments. Air conditioning compressor(s), L.P. tanks, heat pumps, or other such similar
devices may not encroach into the required side yard. Carports, bay windows, cantilevered
projections, chimneys and structures may not project into any required yard.
3) Through Lots. Buildings on through lots, extending from street to street shall provide the required
front yard on both streets.
City of Sioux Center, Iowa Zoning Ordinance
Prepared by: NW IA Planning & Development 105
25’
45’
4) Corner Lots. For buildings on corner lots with
frontage on two (2) or more public streets, each
yard abutting a public street shall be the same as
the required front yard on such street and no
accessory building shall project beyond the
required front yard on either street.
5) Line of Site Visibility (at Intersections). On a
corner lot in any district, except the General
Commercial District, no fence, wall, hedge, tree
or other planting or structure that will obstruct
vision between a height of two (2) feet and ten
(10) feet above the centerline grade of the
intersecting streets shall be erected, placed or
maintained within the triangular area formed, by
connecting a point at the center of the curb radius
with two points that are forty-five (45) feet from
the center of the curb radius as measured along
the curb.
6) Steps, Decks and Patios.
Steps providing access to the ground level of a dwelling may encroach no more than three (3) feet
into any required side yard. Steps may encroach no more than six (6) feet into any required front or
rear yard.
Deck floors higher than twelve (12) inches above the average grade of the ground shall conform to
required yard setbacks. An open unenclosed deck may project into a front yard for a distance not
exceeding ten feet (10'), however, no deck may extend to within ten feet (10’) of the lot line.
Uncovered patios, uncovered carports, or other concrete slab structures constructed on the ground, or
less than 12 inches above the average grade of the ground, shall be allowed to be constructed within
the required front, side, or rear yards. However, no concrete slab structure built on the ground or
uncovered patio or uncovered carport shall encroach closer than two (2) feet of the property line.
Furthermore, uncovered patios, uncovered carports or other concrete slab structures shall not extend
more than ten feet (10’) beyond either side of a driveway.
17.5. FENCES AND HEDGES
1) No fence constructed more than thirty (30) percent solid or more than four (4) feet in height may
be located in any front yard. Fences less than four (4) feet in height may be located on any part of
a lot. Please reference Section 17.4.5. when considering fences in front or side yards.
2) Except as provided above, fences less than seven (7) feet in height may be erected in any
required side or rear yards on those parts of a lot that are setback from the street as far as the
main building is from the street. Fences in excess of seven (7) feet will be allowed in the cases of
tennis courts and swimming pools.
3) Fences shall not be closer than six inches (6”) to any property line and perennial plantings shall
not be planted closer than two and one-half feet (2½’) to any property line. Except that perennial
plantings may be placed up to the property line by written mutual agreement of both adjacent
property owners.
City of Sioux Center, Iowa Zoning Ordinance
Prepared by: NW IA Planning & Development 106
3) Fences shall not be constructed of non-treated or natural wood products; corrugated tin, metal, or
fiberglass; or sheet metal or fiberglass. Fences may be constructed from chain link, nondecomposing
wood products, molded plastic or wrought iron. The Planning and Zoning
Commission may approve other materials. Fences should be constructed in an orderly and neat
manner as to accent and compliment the natural landscape of the property.
17.6. BUILDINGS TO HAVE ACCESS
Every building or principal use hereafter erected or structurally altered, shall be on a lot or parcel
having frontage on a public street, or on a lot or parcel having deeded access to a public street.
17.7. USE OF PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAYS
No portion of the public road, street or alley right-of-way shall be used, or occupied by an abutting
use of land or structure for storage or display purposes, or to provide any parking or loading space.
17.8. BLOCK FRONTAGE CONTINUITY
In the case where the front yards in a given block improved with buildings amount to more than 30%
of the total number of lots, including vacant lots, on one side of the street between two intersecting
streets, then the required minimum setbacks will be based on a line joining the two front corners of
the buildings on either side thereof, or where there is a building on only one side, beyond a line
projected from the corresponding adjacent corners of the two nearest buildings, except that no
building shall be required to provide a front yard setback greater than thirty-five (35) feet, in any
event. Where an official line has been established for future widening or opening of a street upon
which a lot abuts, than the depth of a front or side yard shall be measured from such official line.
In the case where the block front improved with buildings amounts to less than 30% of the total
number of lots, including vacant lots, on one side of the street between two intersecting streets, the
required minimum yards of the district shall be enforced.
17.9. HEIGHT MODIFICATIONS
The building height limitations of this Ordinance shall be modified as follows:
1) No building shall exceed a height of two and one-half (2½) stories or thirty-five (35) feet, unless
otherwise provided, except non-dwelling agricultural buildings.
2) Height regulations shall not apply to television and radio towers, church spires, belfries, monuments,
tanks, water and fire towers, stage towers or scenery lofts, cooling towers, grain elevators,
ornamental towers and spires, chimneys, elevator bulkheads, drilling rigs, conveyors, flagpoles and
other pertinent mechanical apparatus which may be erected to any height not in conflict with any
other applicable regulations. These additional structures or accessories may be erected to a height
approved by the Board of Adjustment, provided however, all towers or structures exceeding
height requirements shall conform to the City of Sioux Center’s Tower Ordinance No. SC-0-06-
97; and shall not be permitted to extend into approach zones, clear zones or other restricted air
space required for the protection of the flying public.
3) Public, semi-public, or public service buildings, hospitals, sanitariums, or schools when
permitted in a district may be erected to a greater height than otherwise permitted in the district if
the building is set back from each property line at least one foot in addition to the minimum yard
requirements, for each two feet of additional building height above the height limit otherwise
provided in the district in which the building is constructed.
City of Sioux Center, Iowa Zoning Ordinance
Prepared by: NW IA Planning & Development 107
City of Sioux Center, Iowa Zoning Ordinance
Prepared by: NW IA Planning & Development 108
ARTICLE XVIII
Additional Use Regulations
Article 18: Additional Use Regulations
Section 18.1. Intent
Section 18.2. Accessory Buildings
Section 18.3. Temporary Uses
Section 18.4. Adult-Oriented Establishment Regulations
Section 18.5. Home Occupations
Section 18.6. Recreational Vehicles
Section 18.7. Minimum Requirements for Residential Structures
Section 18.8. Residential Occupancy Standards
Section 18.9. Design (Architectural) Standards
Section 18.10. Planned Unit Development (PUD) – Application and Approval
18.1 INTENT
These provisions apply to additional use regulations in addition to those guidelines set forth in the
Zoning District Regulations. In event of any conflict in provisions, the more restrictive provision
shall apply unless specifically indicated to the contrary.
18.2 ACCESSORY BUILDINGS
The purpose of these provisions is to establish the relationship among principal and accessory uses and
to establish provisions governing the conduct of accessory uses.
Principal uses specified as permitted uses or special exception uses for a district shall be deemed to
include accessory buildings and uses identified by these regulations and such other accessory uses that
are necessary and customarily associated with and are appropriate, incidental, and subordinate to such
principal or special exception uses. Accessory buildings and uses shall be subject to the same regulations
as apply to principal uses in each district, except as otherwise provided in these regulations.
Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to that of the principal building may be erected or
established as permitted, provided they comply with the following limitations:
1) Accessory buildings that are structurally part of or attached to the principal building shall
conform to the site development regulations of the principal building.
2) Accessory buildings shall not be erected in any required front or side yard and such accessory
building shall not be nearer to the front or side yard lot lines than would be required for the building
wall of a main building on the same lot;
3) Accessory buildings located in the R-2, R-3, commercial, professional office, industrial, and
bioscience/research zoning districts may be allowed as the only principal structure on a separate
platted lot so long as the accessory building and property is located no more than 300 feet from the
lot of the principal structure it is associated with.
4) Site development regulations for detached accessory buildings in residential districts are:
a. Residential accessory buildings shall be limited to a maximum of two (2) total buildings,
including a garage, of which all total accessory buildings in any required yard area shall not
occupy more than thirty (30) percent of the required rear yard area. However, this regulation
shall not prohibit the construction of at least one garage not to exceed six hundred (600)
square feet gross building area and at least one accessory storage building not to exceed one
City of Sioux Center, Iowa Zoning Ordinance
Prepared by: NW IA Planning & Development 109
hundred twenty (120) square feet gross building area.
b. No detached accessory building on a corner lot may be placed in any rear or side yard nearer
to a public street right-of-way than the principal building on the same lot.
c. No detached accessory building is permitted within the limits of a front yard
d. Accessory buildings with a permanent foundation shall not be erected within ten (10) feet of any
main (principal) building, required lot line, other utility or permanent easement.
e. If a garage door directly faces an alley, there must be a fifteen (15) foot minimum setback.
5) No accessory building shall be constructed, including siding and roofing materials, from
galvanized metal, but not to exclude the use of standing seam metal roofs or other fabricated or
painted metal roof shingles.
6) Detached accessory buildings shall not exceed a height of 18 feet.
7) No accessory building shall be constructed upon a lot until the construction of the main building
has been actually commenced, and no accessory building shall be used unless the main building
on the lot is also being used.
8) Accessory buildings shall not be used for dwelling purposes.
9) An open unenclosed porch or deck may not encroach or project into a front yard, except as permitted
in Section 17.4.6.
10) For the purposes of this ordinance, a gasoline dispensing pump shall not be classified as an
accessory structure.
18.3 TEMPORARY USES
Provisions authorizing temporary uses are intended to permit occasional, temporary uses when
consistent with the purposes of this Zoning Regulations and when compatible with other nearby uses.
1) Temporary Use Types: The following types of temporary use may be authorized, subject to
specific limitations herein and such additional conditions as may be established by the Zoning
Administrator.
a. Contractor's office, storage yard, and equipment parking and servicing on the site of an active
construction project may be permitted in any district during the period that the construction
work is in progress, but such temporary building(s) shall be removed within thirty (30) days
after completion or abandonment of the construction work.
b. Religious, patriotic, or historic assemblies, displays, or exhibits.
c. Circuses, carnivals, rodeos, fairs, or similar transient amusement or recreational activities not
closer than 200 feet to an existing dwelling.
d. Outdoor art and craft shows and exhibits.
e. Christmas tree sale lots.
f. Temporary signs relating to temporary uses.
g. Outdoor special sales, including swap meets, flea markets, parking lot sales, or similar
City of Sioux Center, Iowa Zoning Ordinance
Prepared by: NW IA Planning & Development 110
activities, limited to locations in commercial or industrial districts, and when operated not
more than 3 days in the same week or more than 5 days in the same month.
h. Temporary use of trailer units or similar portable structures for nonresidential uses, and
limited to a maximum period of 6 months per calendar year.
i. Additional similar uses determined to be temporary by the Zoning Administrator.
2) Required Conditions of Temporary Use:
a. Each site occupied by a temporary use shall be left free of debris, litter, or other evidence of
temporary use upon completion or removal of the use.
b. The Zoning Administrator may establish such additional conditions as deemed necessary to
ensure land use compatibility and to minimize potential impacts on nearby uses, including
but not limited to time and frequency of operation, temporary arrangements for parking and
traffic circulation, requirements for screening or enclosure, and guarantees for site restoration
and cleanup following temporary use.
3) Determination: The Zoning Administrator may authorize a temporary use only when, in his
judgement, the following determination can be made:
a. The temporary use will not impair the normal, safe, and effective operation of a permanent
use on the same site.
b. The temporary use will be compatible with nearby uses in the general vicinity.
c. The temporary use will not impact public health, safety, or convenience, or create traffic
hazards or congestion or otherwise interrupt or interfere with the normal conduct of uses and
activities in the vicinity.
4) Application and Authorization:
a. Application to conduct a temporary use shall be made to the Zoning Administrator, and shall
include a site plan and description of the use and such additional information as the Zoning
Administrator may require to evaluate the use and to make the determination.
b. Application shall be made at least 20 days prior to the requested date for commencement of
the temporary use, and the Zoning Administrator shall make a determination within 10 days
after the date of application.
c. Authorization of a temporary use shall be by issuance of a zoning permit.
d. A temporary use authorized pursuant to these provisions shall not be exempted or relieved
from compliance with any other ordinance, law, permit, or license applicable to such use.
18.4 ADULT-ORIENTED ESTABLISHMENT REGULATIONS
1) Purpose. The City of Sioux Center finds:
a. Adult-oriented establishments require special consideration in order to protect and preserve
the health, safety, and welfare of the patrons of such establishments as well as the citizens of
Sioux Center;
b. Adult-oriented establishments, because of their very nature, have a detrimental effect on both
existing establishments around them and surrounding residential areas adjacent to them;
City of Sioux Center, Iowa Zoning Ordinance
Prepared by: NW IA Planning & Development 111
c. The concern over sexually-transmitted diseases is a legitimate health concern of the City that
demands reasonable regulation of adult-oriented establishments in order to protect the health
and well-being of the community;
d. Adult-oriented establishments, due to their very nature, have serious objectionable
operational characteristics, thereby contributing to blight and downgrading the quality of life
in the adjacent area;
e. The City of Sioux Center wants to prevent these adverse effects and thereby protect the
health, safety, and welfare of its residents; protect residents from increased crime; preserve
the quality of life; preserve the property values and character of the surrounding
neighborhoods; and deter the spread of blight;
f. It is not the intent of this ordinance to suppress any speech activities protected by the First
Amendment, but to enact content neutral regulations that address the secondary effects of
adult-oriented establishments as well as the health problems associated with such
establishments.
2) Definitions Related to Adult-Oriented Establishments.
a. ADULT BOOKSTORE: An establishment that has a facility or facilities, including but not
limited to, booths, cubicles, rooms or stalls for the presentation of "adult entertainment,"
including adult-oriented films, movies, or live performances for observation by patrons
therein; or an establishment having a substantial or significant portion of its stock-in-trade for
sale, rent, trade, lease, inspection, or viewing of books, films, video cassettes, magazines, or
other periodicals, which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matters
depicting, describing, or relating to specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities as
defined below.
b. ADULT ENTERTAINMENT: Any exhibition of any motion picture, live performance, display,
or dance of any type, which has as its dominant theme or is distinguished or characterized by
an emphasis on any actual or simulated specified sexual activities or specified anatomical
areas as defined below.
c. ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER: An enclosed building used for presenting material
having as its dominant theme or distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matters
depicting, describing, or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas as
defined below for observation by patrons of the building.
d. ADULT-ORIENTED ESTABLISHMENT: Any premises including, without limitation, "adult
bookstores," or "adult motion picture theaters." It further means any premises to which public
patrons or members are invited or admitted and which are physically arranged so as to provide
booths, cubicles, rooms, compartments, or stalls separate from the common area of the
premises for the purposes of viewing adult-oriented motion pictures, or wherein an entertainer
provides adult entertainment to a member of the public, a patron, or a member, where such
adult entertainment is held, conducted, operated, or maintained for a profit, direct or indirect.
"Adult-Oriented Establishment" further includes, without limitation, any premises physically
arranged and used as such whether advertised or represented as an adult entertainment studio,
exotic dance studio, encounter studio, sensitivity studio, or any other term of like import.
e. OPERATORS: Any person, partnership, or corporation operating, conducting, maintaining or
owning any adult-oriented establishment.
City of Sioux Center, Iowa Zoning Ordinance
Prepared by: NW IA Planning & Development 112
f. SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS: Less than completely and opaquely covered human
genitals, buttocks, female breasts below the areola; or, male genitalia.
g. SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES: Simulated or actual (a) showing of human genitals in a
state of sexual stimulation or arousal; (b) acts of sexual activity, sodomy, or sado-masochism;
or (c) fondling or erotic touching of human genitals, buttocks, or female breasts.
3) Location Restrictions.
An adult-oriented establishment shall be permitted within the City of Sioux Center only in the
General Industrial (GI) District upon receipt of a site plan (Article XIX) and special exception
use permit in accordance with the procedures set forth in Articles XXV, and only if it meets all of
the location requirements set forth below. Distances provided hereafter shall be measured by
following a straight line, without regard to intervening buildings, from the nearest point of the
property parcel upon which the proposed adult entertainment business is to be located, to the
nearest point of the parcel of property or zoning district boundary line from which the proposed
adult entertainment business is to be separated.
a. Adult-oriented establishments shall be prohibited in or within one thousand (1,000) feet of
the borders of a residential district.
b. Adult-oriented establishments shall be prohibited within one thousand (1,000) feet of any
church, synagogue, mosque, temple, or other place of religious worship.
c. Adult-oriented establishments shall be prohibited within one thousand (1,000) feet of any
public or private school offering general education for students between the years of
Kindergarten and Twelfth grade.
d. Adult-oriented establishments shall be prohibited within one thousand (1,000) feet of any
daycare home or daycare business.
e. Adult-oriented establishments shall be prohibited within one thousand (1,000) feet of any
public park or playground. For purposes of this section, bike paths, trails, waterways, and
boat launches shall not be deemed a public park.
f. Adult-oriented establishments shall be prohibited within one thousand (1,000) feet of any
other adult entertainment business.
g. Adult-oriented establishments shall be prohibited within one thousand (1,000) feet of any
existing establishment selling alcoholic beverages for consumption on premises.
4) Development Design Standards.
a. Exterior. It shall be unlawful for an owner of an adult-oriented establishment:
i. to allow the merchandise or activities of the establishment to be visible from a point
outside the establishment
ii. to allow the exterior portion of the adult-oriented establishment to have flashing lights, or
any words, lettering, photographs, silhouettes, drawings, or pictorial representation of any
manner depicting specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities.
iii. to allow exterior portions of the establishment to be painted other than a single color.
b. Signage. The operator shall comply with Article XXI of this ordinance. Additionally, the
City of Sioux Center, Iowa Zoning Ordinance
Prepared by: NW IA Planning & Development 113
display surfaces of the sign shall not contain any flashing lights or photographs, silhouettes,
drawings, or pictorial representations of any manner, except for the name of the enterprise.
5) Responsibilities of the Operator. Every act or omission by an employee constituting a violation
of the provisions of this ordinance shall be deemed the act or omission of the operator if such act
or omission occurs either with the authorization, knowledge, or approval of the operator, or as a
result of the operator's negligent failure to supervise the employee's conduct, and the operator
shall be punishable for such act or omission in the same manner as if the operator committed the
act or caused the omission.
6) Minors. It shall be unlawful to allow a person who is younger than eighteen (18) years of age to
enter or be on the premises of an adult-oriented establishment at any time that the establishment
is open for business. The operator must ensure that an attendant is stationed at each public
entrance at all times during regular business hours. The attendant shall prohibit any person under
the age of eighteen (18) from entering the establishment. It shall be presumed that an attendant
knew a person was under the age of eighteen (18) unless such attendant asked for and was
furnished a valid drivers license issued by a state reflecting that person’s age.
7) Hours of Operation. An adult-oriented establishment may remain open for business no longer
than the hours from between 10:00 a.m. to 2:00 a.m., seven days a week.
18.5 HOME OCCUPATIONS
Home occupations as an accessory to residential uses shall be subject to the following limitations.
1) The use must be conducted as a secondary use and in such a manner as not to give an outward
appearance nor manifest any characteristics of a business in the ordinary meaning of the term. The
home occupation shall be conducted entirely within a dwelling unit that is the bona fide residence
of the practitioner(s), or entirely within an attached or detached garage (not to include a carport,
driveway, yard or outside area).
2) Only one (1) unrelated person living outside the residence and members of the immediate family
may be employed in the home occupation.
3) The residential character of the lot and dwelling shall be maintained. The exterior of the dwelling
shall not be structurally altered so as to require compliance with nonresidential construction
codes to accommodate the home occupation.
4) The home occupation shall not generate customer related vehicular traffic substantially in excess
of the normal anticipated residential neighborhood traffic.
5) No equipment or materials associated with the home occupation shall be displayed or stored
where visible from anywhere off the premises.
6) May have no more than one, flush mounted, non-illuminated sign not exceeding four (4) square feet
and four feet (4’) in height.
7) In addition to one flush mounted sign allowed in subsection 6 above, home occupations shall be
permitted to have one yard sign, of the same size and height above, no closer to the street than
fifteen feet (15’) from the curb.
8) No more than thirty percent (30%) of the main floor area of the principal building may be utilized by
the home occupation. However, this regulation shall not apply to day care services.
City of Sioux Center, Iowa Zoning Ordinance
Prepared by: NW IA Planning & Development 114
9) The occupation shall not produce external noise, vibration, smoke, dust, odor, heat, glare, fumes,
electrical interference or waste run off outside the dwelling unit or on the property surrounding
the dwelling unit.
10) The use must not infringe upon the right of neighbors to enjoy peaceful and healthy occupancy of
their home for which purpose the residential district was created and primarily intended.
11) Music lessons, when operated as a home occupation shall be limited to two (2) students at any
one time. Dance lessons, when operated as a home occupation, shall be limited to no more than
four (4) students at any one time.
12) Nothing herein shall be construed to allow the following businesses or occupations as home
occupations: animal hospitals, animal breeding, clinics, hospitals, contractor's yards, junk yards,
restaurants, rental outlets, automotive repair, vehicle repair shops or massage parlors.
13) Day care, for home occupation, shall be permitted according to state regulations.
14) When located in any residential district, administrative services shall be limited to activities and
services of direct benefit to residents of the neighborhood, and shall be conducted in a manner
compatible with permitted residential uses.
18.6 RECREATIONAL VEHICLES
1) Recreational vehicles may be parked for seasonal use (short term use) on a driveway within a
front yard, but not upon the right-of-way, in residential districts provided the view of the street is
not obstructed as to vehicular ingress and egress. Recreational vehicles, including campers, boats,
personal watercraft, snowmobiles, trailers, and other recreational based vehicles not intended for
permanent occupancy, may be parked or stored (long term use) within the side yard or rear yard
of a residential lot, or within an enclosed garage.
2) For purposes of long term storage, all year long, or a period of time exceeding 30 consecutive
days, recreational vehicles parked within side yards of a property shall not be located in front of a
line parallel to the front of the principal structure on the lot.
3) Recreational vehicles shall be customarily or ordinarily used for vacation or recreation purposes
and not used as a place of human habitation for more than fourteen (14) consecutive days in any
three (3) month period.
4) Recreational vehicles shall not be used for permanent human occupancy in any district.
5) Recreational vehicles shall not be used for business purposes.
18.7 MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS FOR RESIDENTIAL STRUCTURES
All structures intended for residential occupancy placed, erected, assembled or constructed in the
City after the effective date of this Section shall meet and comply with the following minimum
requirements:
1) Structure Size: Each such structure shall have a main body with a minimum exterior dimension
of at least twenty-two feet (22’) measured from outside of the exterior walls, exclusive of
attached garages, porches, or other attached accessory structures. A structure may include
porches, sunrooms, garages and wings of lesser dimensions and area, so long as the main body
meets the minimum requirements.
City of Sioux Center, Iowa Zoning Ordinance
Prepared by: NW IA Planning & Development 115
2) Minimum Floor Area: A minimum floor area of not less than eight hundred (800) square feet.
3) Foundation: All residential structures shall have a continuous and complete frost protected
perimeter foundation. Foundation materials may be masonry, poured concrete, wood or metal and
must extend below the normal frost line or be an approved frost-free permanent foundation. The
structure must be permanently attached to the foundation.
4) Exterior Wall and Roof Material:
a. Exterior wall covering shall be wood or masonry finish, vertical or horizontal grooved siding,
lap siding, log siding, wood shingles, or another approved material of similar appearance.
b. Roofing material shall be shingles (asphalt, fiberglass, or wood), slate, ceramic, concrete, or
metal of a type customarily used as local residential roofing material, such as “standing
seam”, “Horizon-Loc”, and “Snap-Lok” or embossed or textured metal providing that the
fasteners remain hidden, concealed, or unexposed to weathering
c. Smooth, unfinished or corrugated sheet metal or sheet fiberglass shall not be used for exterior
wall or roof covering.
d. Soffits and/or eaves, window and door trim, roofs and coverings over bay and bow windows
and doors may be smooth finished metal, vinyl or wood or unfinished metal, such as copper,
customarily used for residential structure trim.
e. All dwelling units shall have a minimum roof pitch of 3:12. This requirement shall not apply
to mobile home housing if the structure complies with 42 U.S.C., Section 5403.
f. This subsection shall not prevent the repair or replacement of existing rolled roofing on flat
roof
5) Wheels, Axles or Towing Device: No residential structure shall have attached wheels, axles, or a
towing device.
6) Exemption: The provisions of Article 18.7 Subsections 1-3, shall not apply to “mobile” or
“manufactured” homes placed in a mobile home park or a mobile home subdivision in
compliance with the remaining regulations in this Zoning Ordinance.
18.8 RESIDENTIAL OCCUPANCY STANDARDS
1) Definitions:
a. Apartment: A single room or set of rooms occupied as a dwelling which is part of a multi-family
structure. (See Section 3.1 “Definitions”)
b. Dwelling: Any house, building, or mobile home, or portion thereof intended to be occupied as
the place of habitation of human beings, either permanently or transiently. (See Section 3.1
“Definitions”)
c. Dwelling unit: One or more rooms intended to be occupied by one family for living purposes.
d. Owner-Occupied Single Family Dwelling: Any townhouse, condominium, or detached
dwelling that is occupied as a dwelling by the owner or owner’s relative and may include a
nanny, live-in nurse or live-in exchange student. It is still a single-family dwelling unit, even if
rooms are rented as part of the building.
e. Family: A person living alone, or any one of the following groups living together as a single
City of Sioux Center, Iowa Zoning Ordinance
Prepared by: NW IA Planning & Development 116
housekeeping unit and sharing common living, sleeping, cooking, and eating facilities.
(1) Two or more persons related to the second degree of collateral consanguinity by blood,
marriage, adoption, guardianship, or otherwise duly authorized custodial
relationship as verified by official public records such as drivers licenses, birth of marriage
certificates, living and cooking together as a single housekeeping unit exclusive of not
more than one additional unrelated person.
(2) Not more than eight (8) people who are:
i) Residents of a “Family Home” as defined in Section 414.22 of the Iowa Code; or
ii) “Handicapped” as defined in the Fair Housing Act, 42 U.S.C. Section 3602 (h).
(3) Exceptions – The definition of a “Family” does not include:
i) Any society, fraternity, sorority, association, lodges, federation, or like organization.
ii) A maximum of four (4) unrelated persons whose association is temporary or seasonal
in nature
iii) Any group of individuals in a living arrangement resulting from criminal offenses.
2) Permitted Occupancy:
a. Owner Occupied Single Family and Two Family Dwellings in the RS (Suburban) and R-1
(Single Family Residential) zoning districts. Notwithstanding excess floor space over the
required minimum occupant requirements in all single family and two-family dwellings in the
RS and R-1 zoning districts, maximum occupancy of a dwelling unit shall be one (1) family.
b. Owner Occupied Single Family and Two Family Dwellings in the R-2 (Medium Density
Residential), R-3 (Multiple Family Residential), MH (Mobile Home Residential), and AG
(Agriculture) zoning districts. Notwithstanding excess floor space over the required minimum
occupant requirements in all single family and two-family dwellings in the R-2, R-3, MH and
AG zoning districts, maximum occupancy of a dwelling unit shall be:
i. one family; or
ii. up to four (4) unrelated people residing in the same dwelling unit.
c. Multiple Family Dwellings and Apartments in all zoning districts. Notwithstanding excess
floor space over the required minimum occupant requirements in all multiple family dwellings
and apartments (more than 3 units) in all zoning districts, maximum occupancy of a dwelling
unit shall be:
i. one family; or
ii. up to four (4) unrelated people residing in the same dwelling unit.
iii. provisions of at least one parking space per bedroom for units with two bedrooms or more;
one bedroom units shall have 2 parking spaces.
3) Maximum Occupancy Requirements:
a. In all cases, each dwelling unit shall provide habitable floor space totaling at least eighty (80)
square feet for the first occupant and sixty (60) square feet for each additional occupant.
b. Every person occupying an apartment, multiple family dwelling, or tenant-occupied
apartment in a one or two family dwelling shall have a livable area of not less than 80 square
feet. The maximum number of persons who may occupy any such rental space shall be
determined by dividing the total livable floor area of the rental space by 80 square feet and
City of Sioux Center, Iowa Zoning Ordinance
Prepared by: NW IA Planning & Development 117
rounding to the nearest whole number.
4) Single Room Occupancy (SRO) and efficiency unit requirements:
a. A single room occupancy unit provides living and sleeping space for the exclusive use of the
occupant, but requires the occupant to share sanitary and or food preparation facilities
(i.e. dormitories, fraternities, sororities, lodging or boarding houses, halfway house, etc.)
b. An SRO unit must contain at least 110 square feet of floor space and at least four square feet
of closet space for use by the occupant.
c. An efficiency dwelling unit (all rooms, including habitable and non-habitable are included in
one open space) shall contain at least 220 square feet of floor space for the first occupant and
at least 100 additional square feet of floor space for every additional occupant.
d. In both SRO’s and efficiency units, when determining the permissible occupancy, the floor
area of that part of a room where the ceiling height is less than five (5) feet shall not be
considered when computing the total floor area.
5) In all existing dwelling units with a current occupancy limit greater than permitted in the
aforesaid sections 2-4, such occupancy limit shall be allowed to continue until such time as
negated by a change in use or occupancy of the dwelling unit; at which time the dwelling unit
will become compliant with the occupancy limits set forth in this ordinance.
18.9 DESIGN (ARCHITECTURAL) STANDARDS
As part of the submittal of a site plan for development within any of the zoning districts and for any
of the uses except one and two family dwellings, architectural plans for buildings shall be submitted
for review and approval by the City staff as part of the permitting process. Documentation to be
submitted shall include drawings showing the building’s design and a description of structural and
exterior materials to be used, on all sides. The following standards shall be used by the city staff to
review architectural plans:
1) Non-Residential uses in any RESIDENTIAL District: Any building used for a permitted or
special exception non-residential use in any residential district, shall be designed and constructed
with architecture and use of materials compatible with the residential uses within the
neighborhood.
2) All uses within the COMMERCIAL District: Buildings within commercial districts shall be
designed, having as a primary element of the building exterior: fascia glass, wood siding, stucco,
vinyl, brick, concrete panels, finished or painted metal or aluminum siding, ribbed metal panels,
textured concrete block or stone with all sides of any building consistent in design and use of
materials. These materials shall make up at least a majority of the building walls of each side of
the structure. No masonite, asphaltic wall material, non-architectural galvanized sheet metal, nontextured
concrete block, or other similar materials shall constitute a major portion of any building
except as a trim material, unless city staff shall determine said material when used as a primary
element, does not distract from the physical appearance of the building. The architectural design
and use of materials for the construction shall be reviewed as part of any site plan.
3) All uses within the INDUSTRIAL District: The exterior material of the building’s front elevation
shall be comprised of one or a combination of the building materials permitted in commercial
City of Sioux Center, Iowa Zoning Ordinance
Prepared by: NW IA Planning & Development 118
districts. These materials shall be present on at least a majority of the building’s front facade. The
use of galvanized metal shall not be considered acceptable for any facade. The architectural
design and use of construction materials shall be reviewed as part of any site plan.
Buildings proposed in commercial or industrial areas that are adjacent to less intense uses (e.g.
residential or civic uses) should be designed with an articulated roofline, giving emphasis to
architectural elements that help divide the mass of a large building into smaller, identifiable parts.
Commercial and industrial buildings shall incorporate facade modulation in all building
elevations visible to the public or adjacent to other less intense uses in order to preserve building
scale and reduce the effect of long, large or expansive wall surfaces. Variation of these surfaces
can be accomplished by physical offsets or the use of color, pattern or texture. Buildings shall
incorporate architectural design elements, materials, and colors into the side and rear building
elevations similar to those used in the front building elevation.
18.10 PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT (PUD) – APPLICATION AND APPROVAL
A planned unit development to be eligible for application and approval, must meet all of the
requirements of Article XVI and meet the following requirements:
Application Procedures: Planned Unit Developments shall be subject to the approval of the City
Council based upon review and recommendations by the Planning Commission.
1) Pre-Application Meeting. Prior to the submission of any plan to the Planning Commission, the
applicant shall meet with the Zoning Administrator to discuss the contemplated project relative to
community development objectives for the area in question and to learn the procedural steps and
exhibits required. This includes the procedural steps for a special exception use permit and
subdivision process. The applicant may submit a simple sketch plan at this stage for informal
review and discussion.
2) Development Plan.
a. An applicant shall make an application for a special exception use permit following the
procedural steps as established by the Zoning Administrator.
b. In order to grant approval to a special exception use permit, the City Council shall find that the
planned unit development complies with the “General Regulations” criteria outlined in Section
16.3 and with the requirements as established in this section of this ordinance.
c. Development Plan Documentation - the following information shall be submitted by the
developer as part of the application for a special exception use permit.
i. An explanation of the character and need for the planned development and the manner in
which it has been planned to take advantage of the planned development regulations.
ii. A statement of proposed financing of the Planned Unit Development (PUD).
iii. A statement of the ownership of all of the land included within the planned development and
a list of property owners and addresses within two hundred (200) feet of the property.
iv. A general indication of the expected schedule of development including phasing schedules.
v. A map giving the legal description of the property including approximate total acreage and
also indicating existing property lines and dimensions, ownership of all parcels, platting,
easement, street rights-of-way, utilities, and buildings.
City of Sioux Center, Iowa Zoning Ordinance
Prepared by: NW IA Planning & Development 119
vi. Natural features map of the property showing contour lines, drainage patterns, wetlands,
vegetation, soil and subsoil conditions.
vii. A map indicating proposed land uses including housing units and types, vehicular and
pedestrian circulation, and open space uses.
viii. Full description as to how all necessary infrastructure and municipal services will be
provided, including sanitary sewer, storm sewer, water, streets and other public utilities.
ix. Any additional information requested by the Zoning Administrator or Planning Commission.
3) Preliminary Plat. The applicant shall also submit a preliminary subdivision plat and all the
necessary documentation as required under the City’s Subdivision Ordinance. For purposes of
administrative simplification, the public hearings required for the special exception use permit
and preliminary subdivision plat may be combined into one hearing.
4) Development Plan Procedures.
a. The applicant shall file a completed application together with required exhibits with the
Zoning Administrator.
b. The Zoning Administrator shall review for conformity and transmit the application and
required exhibits to the Planning Commission, and notify all property owners within the
affected zone and within one hundred (100) feet of the property in question; however, failure
of any property owner to receive such notification shall not invalidate the proceedings.
c. The Zoning Administrator shall set a date for a public hearing and shall have notices of such
hearing published in the legal newspaper at least once, not less than seven (7) days and not
more than thirty (20) days prior to said hearing.
d. The Planning Commission shall hold the public hearing and recommend and transmit to the
City Council within thirty (30) days after the close of the public hearing, one of three actions -
approval, denial, or conditional approval.
e. The City Council shall act upon the application within thirty (30) days after receiving the
recommendation of the Planning Commission.
f. Upon approval by the City Council, the Zoning Administrator shall issue a conditional use
permit to the applicant. The final subdivision plat shall be submitted to the County Recorder's
Office within ninety (90) days. This shall include posting a performance bond or certified
check with the City of Sioux Center, Iowa, guaranteeing those required improvements will be
constructed according to the approved implementation schedule.
g. Once the development plan and final subdivision plat have been approved, the city may issue
the building permit for the area complying with the plan and other laws of the city.
5) Enforcing Development Schedule. The provision of all of common open spaces and public or
recreational facilities shown on the development plan must proceed at the same rate as the
construction of the principal buildings. If city staff finds that the rate of construction of principal
buildings is faster than the rate of public or recreational facilities, the city may revoke the special
exception use permit.
6) Review and Amendments. If the Zoning Administrator finds that development has not occurred
within one year after the original approval, the Planning Commission may recommend that the
City Council revoke the conditional use permit.
City of Sioux Center, Iowa Zoning Ordinance
Prepared by: NW IA Planning & Development 120
Revisions or amendments to the Planned Unit Development (PUD) may include:
a. Changes in location, placement, and heights of buildings may be authorized by the Zoning
Administrator.
b. Approval by the Planning Commission and City Council shall be required for other changes
such as rearrangement of lots, blocks and building tracts.
c. Amendments to the Planned Unit Development (PUD) shall require the same procedures as
for the application for a conditional use permit.
City of Sioux Center, Iowa Zoning Ordinance
Prepared by: NW IA Planning & Development 121
City of Sioux Center, Iowa Zoning Ordinance
Prepared by: NW IA Planning & Development 122
ARTICLE XIX
Site Plans
Article 19: Site Plans
Section 19.1. Scale
Section 19.2. Legal Information
Section 19.3. Site Plan
Site plans are required for review and approval for any use in any district or elsewhere by this
ordinance shall comply with and illustrate the following.
19.1 SCALE
All site plans shall be drawn at a scale not smaller than 1" = 100' and two (2) copies of the site plan
shall be submitted with zoning permit application.
19.2 LEGAL INFORMATION
The final site plan required shall include the following legal information:
a. Legal property owners name and description of property.
b. Appellant's name, requested land use and zoning.
c. If the appellant is other than the legal owner, the appellant's interest shall be indicated and the
legal owners’ authority to appeal shall be certified legal form.
19.3 SITE PLAN
The final site plan shall clearly illustrate and enumerate the following information:
a. Property boundary lines, dimensions and total area.
b. Contour lines at intervals of not more than five (5) feet, if requested by city staff. If substantial
topographic change is proposed, the existing topography shall be illustrated on a separate map
and the finished topography shown on the final site plan.
c. The availability and location of existing utilities, if requested by city staff.
d. The proposed location, size, shape and type of all buildings or structures.
e. The total square feet of building floor area, both individually and collectively.
f. The number of dwelling units, bedrooms, offices, etc.
g. A vicinity sketch showing adjacent existing land uses within five hundred (500) feet of the
property, if requested by city staff.
h. Existing buildings, rights-of-way, street improvements, utilities, easements, or drainage ways,
if requested by city staff.
i. Parking areas, number of parking spaces proposed, number of parking spaces required by this
ordinance, type of surfacing to be used, etc.
j. Walkways, driveways, outside lighting, walls, fences, signs, monuments, statues and other
man-made features to be used in the landscape.
k. Location and type of landscaping to be used for screening purposes shall be illustrated in
elevation as well as in the plan, if required.
l. Walls, fences or other artificial screens to be used as buffers shall be shown in elevation as well
as plan with proposed height and structural material to be used indicated, if required.
m. Traffic considerations, architectural themes, and all other considerations pertinent to the
proposed use may be requested for illustration or statistical purposes.
City of Sioux Center, Iowa Zoning Ordinance
Prepared by: NW IA Planning & Development 123
City of Sioux Center, Iowa Zoning Ordinance
Prepared by: NW IA Planning & Development 124
ARTICLE XX
Off Street Parking and Loading Space
Article 20: Off Street Parking and Loading Space
Section 20.1. Intent
Section 20.2. General Parking Area and Surface Requirements
Section 20.3. Off Street Parking Requirements
Section 20.4. Computation of Parking Spaces
Section 20.5. Location and Type of Parking
Section 20.6. Off Street Loading Requirements
20.1 INTENT
It is the intent of this article to prevent traffic congestion and to provide for proper traffic safety by
preserving the public thoroughfares for the unimpaired movement of pedestrian and vehicular traffic.
Therefore, after the effective date of this ordinance, in all districts, there shall be provided at the time
any new building or structure is erected, off-street parking spaces in accordance with the requirements
set forth herein. The requirements of this Article are minimum standards, and in certain uses these
requirements may be inadequate. Where review of the site plans and intended land use indicate
through the application of proven standards or experienced statistics that the requirements herein are
inadequate for the specific land use adaptation, a greater requirement for off-street parking may be
required to preserve the intent of this ordinance.
20.2 GENERAL PARKING AREA AND SURFACE REQUIREMENTS
All off-street parking areas as required in this Section shall comply with the following minimum area
and surface requirements.
1) Owners of two (2) or more uses or parcels of land may agree to jointly utilize the same parking
spaces provided that satisfactory legal evidence is presented in the form of deeds, leases, or contract
documents to establish such a joint area of use;
2) A "parking space" shall be not less than nine feet (9') in width and nineteen feet (19') in length.
3) Parking spaces shall be surfaced with Portland Cement, concrete, asphaltic concrete, or
equivalent hard surface; or two inch (2") thickness pit run one inch (1") screened gravel with
fifteen percent (15%) binder.
4) Enclosed parking areas or garages shall qualify to meet the minimum parking space requirements
under this section.
5) Requirements as to number and size of parking space in this section are minimum requirements
only and shall not be construed as limitations.
6) Willful failure to permanently maintain and provide parking spaces as required under this section
shall be deemed in violation of this ordinance and subject to the penalty listed in Article XVII
“Violation and Penalty.”
7) General parking requirements within all Residential Districts shall include”
a. No parking in front yards, except on a surfaced driveway or auxiliary parking area.
b. A driveway is considered the surfaced portion of the yard no wider than the width of the
garage.
City of Sioux Center, Iowa Zoning Ordinance
Prepared by: NW IA Planning & Development 125
c. Additional parking of vehicles is permitted on a surfaced area or “wing” off to the side of a
driveway. An auxiliary surfaced parking or driveway “wing” is permitted on one side of the
driveway, but not both sides.
d. Auxiliary “wing” parking areas shall be no more than 10 feet (10’) in width and shall not
encroach into the right-of-way.
20.3 OFF STREET PARKING REQUIREMENTS
At the time of construction, alteration, or enlargement of a structure or building, or change in the use
of the land; off-street parking spaces and loading areas shall be provided, constructed, and
maintained for all uses as follows.
A. Single Family Residential: 2 space
B. Multi- Family Residential: 1.5 spaces per dwelling unit
C. Mobile Home Residential: 2 spaces per mobile home
D. Hotel / Motel: 1 space per room
E. Hospital: 1 space for each four hospital beds, plus 1
space for each two employees on the major
shift
F. Public Assembly: 1 space for each six (6) seats of seating
- Churches, Auditoriums, Stadiums, Etc. capacity provided
- Schools (see requirements below)
G. Bowling Alley 3 spaces per alley
H. Skating rinks or dance halls: 1 space for each 300 sq.ft. of gross floor area.
I. General Retail Sales/ Professional Office: 1 space per 300 feet of gross floor area
Auxiliary Parking
Option #1
Auxiliary Parking
Option #2
City of Sioux Center, Iowa Zoning Ordinance
Prepared by: NW IA Planning & Development 126
J. Restaurants: 1 space for each four seats, plus 1 space for
each two employees
K. Lounges/Bars/Taverns: 1 space for each two seats
L. Primary Educational Facility: 1 space per regularly employee and 1 space
for every ten seats in the largest facility for
public assembly.
M. Secondary Education/College Facilities: 1 space per regular employee or 1 space for
every six (6) seats in the largest facility for
public assembly, whichever is greater.
N. Convalescent/Nursing Home: 1 Space for each eight beds, plus 1 space for
each 3 employees on the largest shift.
O. Industry/Bioscience/Research: 1 Space for every two employees on the
largest shift.
P. All Other Uses: All other buildings having a gross floor area of
more than two thousand (2,000) square feet
shall provide one (1) off-street parking space
for each one thousand (1,000) square feet of
floor space on the same lot as the principal
building.
20.4 COMPUTATION OF PARKING SPACES
1) In the case of any building, structure or premises, the use of which is not specifically mentioned
herein, the provisions for a use which is so mentioned and to which said use is similar, shall
apply, as determined by the Zoning Administrator.
2) Where fractional spaces occur, the parking spaces required shall be construed to be the nearest
whole number.
3) Whenever a building or use constructed or established after the effective date of this ordinance is
changed, altered, or enlarged in floor area, number of employees, number of dwelling units, seating
capacity or otherwise, to create a need for an increase of ten (10) percent or more in the number of
existing parking spaces, such spaces shall be provided on the basis of the enlargement or change.
Whenever a building or use existing prior to the effective date of this ordinance is enlarged to the
extent of fifty percent (50%) or more in floor area or in the area used, said building or use shall then
and thereafter comply with the parking requirements set forth herein.
4) In the case of mixed or joint uses, the parking spaces required shall equal the sum of the
requirements of the various uses if computed separately.
20.5 LOCATION AND TYPE OF PARKING
All parking spaces required herein shall be located on the same lot as the building or use served,
except that where an increase in the number of spaces is required due to a change or enlargement of
use or where such spaces are provided collectively or used jointly by two or more buildings or
establishments, the required spaces may be located and maintained no more than three hundred feet
(300') from an institutional or other non-residential building being served.
City of Sioux Center, Iowa Zoning Ordinance
Prepared by: NW IA Planning & Development 127
1) In any case where the required parking spaces are not located on the same lot with the building or
use served, or where such spaces are collectively or jointly provided and used, a written
agreement thereby assuring their retention for such purposes, shall be properly drawn and
executed by the parties concerned, approved as to form and execution, and shall be filed with the
application for a building permit.
2) Off-street parking spaces may be located within the required front yard of any commercial,
industrial, Bioscience (B), Professional Office (PO), or multiple family residential (R-2 and R-3)
districts. However, no off-street parking shall be permitted in the required front yard except upon
a driveway providing access to a garage, carport or parking area within the Agriculture (A) and
remaining residential (SR, R-1, MH) districts.
3) All required off-street parking areas of more than five (5) spaces shall be surfaced with either
asphalt, concrete, or other such surface as shall be approved by the Zoning Administrator so as to
provide a durable surface. They shall be graded and drained to dispose of all surface water
accumulation within the lot, and shall be arranged and marked to provide for orderly and safe
loading or unloading.
4) Any lighting used to illuminate any off-street parking areas shall be arranged to reflect light away
from adjacent lots and uses of land.
5) In case commercial or other non-residential parking lots adjoin a residential district, it shall be at
least five feet from the property line and effectively screened by the use of a fence, hedge, or
other similar methods.
6) Parking in any district is not permitted on right-of-ways.
20.6 OFF STREET LOADING REQUIREMENTS
At the time of construction, alteration, or enlargement of every building hereafter erected, every
hospital, hotel, institution, manufacturing, storage, warehouse, retail store, wholesale store, or other
similar commercial or industrial building having secondary access from an alley, side street or
otherwise shall have one permanently maintained loading space for buildings in excess of ten
thousand (10,000) square feet.
1) Each loading space shall be no less than ten feet (10') in width, forty feet (40') in length and
fifteen feet (15') in height.
2) No truck or trailer, for purposes of loading, unloading or parking will be permitted to be located
on any street or other public right-of-way.
3) Such space may occupy all or any part of any required side or rear yard or open space, except
where adjoining a residential district. If the loading space is adjacent to a residential district, it
shall be set back at least ten feet (10') from said district and be effectively screened from view.
City of Sioux Center, Iowa Zoning Ordinance
Prepared by: NW IA Planning & Development 128
ARTICLE XXI
Sign Regulations
Article 21: Sign Regulations
Section 21.1 Intent
Section 21.2 Definitions
Section 21.3 Requirements
Section 21.4 Special Exceptions
Section 21.5 Additional Regulations
Section 21.6 General Sign Provisions
Section 21.7 Permits Required
Section 21.8 Permitted Signs
Section 21.9 Unsafe and Unlawful Signs
Section 21.10 Exemptions
Section 21.11 Removal of Signs
21.1 INTENT
This article is established to protect and promote health, safety, general welfare and order within the
City of Sioux Center through the establishment of comprehensive and uniform standards, regulations
and procedures governing the type, number, size, structure, location, height, lighting, erection, use or
display of devices, signs, or symbols serving as a visual communications media to persons situated
within or upon public rights-of-way or private properties. The provisions of this article are intended
to encourage opportunity for effective, aesthetically compatible, and orderly communications by
reducing confusion and hazards resulting from unnecessary or indiscriminate use of communications
facilities. Hereafter no sign shall be erected, constructed, altered, or modified except as regulated by
the provisions of this article.
21.2 DEFINITIONS
For use in this article, the following terms are defined.
21.2.1 AWNING: A device made of cloth, metal, or other material affixed to and projecting from a
building in such a manner that the device is either permanently fixed or so erected as to allow
it to be raised or retracted and return to a flat position against the building when not in use.
21.2.2 ERECT: To build, construct, attach, hang, suspend or affix, and shall also include the
painting of wall signs.
21.2.3 FACING (or SURFACE): The surface of the sign upon; against or through which the
message is displayed or illustrated on the sign.
21.2.4 INCOMBUSTIBLE MATERIAL: Any material that will not ignite at or below a
temperature of 120 degrees Fahrenheit and will not continue to burn or glow at that
temperature.
21.2.5 PERSON: Any one being, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or
organization of any kind.
21.2.6 SIGN: The use of any words, numerals, pictures, figures, devices or trademarks by which
anything is made known such as are used to show an individual, firm, profession or business,
and are visible to the general public.
City of Sioux Center, Iowa Zoning Ordinance
Prepared by: NW IA Planning & Development 129
a. ABANDONED SIGN: A sign which no longer correctly directs any person, advertises a
bona fide business, lessor, owner, product, or activity conducted on the premises where such
sign is displayed.
b. ADDRESS SIGN: A sign communicating street address only, whether written or in
numerical form.
c. AWNING SIGN: A sign consisting of either an operating or permanently affixed awning
containing letters, graphics, pictures, or other images which portray the business or other
advertising of the establishment in which it is attached to. Awning signs shall not encroach more
than four (4) feet out in front of a building, but shall meet all other size requirements addressed
in this chapter. Permanent awnings may be lighted (from the backside); however, awning signs
shall not have any flashing, strobe, or otherwise intermittent light emitting from the awning sign.
d. CAMPAIGN SIGN: A temporary sign promoting the candidacy of a person running for a
governmental office, or promoting an issue to be voted upon at a governmental election.
e. CONSTRUCTION SIGN: A sign placed at construction site identifying the project or the
name of the architect, engineer, contractor, financier or other involved parties.
f. DIRECTIONAL SIGN: A sign erected on public or private property which bears the address
and name of a business, institution, church, or other use or activity plus directional arrows or
information on location.
g. FLASHING SIGN: Any illuminated sign that has artificial light or color which is not
maintained at a constant intensity or color when such sign is in use. A sign providing public
service information, such as time, weather, date, temperature or similar information, shall not be
considered a flashing sign.
h. FREE STANDING SIGN: Any sign or sign structure, not securely attached to the ground
or to any other structure. This shall not include trailer signs as defined in this section
i. GOVERNMENTAL SIGN: A sign which is erected by a governmental unit.
j. ILLUMINATED SIGN: Any sign which has character, letters, figures, designs or outline
illuminated by electric lights or luminous tubes as a part of the sign proper.
k. INFORMATION SIGN: Any sign giving information to employees, visitors or delivery
vehicles, but containing no advertising or identification.
l. JOINT IDENTIFICATION SIGN: A free-standing sign which identifies a subdivision, a
multiple residential complex consisting of three (3) or more structures, a shopping center
consisting of three (3) or more separate business concerns, an industrial area, an office complex
consisting of three (3) or more structures or any combination of the above.
m. NON-CONFORMING SIGN: A sign which lawfully existed at the time of the passage of
this Ordinance or amendments thereto but which does not conform to the regulation of this
ordinance.
n. POLE SIGN: Any sign which is supported by structures or supports in or upon the ground
and independent of support from any building.
o. PORTABLE SIGN: Any sign not permanently attached to a building, structure, or the
ground, capable of being moved at periodic intervals.
City of Sioux Center, Iowa Zoning Ordinance
Prepared by: NW IA Planning & Development 130
p. PROJECTING SIGN: A sign, other than a wall sign, which projects perpendicular to the
wall surface of a building or structure, and is supported by a wall of the building or structure.
q. REAL ESTATE SIGN: A business sign placed upon a property advertising that particular
property for sale, for lease or for rent.
r. ROOF SIGN: A sign erected upon or above a roof or parapet of a building or structure.
s. SWINGING SIGN: A sign installed on an arm or spar that is not, in addition,
permanently fastened to an adjacent wall or upright pole.
t. TRAILER SIGN: Any sign mounted on a vehicle normally licensed by the State of Iowa
as a trailer and used for advertising or promotional purposes.
u. WALL SIGN: All flat signs of solid face construction placed against a building or other
structure and attached to the exterior front, rear or side wall of any building or other structure.
Such signs may extend no more than twelve (12) inches from the surface of the building or
structure to which they are attached. Wall signs are also known as "flush mounted signs".
21.2.7 SIGN AREA: That area within the marginal lines of the surface which bears the advertisement
or, in the case of messages, figures or symbols attached directly to the part of a building; that
area which is included in the smallest connecting geometric figures which can be made to
circumscribe the message, figure or symbol displayed thereon. Only changeable copy areas of
marquee or canopies shall be considered in determining the total sign area.
21.2.8 SIGN STRUCTURE: The supports, uprights, bracing and framework for a sign including the
sign area.
21.2.9 STREET LINE (or PROPERTY LINE): The place where the street right of way line begins
and the private property line ends.
21.2.10 STRUCTURAL TRIM: The molding, battens, cappings, nailing strips, latticing and
platforms that are attached to the sign structure.
21.2.11 TEMPORARY SIGN: Any sign which is erected or displayed for a specified period of time.
21.3 REQUIREMENTS
1) All Residential Districts (SR, R-1, R-2, R-3, & MH).
Signs pertaining to principal permitted uses are allowed in residential districts subject to the
following regulations.
a. Signs, for residential businesses and home occupations, shall be limited to no more than four
(4) square feet in area appurtenant to a permitted use of the property on which displayed.
b. Signs, for non-residential businesses located in residential areas, shall be limited to no more
than forty (40) square feet on one (1) free standing sign not to exceed a height of five (5) feet
from the ground to the top of the sign structure. One (1) additional wall mounted sign not to
exceed four (4) square feet is also permitted for non-residential businesses.
c. One (1) on-site sign pertaining only to the sale or lease of the land or building upon which
displayed shall be allowed.
City of Sioux Center, Iowa Zoning Ordinance
Prepared by: NW IA Planning & Development 131
d. Prohibited Signs:
1. Flashing type signs are prohibited.
e. Permitted Signs:
1. Address signs 5. Joint Identification signs
2. Real Estate signs 6. Wall signs
3. Government signs 7. Ground signs
4. Campaign signs 8. Awning signs
2) General Commercial Districts. Signs and billboards in conjunction with principal permitted
uses are allowed subject to the following regulations.
a. Signs shall be limited to those (i) identifying uses conducted within the building; or (ii)
necessary for directional purposes; or (iii) used to advertise the sale or lease of real property
on buildings on which displayed; or (iv) identifying the commercial enterprise by name or
symbol.
b. The total aggregate area of all signs shall not exceed 200 square feet.
c. For the purposes of this section, the sign area allowed by section b above shall:
i. For freestanding letters, be computed by taking the area enclosed within the smallest
rectangle needed to completely encompass each word or insignia of the sign.
ii. For signs other than freestanding letters, be computed by taking the total area of the
facing or the total area within the outer edge of any existing border of the sign.
d. All signs shall be fixed and shall not be audible. No illumination shall be intermittent,
flashing, or scintillating, nor shall any sign or illumination be revolving or animated. No
signs shall have moving parts including devices set in motion by movement of air.
e. Wall-mounted signs are permitted, but shall not project out from a wall or face of a building
more than twelve inches (12”) nor project above the roofline more than four (4) feet.
f. Service stations located in the General Commercial (C) District shall be limited to one
hundred fifty (250) square feet of sign area. Where a service station has frontage on more
than one street, both street frontages may be used to compute the allowable sign area. In no
case however, shall the total of all signs for any one service station exceed 150 sq. feet per
each street frontage.
g. Advertising signs and billboards shall be set back from the right-of-way line of any state,
federal, county, or local thoroughfare at least as far as the required front yard depth for a
principal building.
h. Only one permanent type sign intended to be read from off the premises will be allowed for each
principal use, except for corner lots or double frontage lots in which case one permanent sign
shall be permitted per each street frontage; (See Section 21.6.13)
i. Permitted signs:
1. Real Estate signs 5. Informational signs 9. Pole signs
2. Government signs 6. Directional signs 10. Temporary or Portable signs
3. Address signs 7. Joint Identification signs 11. Swinging signs
4. Campaign signs 8. Wall signs (located behind the R.O.W.)
12. Awning signs
City of Sioux Center, Iowa Zoning Ordinance
Prepared by: NW IA Planning & Development 132
3) Highway Commercial (HC), General Industrial (GI), Industrial Park (IP), Professional Office
(PO), Bioscience/Research (BR), and Agriculture (A) Districts. Signs and billboards in
conjunction with principal permitted uses are allowed subject to the following regulations.
a. Signs shall be limited to those identifying uses conducted on the property.
b. The total aggregate area of an independent structure sign shall not exceed 200 square feet.
All signs located within the Professional Office (PO) District shall not exceed a height of 5’
from the ground to top of sign structure. The sign area shall not exceed forty (40) square feet
on one (1) free standing sign. A wall mounted sign is also permitted within the PO District.
c. For the purposes of this section, the sign area allowed for the signs described above shall:
i. For freestanding letters be computed by taking the area enclosed within the smallest
rectangle needed to completely encompass each word or insignia of the sign.
ii. For signs other than freestanding letters, be computed by taking the total area of the
facing or the total area within the outer edge of any existent border of the sign.
d. All signs shall be fixed and shall not be audible. No illumination shall be intermittent,
flashing, or scintillating, nor shall any sign or illumination be revolving or animated. No sign
shall have moving parts including devices set in motion by movement of the atmosphere.
e. Wall-mounted sign are permitted, but shall not project out from a wall or face of a building or
structure more than twelve inches (12”) nor project more than four (4) feet above the roof of
a building or structure.
g. Billboard type signs will be limited to one hundred (100) square feet, and must not impair sight
distance or create a traffic hazard;
h. Only two permanent type signs will be permitted; one must be a wall sign, and one may be an
independent structure located not more than 150 feet from the principal building and having a
sign area of not more than 200 square feet;
i. Permitted signs:
1. Address signs 5. Directional signs 9. Pole signs
2. Real Estate signs 6. Informational signs 10. Roof signs
3. Government signs 7. Joint Identification signs 11. Free standing signs
4. Campaign signs 8. Wall signs 12. Awning signs
21.4 SPECIAL EXCEPTIONS
Any sign type may be granted special exception status after review by the Board of Adjustment and
subject to any conditions deemed by the board to be appropriate.
21.5 ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS
In all districts, signs and billboards shall adhere to pertinent state regulations and other local
ordinances.
City of Sioux Center, Iowa Zoning Ordinance
Prepared by: NW IA Planning & Development 133
21.6 GENERAL SIGN PROVISIONS
1) Safety
a. Obstructions to doors, windows or fire escapes. No sign shall be erected, located or
maintained so as to prevent free ingress to or egress from any door, window or fire escape.
No sign of any kind shall be attached to a standpipe or fire escape.
b. Face of sign shall be smooth. All signs or other advertising structures which are constructed
on street lines, or within five (5) feet thereof, shall have a smooth surface and no nails, tacks
or wires shall be permitted to protrude therefrom, except electrical reflectors and devices
which may extend over the top and in front of the advertising structures.
c. Signs not to constitute a traffic hazard. No sign or other advertising structure as permitted by
this ordinance shall, by reason of its location, lighting, size, color or intensity, create a hazard
to the safe, efficient movement of vehicular or pedestrian traffic. No signs shall be erected at
the intersection of any streets in such a manner as to obstruct free and clear vision. No private
sign shall contain words which might be construed as traffic controls, or be confused with
any authorized traffic sign, signal or device; or which makes use of the words “STOP”,
“LOOK”, “WARNING”, “CAUTION”, “DANGER”, or any other word, phrase, symbol or
character in such manner as to interfere with, mislead or confuse traffic. No sign or other
advertising structure as regulated by this ordinance shall have posts, guides or supports
located within any street or alley.
d. Goose neck reflectors. Goose neck reflectors and lights shall be permitted on ground signs,
roof signs and wall signs, provided, however, the reflectors shall be provided with proper
glass lenses concentrating the illumination upon the area of the sign as to prevent glare upon
the street and adjacent property.
2) Sign Maintenance: All signs and sign structures shall be properly maintained and kept in a safe,
orderly condition. In addition, all parts and supports shall be properly painted. Any sign or sign
structure which is rotted, unsafe, deteriorated, defaced, or otherwise altered, shall be repainted,
repaired, or replaced by the property owner or agent of the owner of the property upon which the
sign is located, within thirty (30) days after written notice by the City of Sioux Center.
3) Interference: No sign, nor any guys, stay or attachment thereto shall be erected, placed or
maintained by any person on rocks, fences, or trees; nor in such a manner as to interfere with the
effective use of fire fighting equipment or personnel, or any electric light, power, telephone, fiber
optic, or cable wires or supports thereof.
4) Signs in Right-of Way: No signs other than government signs shall be erected or temporarily
placed within any public rights-of-way except as may be specifically provided herein.
5) Temporary Signs: The temporary use of portable or moveable signs, search lights, banners,
pendants, and similar devices shall be allowed in excess of and in addition to the sign limitations of
this Article for continuous periods of ten (10) consecutive days. No business proprietor shall be
allowed more than three such periods in any calendar year.
6) Clearance: All signs located over public rights-of-way or any public or private access route
(sidewalk, mall, etc.) shall be located a minimum of fourteen (14) feet above grade.
7) Safe Ingress and Egress: No sign or part thereof shall be erected or maintained so as to prevent
City of Sioux Center, Iowa Zoning Ordinance
Prepared by: NW IA Planning & Development 134
or deter free ingress and egress from any door, window, or fire escape. No sign or sign structure
shall be attached to a standpipe or fire escape.
8) Signs Required by Law: All signs required by law shall be permitted in all districts.
9) Back to Back Signs: If a free-standing sign or sign structure is constructed so that the faces are
not back to back, the angle shall not exceed thirty (30) degrees. If the angle is greater than thirty
degrees, the total area of both sides added together shall be the calculated sign area. Back to back
signs (when less than thirty degrees) shall be considered as one sign when debited against the
total number of signs permitted on one zoning lot.
10) Roof Signs: Roof signs shall not be permitted except for a business sign that is attached to the
parapet wall and extending above the building height except where no alternative is available as
determined by the Board of Adjustment.
11) Illumination: All externally illuminated signs shall be constructed so as to direct the source of
light away from adjacent properties or public streets.
12) Animated Signs: Animated signs may be allowed as a special exception requiring a hearing
before the Board of Adjustment.
13) Double Frontage: Lots having frontage on two streets or on a street and an alley shall be
permitted to provide the maximum number and square footage of signs on each of the opposite
ends of said lot, provided however, that not more than the maximum number of square feet of
signs per frontage may be viewed simultaneously.
21.7 PERMITS REQUIRED
It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, alter, or relocate within the city any sign or other
advertising structure as defined in this ordinance, without first obtaining a sign permit and making
payment of the fee required by this section.
1) Application for Sign Permit. Application for sign permits shall be made available upon request
by the Zoning Administrator and contain or have attached thereto the following information:
• Name, address and telephone number of the applicant.
• Location of building, structure, or lot to which or upon which the sign or other advertising
structure is to be attached or erected.
• Position of the sign or other advertising structure in relation to nearby buildings or structures.
• One sketch of the plan, method of construction, and attachment to the building or ground.
• Name of person, firm, corporation or association erecting structure.
• Written consent of the owner of the building, structure or land on which the sign is placed.
• Such other information as the Zoning Administrator shall require showing full compliance
with this ordinance and all other ordinances of the city.
• Inscription of what the sign will say.
• For signs located along a state primary highway, a state sign permit will also need to be
included with the application.
2) Permit Issued. It shall be the duty of the Zoning Administrator, upon the filing of an application
for a sign permit to examine such plans and other data and the premises upon which it is
proposed to erect the sign or other advertising structure, and if it shall appear the proposed
structure is in compliance with all the requirements of this ordinance and all other ordinances of
City of Sioux Center, Iowa Zoning Ordinance
Prepared by: NW IA Planning & Development 135
city, the sign permit shall then be issued. If the work authorized under a sign permit has not been
completed within six (6) months after date of issuance, the permit shall become null and void.
3) Permit Fees. Every applicant, before being granted a sign permit, and to defray administrative
costs of processing requests for sign permits, shall pay to the City Clerk, a fee in the amount
established by the City Council.
4) Permit Revocation. Any permit holder who fails to comply with a valid order of the Zoning
Administrator within the allotted time period, or who fails to pay reasonable removal or repair
expenses shall have the permit as to such sign or signs revoked, and another permit for the
erection or maintenance of such sign or signs shall not be issued to said permit holder for a
period of one (1) year from the date of revocation.
21.8 ADDITIONAL SIGN REGULATIONS – PERMITTED SIGNS
The following signs are allowed with a permit and shall comply with all other applicable provisions
of this ordinance.
1) Ground Signs and/or Pole Signs.
a. Letters, etc. to be secured. All letters, figures, characters or representations in cut-out or
irregular form, maintained in conjunction with, attached to, or superimposed upon any sign shall
be safely and securely built or attached to the sign structure.
n. Premises to be kept free of weeds, etc. All ground signs and the premises surrounding the same
shall be maintained by the owner thereof in a clean, sanitary and inoffensive condition, and free
and clear of all obnoxious substances, rubbish and weeds.
2) Wall Signs: No wall sign shall cover wholly or partially any wall opening, nor project beyond
the ends of the wall to which it is attached.
3) Bulletin Boards and Announcement Signs: These shall be permitted on the premises of charitable,
religious and public institutions but may not exceed thirty-two square feet (32 sq. ft.) in size, and
must be a minimum of fifteen feet (15 ft.) from all right-of-way lines. The height of such signs
shall not exceed five feet (5 ft.).
4) Free Standing Signs: Free standing signs will be permitted if they do not block the view of
oncoming traffic, conform to the Iowa Department of Transportation regulations, and are not
located within any public right-of-way.
21.9 UNSAFE AND UNLAWFUL SIGNS
All signs and sign structures shall be properly maintained and kept in a safe, orderly condition. Signs
shall also maintain a neat and orderly appearance in which the sign is legible and can be easily read.
Additionally, all parts and supports shall be properly painted. Any sign or sign structure which is
rotted, unsafe, deteriorated, defaced, or otherwise altered, shall be repainted, repaired, or replaced by
the property owner or agent of the owner of the property upon which the sign is located, within thirty
(30) days after written notice by the City of Sioux Center. Such notice shall include a statement
explaining the alleged violations and deficiencies, an order to repair or remove said sign, and an
explanation of the consequences of failure to comply with said order. If the permit holder fails to
remove or alter said sign so as to comply with the order, said sign or other advertising structure may
City of Sioux Center, Iowa Zoning Ordinance
Prepared by: NW IA Planning & Development 136
be removed or altered to comply by the Zoning Administrator at the expense of the permit holder, or
owner of the property on which it is located. The permit holder may appeal the order of the Zoning
Administrator to the board of adjustment and, if such an appeal is on file, the compliance period shall
be extended until following the board of adjustment's decision on the matter. If, however, the Zoning
Administrator finds that any sign or other advertising structure poses a serious and immediate threat
to the health or safety of any person, he/she may order the removal of such sign summarily and
without notice to the permit holder.
21.10 EXEMPTIONS
The following signs are allowed without a permit but shall comply with all other applicable provisions
of this ordinance.
1) Real estate signs (on-site) Announcing the owner, manager, realtor or other person directly
involved in the sale or rental of the property on which the sign is located. At the date of closing,
signs shall be removed within twenty-four (24) hours. Signs shall not measure more than four (4)
square feet in the residential districts or twenty (20) square feet in the other districts. Residential
signs shall be a maximum height of 72 inches. Only one (1) real estate sign may be allowed per
zoning lot. All real estate signs placed in the front yard shall be placed no closer to the curb than 30
feet, or placed no more than 5 feet from the principle structure. An open house sign of the same size
will be allowed for a three (3) day period of time before the date of the open house.
2) Integral signs, Memorial signs or Professional name plates not exceeding two (2) square foot
in area, and attached to the building, including names on buildings, date of construction,
commemorative tablets and the like, which are a part of the building or structure.
3) Address Signs identifying street address only, whether in written or numerical form.
4) Construction Signs as a non-illuminated sign announcing the names of architects, engineers,
contractors, future use, and other individuals or firms involved with the construction, alteration, or
repair of such building (but not including any advertisement of any product). Such signs shall be
confined to the site of the construction, alteration or repair and shall be removed within one (1) year
of the date of issuance of the first building permit or when the particular project is completed,
whichever is later. One (1) sign, not to exceed 32 sq. ft. shall be permitted on the project site.
5) Traffic or municipal signs, legal notices, railroad crossing signs, danger signs, and other such
temporary, emergency or non-advertising signs may be approved by the Board of Adjustment.
6) Temporary signs are signs that are temporary in nature and allowed for a consecutive ten (10)
day period and no more than three (3) periods per calendar year. A temporary sign shall be self
supporting and shall not exceed two (2) square feet in all zoning districts, except for a portable
sign that is advertising a specific event will be allowed up to a maximum thirty-two (32) square
feet placed on owned property or with owner’s consent, to be removed within 24 hours following
the advertised event. No sign will be allowed to be placed in the road right-of-way. Only one (1)
sign will be allowed per platted lot. Any violations of this ordinance will result in immediate
removal of said sign.
7) Government signs of a public, non-commercial nature to include safety signs, danger signs,
trespassing signs, traffic signs, signs indicating scenic or historical points of interest, memorial
plaques and the like, when signs are erected by order of a public officer or employee in the
performance of official duty.
City of Sioux Center, Iowa Zoning Ordinance
Prepared by: NW IA Planning & Development 137
8) Directory signs which identifies the business, owners, manager, or resident occupant and sets forth
the occupation or other address information but contains no advertising. There may be one directory
sign per lot not to exceed two (2) square feet of area per business or resident occupant.
9) On-site Directional and Parking Signs intended to facilitate the movement of vehicles and
pedestrians upon which the sign is located. Signs shall not exceed six (6) square feet of area.
21.11 REMOVAL OF SIGNS
Any sign now or hereafter existing which no longer advertises a bona fide business conducted, or a
product sold, shall be taken down and removed by the owner, agent or person having the beneficial
use of the building or structure upon which such sign may be found within ninety (90) days from date
of notice provided by the city. The owner of the property on which the sign is located shall have
ninety (90) days from date of notice to remove any such sign. If after the expiration of the ninety (90)
day period, the sign has not been removed, the city may cause the sign to be removed and any
expenses may be charged back to the property owner.
City of Sioux Center, Iowa Zoning Ordinance
Prepared by: NW IA Planning & Development 138
ARTICLE XXII
District Buffers Required
Article 22: District Buffers Required
Section 22.1 Intent
Section 22.2 Conditions for Requiring a Buffer
Section 22.3 Permissive Buffers
Section 22.4 Burden of Provision of a Buffer
Section 22.5 Waiver of Buffer Requirement
22.1 INTENT
It is recognized that the transition from one district to another district of contrasting and conflicting
uses, is across a barrier and line in theory and not in existence. Therefore, it shall be the intent of this
article to require the actual provision of a physical barrier so as to reduce any possible harmful or
detrimental influence one district use may or may not have to abutting and conflicting district use.
22.2 CONDITIONS FOR REQUIRING A BUFFER
The following conditions shall require a buffer between abutting districts:
1) All industrial or bioscience districts that abut any residential district shall be buffered as required
in this Article.
2) Any lot located in a professional office, commercial or industrial district having both its front and
rear lines abutting a public thoroughfare (a double frontage lot) shall be buffered from the
thoroughfare abutting its rear line by one of the buffer methods set forth in this Article.
3) Any storage facility, storage yard, loading yard, or equipment storage/staging area in any
commercial, industrial or bioscience district which abuts a public thoroughfare shall be restricted
from public view by a buffer.
4) Any other uses or districts abutting residential properties determined to be more intensive in
nature or as recommended by the Board of Adjustment.
22.3 PERMISSIVE BUFFERS
Buffers required under the provisions of this article or elsewhere in this ordinance shall be
accomplished by any one or approved combination of the following methods:
1) A Man-made Buffer:
Such shall be not less than six (6) feet in height; constructed of a permanent low maintenance
material. The wall shall be designed for both structural adequacy and aesthetic quality. The use of
weather resistant wood, metal, concrete products, brick, tile, or other manufactured substitutes
shall be used as a primary material for aesthetic quality, as long as the buffer is solid and
opaquely screened.
2) A Natural Buffer:
a. Natural Buffer Park: Such park shall be not less than sixty (60) feet in width; designed and
landscaped with evergreen type trees, shrubs and plants so as to assure year around effective
screening.
City of Sioux Center, Iowa Zoning Ordinance
Prepared by: NW IA Planning & Development 139
b. Natural Buffer Screen: Such natural screen shall not be less than 6 feet in height and
comprised of natural plantings; and shall maintain a density of planting adequate to serve as a
solid and unpenetrable screen.
c. Natural Buffer Berm: Such natural berm or berm in combination with a natural plantings
shall not be less than 6 feet in height. If a berm is used in combination with natural plantings,
the earthen berm shall be at least 3 feet in height.
22.4 BURDEN OF PROVISION OF A BUFFER
The burden of' provision and selection of the buffer shall be as follows:
l) Where two different districts, requiring a buffer between them, are both in an existing improved
condition, the above requirement is not retroactive and should a buffer be desired, it shall be by
mutual agreement between property owners or as otherwise provided by law. However, in the
event of any or all of the improved property is abandoned, destroyed, demolished, etc., for the
purpose of renewal, redevelopment, etc., that portion of such property being renewed,
redeveloped, etc. shall be considered vacant land subject to the requirements herein.
2) Where one of two different districts requiring a buffer between them is partially developed, the
developer of the vacant land shall assume the burden.
3) Where both districts requiring a buffer between them are vacant or undeveloped, except for
agricultural use, the developer shall assume the burden as the land is improved or developed.
22.5 WAIVER OF BUFFER REQUIREMENT
Where the line between two districts requiring a buffer follows a railroad, stream, or other similar
natural or man-made barrier, the requirement for a buffer may be waived. Waiver of a buffer
requirement may be incorporated into and considered during the subdivision platting process.
City of Sioux Center, Iowa Zoning Ordinance
Prepared by: NW IA Planning & Development 140
ARTICLE XXIII
Open Space Requirements
Article 23: Open Space Requirements
Section 23.1 Intent
Section 23.2 Open Space Requirements
23.1 INTENT
It shall be recognized that the extensive use and excessive congestion of land induces the natural
elements to become hazardous to the general health and welfare of the community. Therefore, the
intent of this Article shall be to require adequate open space necessary to preserve the basic qualities
and beauty of nature.
23.2 OPEN SPACE REQUIREMENTS
1) All buildings and land uses in any of the residential districts shall comply with the following:
a. On each lot there shall be provided a pervious or natural greenspace equal to at least twentyfive
(25) percent of the total lot area; said space shall be unencumbered with any structure or
impervious off-street parking and shall be landscaped and well maintained with grass, trees,
or shrubbery.
b. Each principal structure of an apartment or office complex shall be separated from any other
principal structure in the complex by an open space of not less than twenty (20) feet in width.
c. Where doors and windows in the exterior walls of a living unit face a wall of another multistory
building in the same complex of multiple family residential uses, there shall be
provided a minimum open space of not less than thirty (30) feet. Said distance to be
measured on a line projected at right angles at the opening to the opposite wall.
2) All buildings and land uses in Highway Commercial or Professional Office districts shall comply
with the following:
a. Any permitted or special exception use allowed in any of the commercial or professional
office districts shall comply with Subsection 1 above.
3) All buildings and land use in any of the Industrial or Bioscience districts shall comply with the
following:
a. On each lot there shall be provided a natural open greenspace equal to at least ten (10)
percent of the total lot area; said space shall be unencumbered with any structure or
impervious off-street parking and shall be landscaped and well maintained with grass, trees,
and shrubbery.
b. Each principal structure of a commercial, industrial or other professional office complex shall
be separated from any other principal structure in the complex by a natural open greenspace
of not less than twenty (20) feet in width.
City of Sioux Center, Iowa Zoning Ordinance
Prepared by: NW IA Planning & Development 141
City of Sioux Center, Iowa Zoning Ordinance
Prepared by: NW IA Planning & Development 142
ARTICLE XXIV
Nonconformities
Article 24: Nonconformities
Section 24.1 Intent
Section 24.2 Nonconforming Uses of Land
Section 24.3. Nonconforming Lot of Record
Section 24.4. Nonconforming Structures
Section 24.5. Nonconforming Uses of Structures and Land
Section 24.6 Repairs and Maintenance
Section 24.7 Uses Under Exception Provisions Not Nonconforming Uses
Section 24.8 Change of Tenancy or Ownership
24.1 INTENT
It is the intent of this ordinance to permit legal nonconforming lots, structures, or uses to continue
until they are removed but not to encourage their survival.
It is recognized that there exists within the districts established by this ordinance and subsequent
amendments, lots, structures, and uses of land and structures which were lawful before this ordinance
was passed or amended which would be prohibited, regulated, or restricted under the terms of this
ordinance or future amendments.
Such uses are declared by this ordinance to be incompatible with permitted uses in the districts
involved. It is further the intent of this ordinance that nonconformities shall not be enlarged upon,
expanded or extended, nor be used as grounds for adding other structures or uses prohibited
elsewhere in the same district.
A nonconforming use of a structure, a nonconforming use of land, or a nonconforming use of a
structure and land in combination shall not be extended or enlarged after passage of this ordinance by
attachment on a building or premises of additional signs intended to be seen from off the premises, or
by addition of other uses of a nature which would not be permitted generally in the district involved.
To avoid undue hardship, nothing in this ordinance shall be deemed to require a change in the plans,
construction or designated use of any building on which actual construction was lawfully begun prior
to the effective date of adoption or amendment of this ordinance and upon which actual building
construction has been diligently carried on. Actual construction is hereby defined to include the
placing of construction materials in permanent position and fastened in a permanent manner; except
that where demolition or removal of existing building has been substantially begun preparatory to
rebuilding such demolition or removal shall be deemed to be actual construction, providing that work
shall be diligently carried on until completion of the building involved.
24.2 NONCONFORMING USES OF LAND
Where at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this ordinance, lawful use of land exists that
is made no longer permissible under the terms of this ordinance as enacted or amended such use may
be continued, so long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the following provisions:
1) No such nonconforming use shall be enlarged or increased, nor extended to occupy a greater area
of land than was occupied at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this ordinance.
City of Sioux Center, Iowa Zoning Ordinance
Prepared by: NW IA Planning & Development 143
2) No such nonconforming use shall be moved in whole or in part to any other portion of the lot or
parcel occupied by such use at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this ordinance.
3) If such nonconforming use of land ceases for any reason for a period of more than six (6) months,
any subsequent use of such land shall conform to the regulations specified by this ordinance for
the district in which such land is located.
24.3 NONCONFORMING LOT OF RECORD
In any district in which residential dwellings are permitted, notwithstanding limitations imposed by
other provisions of this ordinance, a dwelling and customary accessory buildings may be erected on
any single lot of record at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this ordinance. Such lot
must be in separate ownership. This provision shall apply even though such lot fails to meet the
requirements for area or width or both that are generally applicable in the district, provided that yard
dimensions and other requirements not involving area or width or both, of the lot shall conform to the
regulations for the district in which such lot is located.
24.4 NONCONFORMING STRUCTURES
Where a lawful structure exists at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this ordinance that
could not be built under the terms of this ordinance by reason of restrictions on area, lot coverage,
height, yards or other characteristics of the structure or its location on the lot, such structure may be
continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the following provisions:
1) No such structure may be enlarged or altered in a way which increases its nonconformity. Such
structure may be altered in a way which does not increase its nonconformity.
2) Should such structure be destroyed by any means to an extent of more than fifty (50) percent of
its replacement costs, exclusive of the foundation, it shall be reconstructed only in conformity
with the provisions of this ordinance.
3) Should such structure be moved for any reason for any distance whatever, it shall thereafter
conform to the regulations for the district in which it is located after it is moved.
4) Discontinuance. In the event that a non-conforming building or structure or premises is
discontinued for a period of six (6) months, the use of the same shall conform thereafter to the
uses permitted in the district in which it is located.
24.5 NONCONFORMING USES OF STRUCTURES AND LAND
Where a lawful use of a structure, or of a structure and land in combination exists at the effective
date of adoption or amendment of this ordinance that would not be permitted in the district under the
terms of this ordinance, the lawful use may be continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful,
subject to the following provisions:
1) No existing structure devoted to a use not permitted by this ordinance in the district in which it is
located shall be enlarged, extended, constructed, reconstructed, moved or structurally altered
except in changing the use of the structure to a use permitted in the district in which it is located.
2) Any nonconforming use may be extended throughout any parts of a building which was
manifestly arranged or designed for such use, and which existed at the time of adoption or
amendment of this ordinance, but no such use shall be extended to occupy any land outside such
City of Sioux Center, Iowa Zoning Ordinance
Prepared by: NW IA Planning & Development 144
building.
3) If no structural alterations are made, any nonconforming use of structure, or structure and land in
combination, may be changed to another nonconforming use of the same or a more restricted
classification provided that the Board of Adjustment by making findings in the specific case, shall
find that the proposed use is equally appropriate or more appropriate to the district than the existing
nonconforming use. In permitting such change, the Board of Adjustment may require conditions and
safeguards in accord with the purpose and intent of this ordinance. Where such nonconforming use
of a structure, land, or structure and land in combination is hereafter changed to a more conforming
use, it shall not thereafter be changed to a less conforming use.
4) Any structure, or structure and land in combination, in or on which a nonconforming use is
superseded by a permitted use, shall thereafter conform to the regulations for the district in which
such structure is located, and the nonconforming use may not thereafter be resumed.
5) When a nonconforming use of a structure, or structures and land in combination, is discontinued
or ceases to exist for a period of more than six (6) months, the structure, or structure and land in
combination, shall not thereafter be used except in conformance with the regulations of the
district in which it is located.
6) Where nonconforming use status applies to a structure and land in combination, removal or
destruction of the structure shall eliminate the nonconforming status of the land.
24.6 REPAIRS AND MAINTENANCE
On any building devoted in whole or in part to any nonconforming use, work may be done in any
period of twelve (12) consecutive months on ordinary repairs, or on repairs or replacement of nonbearing
walls, fixtures, wiring, or plumbing of the building to an extent not exceeding fifty (50)
percent of the assessed value of the building, provided that the cubic content of the building as it
existed at the time of passage or amendment of this ordinance shall not be increased.
Nothing in this ordinance shall be deemed to prevent the strengthening or restoring to a safe
condition of any building or part thereof declared to be unsafe by an official charged with protecting
the public safety upon orders of such official.
24.7 USES UNDER EXCEPTION PROVISIONS NOT NONCONFORMING USES
Any use for which a special exception is permitted as provided in this ordinance shall not be deemed
a nonconforming use, but shall without further action, be deemed a conforming use in such district.
Any expansion shall be with approval of the Board of Adjustment.
24.8 CHANGE OF TENANCY OR OWNERSHIP
There may be a change of tenancy, ownership, or management of any existing nonconforming uses
of land, of structures, or of structures and land in combination.
City of Sioux Center, Iowa Zoning Ordinance
Prepared by: NW IA Planning & Development 145
City of Sioux Center, Iowa Zoning Ordinance
Prepared by: NW IA Planning & Development 146
ARTICLE XXV
Special Exceptions
Article 25: Special Exceptions
Section 25.1 Requirements
Section 25.2 Jurisdiction
Section 25.3. Application for a Special Exception Permit
Section 25.4. Procedures
Section 25.5. Standards
Section 25.6 Revocation
Section 25.7. Supplemental Standards
25.1 REQUIREMENTS
Special exception uses may be permitted, enlarged, or altered upon application for a special
exception use permit in accordance with the rules and procedures of the Board of Adjustment. The
board will grant or deny a special exception use permit in accordance with the standards set forth
herein and with the intent and purpose of this ordinance. In granting a special exception use permit,
the Board of Adjustment will authorize the special exception use and may prescribe and impose
conditions, safeguards, or a specified time limit for performance of the special exception use.
25.2 JURISDICTION
The Zoning Administrator shall be responsible for administration of the special exception procedure
and the Board of Adjustment shall be responsible for the review, evaluation, and action on all
applications for a special exception use permit.
25.3 APPLICATION FOR SPECIAL EXCEPTION PERMIT
A request for a special exception use permit for a special exception use or modification of a special
exception use may be initiated by a property owner or his or her authorized agent by filing an
application with the zoning administrator upon forms prescribed for the purpose. The application
shall be accompanied by a site plan and other such data showing dimensions, arrangements,
descriptive data, and other materials constituting a record essential to an understanding of the
proposed use and proposed modification in relation to the standards set forth herein. A fee as
determined by resolution of the city council shall also accompany the application.
Application and Fee: Application for a special exception use permit shall be filed with the zoning
administrator. The Board of Adjustment shall provide a copy of the application for special exception
for review and comment of the Planning and Zoning Commission within five (5) days after receipt of
the application. The application shall include the following:
a. Name and address of the owner and applicant.
b. Address and legal description of the property.
c. If the applicant is not the legal owner of the property, a statement that the applicant is the
authorized agent of the owner of the property.
d. A statement describing the nature and operating characteristics of the proposed use, including
any data pertinent to the findings required for approval of the application.
e. Site plans as prepared in accordance with Article XIX
City of Sioux Center, Iowa Zoning Ordinance
Prepared by: NW IA Planning & Development 147
25.4 PROCEDURES
The Board of Adjustment shall not grant a special exception unless and until the following
procedures have been fulfilled:
1) The Board of Adjustment shall provide a copy of the application for special exception for review
and comment to the Planning and Zoning Commission.
2) The Planning and Zoning Commission shall provide the Board of Adjustment with their
recommendations within fifteen (15) days after receipt of the application.
3) After receipt of the Planning and Zoning Commission's recommendations, the Board of
Adjustment shall schedule a public hearing in relation to the special exception request. Notice
shall be given of the public hearing as required by state statute by publication in a newspaper of
general circulation in the city. Notice shall be given to a complete list of persons provided by the
applicant who are all of the owners of property within one hundred (100) feet of the property in
question.
4) The Board of Adjustment shall determine that it is empowered under this ordinance to grant the
special exception as described in the application, and that the granting of the special exception
will not adversely affect the public interest pursuant to testimony presented at the public hearing
and the review by the Planning and Zoning Commission.
5) In granting any special exception, the Board of Adjustment may prescribe appropriate conditions
and safeguards in conformity with this ordinance. Violation of such conditions and safeguards,
when made a part of the terms under which the special exception is granted, shall be deemed a
violation of this ordinance and punishable under Article XXVII “Violation and Penalty”, of this
ordinance.
7) The concurring vote of three members of the Board of Adjustment grants a special exception use
permit. No order of the Board of Adjustment granting a special exception use permit shall be
valid for a period longer than six (6) months from the date of such order, unless the Board of
Adjustment specifically grants a longer period of time or a building permit is obtained within the
six (6) month period and construction is commenced.
25.5 STANDARDS
The Board of Adjustment shall grant no special exception permit unless such board shall find:
1) That the establishment, maintenance, or operation of the special exception use will not be
detrimental to or endanger the public health, safety, morals, comfort, or general welfare of the
community.
2) That the special exception use will not be injurious to the use and enjoyment of other property in
the immediate vicinity for the purpose already permitted, nor substantially diminish and impair
property values within the neighborhood.
3) That in the case of existing relocated single family dwellings, that the proposed use aesthetically
blend in with the neighboring existing permitted uses and special attention be given to the
architectural style, size and quality of construction of the proposed use.
4) That the establishment of the special exception use will not impede the normal and orderly
development in improvement of the surrounding property for uses permitted in the district.
5) That adequate utilities, access roads, drainage, parking, and/or necessary facilities have been or
will be provided.
City of Sioux Center, Iowa Zoning Ordinance
Prepared by: NW IA Planning & Development 148
6) That adequate measures have been or will be taken to provide ingress and egress so designed as
to minimize traffic congestion in the public streets.
7) The use shall not include any activity involving the use or storage of flammable, or explosive
material unless protected by adequate firefighting and fire suppression equipment and by such
safety devices as are normally used in the handling of any such material.
8) The use shall not include noise that is objectionable due to volume, frequency, or beat unless
muffled or otherwise controlled.
9) The use shall not include vibration which is discernable without instruments on any adjoining lot
or property.
10) The use shall not involve any malodorous gas or matter which is discernable on any adjoining
property.
11) The use shall not involve any pollution of the air by fly-ash, dust vapors, or other substance
which is harmful to health, animals, vegetation or other property or which causes soiling,
discomfort or irritation.
12) The use shall not involve any direct or reflected glare which is visible from any adjoining
property or from any public street, road, or highway.
13) The use shall not involve any activity substantially increasing the movement of traffic on public
streets unless procedures are instituted to limit traffic hazards and congestion.
14) The use shall not involve any activity substantially increasing the burden on any public utilities or
facilities unless provisions are made for any necessary adjustments.
15) That the use will not be in conflict with the city’s comprehensive plan.
16) The use shall not interfere with the use or enjoyment of neighboring permitted uses. If such
interference is found, provisions must be made for increased setbacks (up to 500 feet) from
property lines or screening of incompatible use by the use of fences or hedges.
17) The ground coverage shall be such that no additional dust or storm run-off is generated by the
special exception use.
18) The use shall not create a hazard to vehicular traffic. If any such hazard is determined, provisions
must be made to increase the required setback in regard to open-air storage.
19) The use shall not cause any permanent, irreparable environmental damage to the parcel or
neighboring lands.
20) The special exception use permit may be reviewed after a specified period of time for compliance
and for possible additional conditions.
In addition to the general standards outlined above, specified uses shall adhere to these standards and
operate only after the issuance of a special exception use permit.
25.6 REVOCATION
The issuance of a special exception use permit by the Board of Adjustment shall entitle the owner to
continue to operate the use so long as he remains in compliance with the terms and conditions of this
ordinance and the terms, conditions, limitations, requirements and safeguards set forth in the special
exception use permit. If such permit is granted, does expressly grant to the city, for the enforcement
City of Sioux Center, Iowa Zoning Ordinance
Prepared by: NW IA Planning & Development 149
of this ordinance, the power and authority to enter upon the premises at any reasonable time for the
purpose of inspection and enforcement of the terms of the special exception use permit. In the event
the owner or occupant of the property for which a special exception use permit has been issued, shall
violate any term, condition, limitation, regulation or safeguards contained in the special exception
permit, the permit shall become null and void and the owner or occupant shall be deemed to be in
violation of this ordinance and the city may proceed to enforce the provisions of this ordinance and
the terms, conditions, limitations, and safeguards of the special exception permit. In addition to all
other remedies provided herein, in the event that such special exception shall become null and void,
any bonds, if any, given by the owner under the provisions of this ordinance shall be forfeited.
25.7 SUPPLEMENTAL STANDARDS
In addition to the general standards outlined in Section 25.5 above, specified uses shall adhere to
standards as follows:
Salvage Yards: All salvage yards, including any area where waste, junk, discarded or wrecked and
salvaged materials are bought, sold, stored, exchanged, baled or packed, disassembled or handled,
including dismantling or "wrecking" of automobiles or machinery or other vehicles, shall be located
in the General Industrial (GI) district under special exception use permit. The application for a
special use permit shall be accompanied with a proposed intent or covenant to meet the minimum
requirements described herein:
1. The yards shall be at least three hundred (300) feet distant in all directions from any residential
building;
2. Outdoor yards shall be screened by a solid wall or uniformly painted solid fence not less than
eight (8) feet in height, or in lieu thereof, a landscape buffer strip fifty (50) feet wide with
coniferous trees or large shrubs to provide a solid landscape screen at least ten (10) feet high;
3. Off-street parking or service areas may be located outside of the screened-in area.
25.8 SUPPLEMENTAL STANDARDS-WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS
FACILITIES
In addition to the general standards outlined in Section 25.5 above, wireless telecommunications
facilities shall adhere to standards as follows:
1. Purpose and Legislative Intent.
The Telecommunications Act of 1996 affirmed the City of Sioux Center, Iowa’s authority concerning the
placement, construction and modification of Wireless Telecommunications Facilities. The City of Sioux
Center, Iowa finds that Wireless Telecommunications Facilities may pose concerns to the health, safety,
public welfare, character and environment of the City and its citizens. The City also recognizes that
facilitating the development of wireless service technology can be an economic development asset to the
City and of significant benefit to the City and its residents. In order to insure that the placement,
construction or modification of Wireless Telecommunications Facilities is consistent with the City’s land
use policies, the City is adopting a single, comprehensive, Wireless Telecommunications Facilities
application and permit process. The intent of this Ordinance is to minimize impact of Wireless
Telecommunications Facilities, establish a fair and efficient process for review and approval of
applications, assure an integrated, comprehensive review of environmental impacts of such facilities, and
protect the health, safety and welfare of the City of Sioux Center, Iowa..
2. Definitions
For purposes of this Ordinance, and where not inconsistent with the context of a particular
section, the defined terms, phrases, words, abbreviations, and their derivations shall have the
City of Sioux Center, Iowa Zoning Ordinance
Prepared by: NW IA Planning & Development 150
meaning given in this section. When not inconsistent with the context, words in the present tense
include the future tense, words used in the plural number include words in the singular number
and words in the singular number include the plural number. The word “shall” is always
mandatory, and not merely directory.
A) “Accessory Facility or Structure” means an accessory facility or structure serving or being used
in conjunction with Wireless Telecommunications Facilities, and located on the same property or
lot as the Wireless Telecommunications Facilities, including but not limited to, utility or
transmission equipment storage sheds or cabinets.
B) “Applicant” means any wireless service provider submitting an Application for a Special Use
Permit for Wireless Telecommunications Facilities.
C) “Application” means all necessary and appropriate documentation that an Applicant submits in
order to receive a Special Use Permit for Wireless Telecommunications Facilities.
D) “Antenna” means a system of electrical conductors that transmit or receive electromagnetic
waves or radio frequency or other wireless signals.
E) “Board of Adjustment” means the Board of Adjustment of the City of Sioux Center, Iowa.
F) “City” means the City of Sioux Center, Iowa.
G) “Co-location” means the use of an existing Tower or structure to support Antennae for the
provision of wireless services. A replacement tower that is constructed on the same site as an
existing tower will be considered a co-location as long as the new tower is no more than twenty
feet taller than the old tower and that the old tower is removed in a reasonably short time frame
after the new tower is constructed.
H) “Commercial Impracticability” or “Commercially Impracticable” means the inability to
perform an act on terms that are reasonable in commerce; the cause or occurrence of which could
not have been reasonably anticipated or foreseen and that jeopardizes the financial efficacy of the
project. The inability to achieve a satisfactory financial return on investment or profit, standing
alone, shall not deem a situation to be “commercially impracticable” and shall not render an act
or the terms of an agreement “commercially impracticable”.
I) “Completed Application” means an Application that contains all information necessary as per
Section 8 of this Ordinance to enable an informed decision to be made with respect to an
Application.
J) “Council” means the City Council of the City of Sioux Center, Iowa.
K) “FAA” means the Federal Aviation Administration, or its duly designated and authorized
successor agency.
L) “FCC” means the Federal Communications Commission, or its duly designated and authorized
successor agency.
M) “Height” means, when referring to a Tower or structure, the distance measured from the preexisting
grade level to the highest point on the Tower or structure, even if said highest point is an
Antenna or lightening protection device.
City of Sioux Center, Iowa Zoning Ordinance
Prepared by: NW IA Planning & Development 151
N) “Modification” or “Modify” means, the addition, removal or change of any of the physical and
visually discernable components or aspects of a wireless facility, such as antennas, cabling,
equipment shelters, landscaping, fencing, utility feeds, changing the color or materials of any
visually discernable components, vehicular access, parking and/or an upgrade or change out of
equipment for better or more modern equipment. Adding a new wireless carrier or service
provider to a Telecommunications Tower or Telecommunications Site as a co-location is a
modification. A Modification shall not include the replacement of any components of a wireless
facility where the replacement does not materially increase the structural loading on the
Telecommunication Structure and/or is identical to the component being replaced or for any
matters that involve the normal repair and maintenance of a wireless facility without adding,
removing or changing anything.
O) “NIER” means Non-Ionizing Electromagnetic Radiation
P) “Person” means any individual, corporation, estate, trust, partnership, joint stock company,
association of two (2) or more persons having a joint common interest, or any other entity.
Q) “Personal Wireless Facility” See definition for ‘Wireless Telecommunications Facilities’
R) “Personal Wireless Services” or “PWS” or “Personal Telecommunications Service” or
“PCS” shall have the same meaning as defined and used in the 1996 Telecommunications Act.
S) "Repairs and Maintenance" means the replacement of any components of a wireless facility
where the replacement is identical in all material respectsto the component being replaced or for
any matters that involve the normal repair and maintenance of a wireless facility without the
addition, removal or change of any of the physical or visually discernable components or aspects
of a wireless facility that will materially add to the visible appearance of the facility as originally
permitted.
T) “Special Use Permit” means the official document or permit by which an Applicant is allowed to
file for a building permit to construct and use Wireless Telecommunications Facilities as granted
or issued by the City.
U) “Stealth” or “Stealth Technology” means to minimize adverse aesthetic and visual impacts on
the land, property, buildings, and other facilities adjacent to, surrounding, and in generally the
same area as the requested location of such Wireless Telecommunications Facilities, which shall
mean using the least visually and physically intrusive facility that is not technologically or
commercially impracticable under the facts and circumstances,
V) “State” means the State of Iowa.
W) “Telecommunications” means the transmission and/or reception of audio, video, data, and other
information by wire, radio frequency, light, and other electronic or electromagnetic systems
X) “Telecommunication Site” See definition for Wireless Telecommunications Facilities
Y) “Telecommunications Structure” means a structure used in the provision of services described
in the definition of ‘Wireless Telecommunications Facilities’
Z) “Temporary” means, temporary in relation to all aspects and components of this Ordinance,
something intended to, or that does not exist for more than ninety (90) days.
City of Sioux Center, Iowa Zoning Ordinance
Prepared by: NW IA Planning & Development 152
AA) “Tower” means any structure designed primarily to support an antenna for receiving and/or
transmitting a wireless signal.
BB) “Wireless Telecommunications Facilities” means and includes a “Telecommunications Site”
and “Personal Wireless Facility”. It means a structure, facility or location designed, or
intended to be used as, or used to support Antennas or other transmitting or receiving devices.
This includes without limit, Towers of all types and kinds and structures, including, but not
limited to buildings, church steeples, silos, water towers, signs or other structures that can be
used as a support structure for Antennas or the functional equivalent of such. It further includes
all related facilities and equipment such as cabling, equipment shelters and other structures
associated with the site. It is a structure and facility intended for transmitting and/or receiving
radio, television, cellular, SMR, paging, 911, Personal Communications Services (PCS),
commercial satellite services, microwave services and any commercial wireless
telecommunication service not licensed by the FCC.
3. Overall Policy and Desired Goals for Special Exception Permits for Wireless
Telecommunications Facilities.
In order to ensure that the placement, construction, and modification of Wireless
Telecommunications Facilities protects the City’s health, safety, public welfare, environmental
features, the nature and character of the community and neighborhood and other aspects of the
quality of life specifically listed elsewhere in this Ordinance, the City hereby adopts an overall
policy with respect to a Special Exception Permit for Wireless Telecommunications Facilities for
the express purpose of achieving the following goals:
A) Requiring a Special Exception Permit for any new, co-location or modification of a Wireless
Telecommunications Facility.
B) Implementing an Application process for person(s) seeking a Special Exception Permit for
Wireless Telecommunications Facilities;
C) Establishing a policy for examining an application for and issuing a Special Exception
Permit for Wireless Telecommunications Facilities that is both fair and consistent.
D) Promoting and encouraging, wherever possible, the sharing and/or co-location of Wireless
Telecommunications Facilities among service providers
E) Promoting and encouraging, wherever possible, the placement, height and quantity of
Wireless Telecommunications Facilities in such a manner, including but not limited to the
use of stealth technology, to minimize adverse aesthetic and visual impacts on the land,
property, buildings, and other facilities adjacent to, surrounding, and in generally the same
area as the requested location of such Wireless Telecommunications Facilities, which shall
mean using the least visually and physically intrusive facility that is not technologically or
commercially impracticable under the facts and circumstances.
F) That in granting a Special Exception Permit, the City has found that the facility shall be the
most appropriate site as regards being the least visually intrusive among those available in
the City.
City of Sioux Center, Iowa Zoning Ordinance
Prepared by: NW IA Planning & Development 153
4. Exceptions from a Special Exception Permit for Wireless Telecommunications Facilities
A) Except as otherwise provided by this Ordinance no Person shall be permitted to site, place,
build, construct, modify or prepare any site for the placement or use of, Wireless
Telecommunications Facilities as of the effective date of this Ordinance without having first
obtained a Special Exception Permit for Wireless Telecommunications Facilities.
Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this section, no Special Exception Permit shall
be required for those non-commercial exceptions noted in Section 7.
B) All legally permitted Wireless Telecommunications Facilities, constructed as permitted, existing on
or before the effective date of this Ordinance shall be allowed to continue as they presently exist.
C) Any Repair and Maintenance of a Wireless Facility does not require an Application for a
Special Exception Permit.
5. Exclusions
The following shall be exempt from this Ordinance:
A) The City’s fire, police, department of transportation or other public service facilities owned
and operated by the local government.
B) Any facilities expressly exempt from the City’s siting, building and permitting authority.
C) Over-the-Air reception Devices including the reception antennas for direct broadcast
satellites (DBS), multichannel multipoint distribution (wireless cable) providers (MMDS),
television broadcast stations (TVBS) and other customer-end antennas that receive and
transmit fixed wireless signals that are primarily used for reception.
D) Facilities exclusively for private, non-commercial radio and television reception and private
citizen’s bands, licensed amateur radio and other similar non-commercial
Telecommunications.
E) Facilities exclusively for providing unlicensed spread spectrum technologies (such as IEEE
802.11a, b, g (Wi-Fi) and Bluetooth) where the facility does not require a new tower.
6. Special Exception Permit Application and Other Requirements
A) All Applicants for a Special Use Permit for Wireless Telecommunications Facilities or any
modification of such facility shall comply with the requirements set forth in this Ordinance. The
Board of Adjustment is the officially designated agency or body of the City to whom applications for
a Special Use Permit for Wireless Telecommunications Facilities must be made, and that is
authorized to review, analyze, evaluate and make decisions with respect to granting or not granting
or revoking Special Use Permits for Wireless Telecommunications Facilities. The City has delegated
the Board of Adjustment to accept, review, analyze, evaluate and make decisions with respect to the
granting or not granting or revoking Special Use Permits for Wireless Telecommunications
Facilities.
B) The City may reject applications not meeting the requirements stated herein or which are otherwise
incomplete
C) No Wireless Telecommunications Facilities shall be installed, constructed or modified until the
Application is reviewed and approved by the City, and the Special Use Permit has been issued.
City of Sioux Center, Iowa Zoning Ordinance
Prepared by: NW IA Planning & Development 154
D) Any and all representations made by the Applicant to the City on the record during the Application
process, whether written or verbal, shall be deemed a part of the Application and may be relied upon
in good faith by the City
E) An Application for a Special Use Permit for Wireless Telecommunications Facilities shall be signed
on behalf of the Applicant by the person preparing the same and with knowledge of the contents and
representations made therein and attesting to the truth and completeness of the information.
.
F) The Applicant must provide documentation to verify it has the right to proceed as proposed on the
Site. This would require an executed copy of the lease with the landowner or landlord or a signed
letter acknowledging authorization. If the applicant owns the site, a copy of the ownership record is
required.
G) The Applicant shall include a statement in writing:
1) That the applicant’s proposed Wireless Telecommunications Facilities shall be maintained in a
safe manner, and in compliance with all conditions of the Special Use Permit, without exception,
unless specifically granted relief by the City in writing, as well as all applicable and permissible
local codes, ordinances, and regulations, including any and all applicable City, State and Federal
Laws, rules, and regulations;
2) That the construction of the Wireless Telecommunications Facilities is legally permissible,
including, but not limited to the fact that the Applicant is authorized to do business in the State.
H) Where a certification is called for in this Ordinance, such certification shall bear the signature and
seal of a Registered Professional licensed in the State
I) In addition to all other required information as stated in this ordinance, all applications for the
construction or installation of new Wireless Telecommunications Facilities or modification of an
existing facility shall contain the information hereinafter set forth.
1) A descriptive statement of the objective(s) for the new facility or modification including and
expanding on a need such as coverage and/or capacity requirements;
2) Documentation that demonstrates and proves the need for the Wireless Telecommunications
Facility to provide service primarily and essentially within the City. Such documentation shall
include propagation studies of the proposed site and all adjoining planned, proposed, in-service
or existing sites that demonstrate a significant gap in coverage and/or if a capacity need,
including an analysis of current and projected usage;
3) The name, address and phone number of the person preparing the report;
4) The name, address, and phone number of the property owner and Applicant, and to include the
legal name of the Applicant. If the site is a tower and the owner is different that the applicant,
provide name and address of the tower owner;
5) The postal address and tax map parcel number of the property;
6) The Zoning District or designation in which the property is situated;
7) Size of the property stated both in square feet and lot line dimensions, and a survey showing the
location of all lot lines;
8) The location of nearest residential structure;
9) The location, size and height of all existing and proposed structures on the property which is the
subject of the Application;
10) The type, locations and dimensions of all proposed and existing landscaping, and fencing;
City of Sioux Center, Iowa Zoning Ordinance
Prepared by: NW IA Planning & Development 155
11) The azimuth, size and center-line height location of all proposed and existing antennae on the
supporting structure;
12) The number, type and model of the Antenna(s) proposed with a copy of the specification sheet;
13) The make, model, type and manufacturer of the Tower and design plan stating the Tower’s
capacity to accommodate multiple users
14) A site plan describing the proposed Tower and Antenna(s) and all related fixtures, structures,
appurtenances and apparatus, including height above pre-existing grade, materials, color and
lighting;
15) The frequency, modulation and class of service of radio or other transmitting equipment;
16) The actual intended transmission power stated as the maximum effective radiated power (ERP)
in watts;
17) Signed documentation such as the “Checklist to Determine Whether a Facility is Categorically
Excluded” to verify that the Wireless Telecommunication Facility with the proposed installation
will be in full compliance with the current FCC RF Emissions guidelines (NIER). If not
categorically excluded, a complete RF Emissions study is required to provide verification;
18) A signed statement that the proposed installation will not cause physical or RF interference with
other telecommunications devices;
19) A copy of the FCC license applicable for the intended use of the Wireless Telecommunications
Facilities;
20) A copy of the geotechnical sub-surface soils investigation, evaluation report and foundation
recommendation for a proposed or existing Tower site and if existing Tower or water tank site, a
copy of the installed foundation design.
J) The applicant will provide a written copy of the determination as to whether the proposed new
Tower or existing structure intended to support wireless facilities is in compliance with Federal
Aviation Administration Regulation Part 77 and if it requires lighting. This requirement shall also be
for any existing structure or building where the application increases the height of the structure or
building. If this analysis determines, that an FAA determination is required, then all filings with the
FAA, all responses from the FAA and any related correspondence shall be provided with the
application.
K) Application for New Tower
1) In the case of a new Tower, the Applicant shall be required to submit a written report
demonstrating its meaningful efforts to secure shared use of existing Tower(s) or the use of
alternative buildings or other structures within the City. Copies of written requests and responses
for shared use shall be provided to the City in the Application, along with any letters of rejection
stating the reason for rejection.
2) The Tower shall be structurally designed to accommodate at least three (3) additional Antenna
Arrays equal to those of the Applicant, and located as close to the Applicant’s Antenna as
possible without causing interference. This requirement may be waived, provided that the
Applicant, in writing, demonstrates that the provisions of future shared usage of the Tower is not
technologically feasible, is Commercially Impracticable or creates an unnecessary and
unreasonable burden, based upon:
a) The foreseeable number of FCC licenses available for the area;
b) The kind of Wireless Telecommunications Facilities site and structure proposed;
c) The number of existing and potential licenses without Wireless Telecommunications
Facilities spaces/sites;
d) Available space on existing and approved Towers.
City of Sioux Center, Iowa Zoning Ordinance
Prepared by: NW IA Planning & Development 156
3) The owner of a proposed new Tower, and his/her successors in interest, shall negotiate in good
faith for the shared use of the proposed Tower by other Wireless service providers in the future,
and shall:
a) Respond within 60 days to a request for information from a potential shared-use Applicant;
b) Negotiate in good faith concerning future requests for shared use of the new Tower by
other Telecommunications providers;
c) Allow shared use of the new Tower if another Telecommunications provider agrees in
writing to pay reasonable charges and adhere to business, legal, engineering,and other
terms as set by the owner. The charges may include, but are not limited to, a pro rata share
of the cost of site selection, planning, project administration, land costs, site design,
construction and maintenance financing, return on equity, less depreciation, and all of the
costs of adapting the Tower or equipment to accommodate a shared user without causing
electromagnetic interference.
d) Failure to abide by the conditions outlined above may be grounds for revocation of the
Special Use Permit.
L) The Applicant shall provide certification with documentation (structural analysis) including
calculations that the Telecommunication Facility Tower and foundation and attachments, rooftop
support structure, water tank structure, and any other supporting structure as proposed to be utilized
are designed and will be constructed to meet all local, City, State and Federal structural requirements
for loads, including wind and ice loads.
M) If proposal is for a co-location or modification on an existing Tower, the applicant is to provide
signed documentation of the Tower condition such as an ANSI report as per Annex E, Tower
Maintenance and Inspection Procedures, ANSI/TIA/EIA-222F or most recent version. The
inspection report must be performed every three (3) years for a guyed tower and five (5) years for
monopoles and self-supporting towers.
N) All Applications for a proposed Wireless Telecommunications Facilities shall contain a
demonstration that the Facility will be sited so as to minimize visual intrusion as much as possible,
and balance the potential benefits of the facility with the potential adverse visual effect considering
the factors delineated in Section 5,and will thereby have the least adverse visual effect on the
environment and its character and on the residences in the area of the Wireless Telecommunications
Facility.
O) For a new Tower, a new Antenna attachment to an existing structure, or modification adding to the
visual impact, the Applicant shall furnish a Visual Impact Assessment, which shall include:
1) Pictorial representations of “before and after” (photo simulations) views from key viewpoints
both inside and outside of the City as may be appropriate, including but not limited to State
highways and other major roads; State and local parks; other public lands; historic districts;
preserves and historic sites normally open to the public; and from any other location where the
site is visible to a large number of visitors, travelers or residents. Guidance will be provided,
concerning the appropriate key sites at the pre-application meeting. Provide a map showing the
locations of where the pictures were taken and distance from the proposed structure.
2) A written description of the visual impact of the proposed facility including; and as applicable
the Tower base, guy wires, fencing and accessory buildings from abutting and adjacent
properties and streets as relates to the need or appropriateness of screening.
City of Sioux Center, Iowa Zoning Ordinance
Prepared by: NW IA Planning & Development 157
P) The Applicant shall demonstrate and provide in writing and/or by drawing how it shall effectively
screen from view the base and all related equipment and structures of the proposed Wireless
Telecommunications Facility
Q) The Wireless Telecommunications Facility and any and all accessory or associated facilities shall
maximize the use of building materials, colors and textures designed to blend with the structure to
which it may be affixed and/or to harmonize with the natural surroundings. This shall include the
utilization of stealth or concealment technology as may be required by the City.
R) All utilities at a Wireless Telecommunications Facilities site shall be installed underground
whenever possible and in compliance with all Laws, Ordinances, rules and regulations of the City,
including specifically, but not limited to, the National Electrical Safety Code and the National
Electrical Code where appropriate
S) At a Telecommunications Site, an access road, turn-around space and parking shall be provided to
assure adequate emergency and service access. Maximum use of existing roads, whether public or
private, shall be made to the extent practicable. Road construction shall at all times minimize ground
disturbance and the cutting of vegetation. Road grades shall closely follow natural contours to assure
minimal visual disturbance and reduce soil erosion.
T) All Wireless Telecommunications Facilities shall be constructed, operated, maintained, repaired,
provided for removal of, modified or restored in strict compliance with all current applicable
technical, safety and safety-related codes adopted by the City, State, or United States, including but
not limited to the most recent editions of the ANSI Code, National Electrical Safety Code and the
National Electrical Code, as well as accepted and responsible workmanlike industry practices and
recommended practices of the National Association of Tower Erectors. The codes referred to are
codes that include, but are not limited to, construction, building, electrical, fire, safety, health, and
land use codes. In the event of a conflict between or among any of the preceding the more stringent
shall apply.
U) A holder of a Special Use Permit granted under this Ordinance shall obtain, at its own expense, all
permits and licenses required by applicable Law, rule, regulation or code, and must maintain the
same, in full force and effect, for as long as required by the City or other governmental entity or
agency having jurisdiction over the applicant.
V) There shall be a pre-application meeting. The purpose of the pre-application meeting will be to
address issues that will help to expedite the review and permitting process. A pre-application
meeting shall also include a site visit if there has not been a prior site visit for the requested site.
W) An Applicant shall submit to the City the number of completed Applications determined to be
needed at the pre-application meeting.
X) The holder of a Special Use Permit shall notify the City of any intended Modification of a Wireless
Telecommunication Facility and shall apply to the City to modify, relocate or rebuild a Wireless
Telecommunications Facility.
7. Location of Wireless Telecommunications Facilities
A) Applicants for Wireless Telecommunications Facilities shall locate, site and erect said Wireless
Telecommunications Facilities in accordance with the following priorities, one (1) being the highest
priority and seven (7) being the lowest priority.
City of Sioux Center, Iowa Zoning Ordinance
Prepared by: NW IA Planning & Development 158
1) On existing Towers or other structures on city owned properties.
2) On existing Towers or other structures on other property in the City
3) A new Tower on City-owned properties;
4) A new Tower on properties in areas zoned for Heavy Industrial use
5) A new Tower on properties in areas zoned for Commercial use
6) A new Tower on properties in areas zoned for Agricultural use
7) A new Tower on properties in areas zoned for Residential use
B) If the proposed site is not proposed for the highest priority listed above, then a detailed explanation
must be provided as to why a site of a higher priority was not selected. The person seeking such an
exception must satisfactorily demonstrate the reason or reasons why such a permit should be granted
for the proposed site, and the hardship that would be incurred by the Applicant if the permit were not
granted for the proposed site.
C) An Applicant may not by-pass sites of higher priority by stating the site proposed is the only site
leased or selected. An Application shall address co-location as an option. If such option is not
proposed, the Applicant must explain to the reasonable satisfaction of the City why co-location is
Commercially or otherwise Impracticable. Agreements between providers limiting or prohibiting colocation
shall not be a valid basis for any claim of Commercial Impracticability or hardship.
D) Notwithstanding the above, the City may approve any site located within an area in the above list of
priorities, provided that the City finds that the proposed site is in the best interest of the health, safety
and welfare of the City and its inhabitants and will not have a deleterious effect on the nature and
character of the community and neighborhood.
E) Notwithstanding that a potential site may be situated in an area of highest priority or highest
available priority, the City may disapprove an Application for any of the following reasons.
1) Conflict with safety and safety-related codes and requirements;
2) Conflict with the historic nature or character of a neighborhood or historical district;
3) The use or construction of Wireless Telecommunications Facilities which is contrary to an
already stated purpose of a specific zoning or land use designation;
4) The placement and location of Wireless Telecommunications Facilities which would create an
unacceptable risk, or the reasonable probability of such, to residents, the public, employees and
agents of the City, or employees of the service provider or other service providers;
5) Conflicts with the provisions of this Ordinance.
8. Shared Use of Wireless Telecommunications Facilities and Other Structures
A) The City, as opposed to the construction of a new Tower, shall prefer locating Wireless
Telecommunications Facilities on existing Towers or others structures without increasing the height.
The Applicant shall submit a comprehensive report inventorying existing Towers and other suitable
structures within one (1) mile of the location of any proposed new Tower, unless the Applicant can
show that some other distance is more reasonable and demonstrate conclusively why an existing
Tower or other suitable structure cannot be used, or additional height is necessary.
B) An Applicant intending to locate on an existing Tower or other suitable structure shall be required to
document the intent of the existing owner to permit its use by the Applicant.
City of Sioux Center, Iowa Zoning Ordinance
Prepared by: NW IA Planning & Development 159
C) Such shared use shall consist only of the minimum Antenna Array technologically required to
provide service primarily and essentially within the City, to the extent practicable, unless good cause
is shown.
9. Height of Telecommunications Tower(s)
A) The Applicant shall submit documentation justifying the total height of any Tower, Facility and/or
Antenna requested and the basis therefore. Documentation in the form of propagation studies must
include all backup data used to perform at requested height and a minimum of ten (10’) feet lower
height to allow verification of this height need. Such documentation will be analyzed in the context
of the justification of the height needed to provide service primarily and essentially within the City,
to the extent practicable, unless good cause is shown.
B) No Tower constructed after the effective date of this Ordinance, including allowing for all
attachments, shall exceed that height which shall permit operation without required artificial lighting
of any kind in accordance with City, State, and/or any Federal statute, law, local law, City
Ordinance, code, rule or regulation.
10. Visibility of Wireless Telecommunications Facilities
A) Wireless Telecommunications Facilities shall not be artificially lighted or marked, except as required
by Law.
B) Towers shall be galvanized and/or painted with a rust-preventive paint of an appropriate color to
harmonize with the surroundings and shall be maintained in accordance with the requirements of this
Ordinance.
C) If lighting is required, Applicant shall provide a plan for sufficient lighting of as unobtrusive and
inoffensive an effect as is permissible under State and Federal regulations.
11. Security of Wireless Telecommunications Facilities
All Wireless Telecommunications Facilities and Antennas shall be located, fenced or otherwise
secured in a manner that prevents unauthorized access. Specifically:
A) All Antennas, Towers and other supporting structures, including guy anchor points and wires, shall
be made inaccessible to individuals and constructed or shielded in such a manner that they cannot be
climbed or collided with; and
B) Transmitters and Telecommunications control points shall be installed in such a manner that they are
readily accessible only to persons authorized to operate or service them.
12. Signage
Wireless Telecommunications Facilities shall contain a sign no larger than four (4) square feet in order
to provide adequate notification to persons in the immediate area of the presence of RF radiation or to
control exposure to RF radiation within a given area. A sign of the same size is also to be installed to
contain the name(s) of the owner(s) and operator(s) of the Antenna(s) as well as emergency phone
number(s). The sign shall be on the equipment shelter or cabinet of the Applicant and be visible from
the access point of the site and must identify the equipment owner of the shelter or cabinet. On tower
sites, an FCC registration site as applicable is also to be present. The signs shall not be lighted, unless
applicable law, rule or regulation requires lighting. No other signage, including advertising, shall be
permitted.
City of Sioux Center, Iowa Zoning Ordinance
Prepared by: NW IA Planning & Development 160
13. Lot Size and Setbacks
All proposed Towers and any other proposed Wireless Telecommunications Facility structures shall be
set back from abutting parcels, recorded rights-of-way and road and street lines by the greater of the
following distances: A distance equal to the height of the proposed Tower or Wireless
Telecommunications Facility structure, or the existing setback requirement of the underlying Zoning
District, whichever is greater. The board may consider an alternative set back distance if engineering
studies support a reduction in the requirement(see Section 28.Relief). Any Accessory structure shall be
located so as to comply with the applicable minimum setback requirements for the property on which it
is situated.
14. Retention of Expert Assistance and Reimbursement by Applicant
A) The City may hire any consultant and/or expert necessary to assist the City in reviewing and
evaluating the Application, including the construction and modification of the site, once permitted,
and any site inspections.
B) An Applicant shall deposit with the City funds sufficient to reimburse the City for all reasonable
costs of consultant and expert evaluation and consultation to the City in connection with the review
of any Application including where applicable, the lease negotiation, the pre -approval evaluation,
and the construction and modification of the site, once permitted. The initial deposit shall be
$8,500.00 for new construction and $4,000.00 for co-location and/or modifications to an existing
structure. The placement of the deposit with the City shall precede the pre-application meeting. The
City will maintain a separate escrow account for all such funds. The City’s consultants/experts shall
invoice the City for its services related to the Application. If at any time during the process this
escrow account has a balance less than $2,500.00, the Applicant shall immediately, upon notification
by the City, replenish said escrow account so that it has a balance of at least $5,000.00. Such
additional escrow funds shall be deposited with the City before any further action or consideration is
taken on the Application. Each month the City’s consultant shall provide the City with a detailed
accounting of the time and corresponding activities. In the event that the amount held in escrow by
the City is more than the amount of the actual invoicing at the conclusion of the project, the
remaining balance shall, upon request of the Applicant, be promptly refunded to the Applicant.
C) The total amount of the funds needed as set forth in subsection (B) of this section may vary with the
scope (lease negotiations and/or review) and complexity of the project, the completeness of the
Application and other information as may be needed to complete the necessary review, analysis and
inspection of any construction or modification.
15. Public Hearing and Notification Requirements
A) Prior to the approval of any Application for a Special Use Permit for Wireless Telecommunications
Facilities, a Public Hearing shall be held by the Board of Adjustment, notice of which shall be
published in the newspaper with general circulation in the City not less than four (4) and no more
than twenty (20) calendar days prior to the scheduled date of the Public Hearing. In order that the
City may notify nearby landowners, the Application shall contain the names and address of all
landowners whose property is located within five hundred (500) feet of any property line of the lot
or parcel on which the new Wireless Telecommunications Facilities are proposed to be located.
B) There shall be no Public Hearing required for an Application to co-locate on an existing Tower or
other structure or a modification at an existing site, as long as there is no proposed increase in the
height of the Tower or structure, including attachments thereto.
City of Sioux Center, Iowa Zoning Ordinance
Prepared by: NW IA Planning & Development 161
C) The Board of Adjustment shall schedule the Public Hearing referred to in Subsection (A) of this
section once it finds the Application is complete, the City, at any stage prior to issuing a Special Use
Permit, may require such additional information as it deems necessary.
16. Action on an Application for a Special Use Permit for Wireless Telecommunications
Facilities
A) The City will undertake a review of an Application pursuant to this Article in a timely fashion,
consistent with its responsibilities, and shall act within a reasonable period of time given the relative
complexity of the Application and the circumstances, with due regard for the public’s interest and
need to be involved, and the Applicant’s desire for a timely resolution.
B) The City may refer any Application or part thereof to any advisory, other committee or commission
for a non-binding recommendation.
C) After the Public Hearing and after formally considering the Application, the City may approve,
approve with conditions, or deny a Special Use Permit. Its decision shall be in writing and shall be
supported by substantial evidence contained in a written record. The burden of proof for the granting
of the Permit shall always be upon the Applicant.
D) If the City approves the Special Use Permit for Wireless Telecommunications Facilities, then the
Applicant shall be notified of such approval in writing within ten (10) calendar days of the City’s
action, and the Special Use Permit shall be issued within thirty (30) days after such approval.
Except for necessary building permits, and subsequent Certificates of Compliance, once a Special
Use Permit has been granted hereunder, no additional permits or approvals from the City, such as
site plan or zoning approvals, shall be required by the City for the Wireless Telecommunications
Facilities covered by the Special Use Permit.
E) If the City denies the Special Use Permit for Wireless Telecommunications Facilities, then the
Applicant shall be notified of such denial in writing within ten (10) calendar days of the City’s
action.
17. Extent and Parameters of Special Use Permit for Wireless Telecommunications
Facilities
The extent and parameters of a Special Use Permit for Wireless Telecommunications Facilities shall be
as follows:
A) Such Special Use Permit shall not be assigned, transferred or conveyed without the express prior
written notification to the City.
B) Such Special Use Permit may, following a hearing upon due prior notice to the Applicant, be
revoked, canceled, or terminated for a violation of the conditions and provisions of the Special Use
Permit, or for a material violation of this Ordinance after prior written notice to the holder of the
Special Use Permit.
18. Application/Permit Fees
At the time that a Person submits an Application for a Special Use Permit for a new Tower, for
co-locating on an existing Tower or other suitable structure, where no increase in height of the
Tower or structure is required, such Person shall pay a non-refundable Special Use Permit
application fee in accordance with the current City fee schedule . Upon approval of a Special
Use Permit, the Applicant shall pay a building permit fee in accordance with the current City
City of Sioux Center, Iowa Zoning Ordinance
Prepared by: NW IA Planning & Development 162
building permit fee schedule.
19. Performance Security
The Applicant and the owner of record of any proposed Wireless Telecommunications Facilities property
site shall, at its cost and expense, be jointly required to execute and file with the City either a bond, an
irrevocable letter of credit or other form of security acceptable to the City as to type of security and the
form and manner of execution, in an amount of at least $75,000.00 for a Tower facility and $25,000 for a
co-location on an existing tower or other structure and with such sureties as are deemed sufficient by the
City to assure the faithful performance of the terms and conditions of this Ordinance and conditions of
any Special Use Permit issued pursuant to this Ordinance. The full amount of the bond, letter of credit, or
security shall remain in full force and effect throughout the term of the Special Use Permit and/or until
any necessary site restoration is completed to restore the site to a condition comparable to that, which
existed prior to the issuance of the original Special Use Permit. In lieu of providing a bond, letter of credit,
or other form of security as described above, the Applicant may provide proof of a recorded lease for the site
which includes provisions requiring that, at the termination of the lease, the site must be restored to a
condition substantially similar to that which existed prior to the issuance of the original Special Use Permit.
20. Reservation of Authority to Inspect Wireless Telecommunications Facilities
In order to verify that the holder of a Special Use Permit for Wireless Telecommunications Facilities and
any and all lessees, renters, and/or licensees of Wireless Telecommunications Facilities, place and
construct such facilities, including Towers and Antennas, in accordance with all applicable technical,
safety, fire, building, and zoning codes, Laws, Ordinances and regulations and other applicable
requirements, the City may inspect all facets of said permit holder’s, renter’s, lessee’s or licensee’s
placement, construction, modification and maintenance of such facilities, including, but not limited to,
Towers, Antennas and buildings or other structures constructed or located on the permitted site.
21. Liability Insurance
A) A holder of a Special Use Permit for Wireless Telecommunications Facilities shall secure and at all
times maintain liability insurance for personal injuries, death and property damage, and umbrella
insurance coverage, for the duration of the Special Use Permit in amounts as set forth below
1) Commercial General Liability covering personal injuries, death and property damage: $1,000,000
per occurrence/$2,000,000 aggregate;
2) Automobile Coverage: $1,000,000 per occurrence/ $2,000,000 aggregate;
3) Workers Compensation and Disability: Statutory amounts
B) For a Wireless Telecommunications Facility on City property, the Commercial General Liability
insurance policy shall specifically include the City and its officers, Councils, employees, committee
members, attorneys, agents and consultants as additional insureds.
C) The insurance policies shall be issued by an agent or representative of an insurance company
licensed to do business in the State and with a Best’s rating of at least A.
D) The insurance policies shall contain an endorsement obligating the insurance company to furnish the
City with at least thirty-(30) days prior written notice in advance of the cancellation of the insurance.
E) Renewal or replacement policies or certificates shall be delivered to the City at least fifteen (15) days
before the expiration of the insurance that such policies are to renew or replace.
City of Sioux Center, Iowa Zoning Ordinance
Prepared by: NW IA Planning & Development 163
F) Before construction of a permitted Wireless Telecommunications Facilities is initiated, but in no
case later than fifteen (15) days after the granting of the Special Use Permit, the holder of the Special
Use Permit shall deliver to the City a copy of each of the policies or certificates representing the
insurance in the required amounts.
22. Indemnification
A) Any application for Wireless Telecommunication Facilities that is proposed for City property,
pursuant to this Ordinance, shall contain a provision with respect to indemnification. Such provision
shall require the applicant, to the extent permitted by the Law, to at all times defend, indemnify,
protect, save, hold harmless, and exempt the City, and its officers, Councils, employees, committee
members, attorneys, agents, and consultants from any and all penalties, damages, costs, or charges
arising out of any and all claims, suits, demands, causes of action, or award of damages, whether
compensatory or punitive, or expenses arising therefrom, either at law or in equity, which might
arise out of, or are caused by, the placement, construction, erection, modification, location, products
performance, use, operation, maintenance, repair, installation, replacement, removal, or restoration
of said Facility, excepting, however, any portion of such claims, suits, demands, causes of action or
award of damages as may be attributable to the negligent or intentional acts or omissions of the City,
or its servants or agents. With respect to the penalties, damages or charges referenced herein,
reasonable attorneys’ fees, consultants’ fees, and expert witness fees are included in those costs that
are recoverable by the City.
B) Notwithstanding the requirements noted in subsection (A) of this section, an indemnification
provision will not be required in those instances where the City itself applies for and secures a
Special Use Permit for Wireless Telecommunications Facilities
23. Fines
A) In the event of a violation of this Ordinance or any Special Use Permit issued pursuant to this
Ordinance, the City may impose and collect, and the holder of the Special Use Permit for Wireless
Telecommunications Facilities shall pay to the City, fines or penalties as set forth below.
B) The holder of a Special Use Permits failure to comply with provisions of this Ordinance shall
constitute a violation of this Ordinance and shall subject the Applicant to the code enforcement
provisions and procedures as provided in the, Iowa Code and Article XXVII of the Zoning
Ordinance of the City of Sioux Center.
C) Notwithstanding anything in this Ordinance, the holder of the Special Use Permit for Wireless
Telecommunications Facilities may not use the payment of fines, liquidated damages or other
penalties, to evade or avoid compliance with this Ordinance or any section of this Ordinance. An
attempt to do so shall subject the holder of the Special Use Permit to termination and revocation of
the Special Use Permit. The City may also seek injunctive relief to prevent the continued violation of
this Ordinance, without limiting other remedies available to the City.
24. Default and/or Revocation.
If a Wireless Telecommunications Facility is repaired, rebuilt, placed, moved, re-located, modified or
maintained in a way that is inconsistent or not in compliance with the provisions of this Ordinance or of
the Special Use Permit, then the City shall notify the holder of the Special Use Permit in writing of such
violation. A Permit holder in violation may be considered in default and subject to fines as in Section 25
and if a violation is not corrected to the satisfaction of the City in a reasonable period of time the Special
Use Permit is subject to revocation.
25. Removal of Wireless Telecommunications Facilities.
A) Under the following circumstances, the City may determine that the health, safety, and welfare
City of Sioux Center, Iowa Zoning Ordinance
Prepared by: NW IA Planning & Development 164
interests of the City warrant and require the removal of Wireless Telecommunications Facilities.
1) Wireless Telecommunications Facilities with a permit have been abandoned (i.e. not used as
Wireless Telecommunications Facilities) for a period exceeding ninety consecutive (90) days or
a total of one hundred-eighty (180) days in any three hundred-sixty five (365) day period, except
for periods caused by force majeure or Acts of God, in which case, repair or removal shall
commence within 90 days;
2) Permitted Wireless Telecommunications Facilities fall into such a state of disrepair that it creates
a health or safety hazard;
3) Wireless Telecommunications Facilities have been located, constructed, or modified without
first obtaining, or in a manner not authorized by, the required Special Use Permit, or any other
necessary authorization and the Special Permit may be revoked.
B) If the City makes such a determination as noted in subsection (A) of this section, then the City shall
notify the holder of the Special Use Permit for the Wireless Telecommunications Facilities within
forty-eight (48) hours that said Wireless Telecommunications Facilities are to be removed, the City
may approve an interim temporary use agreement/permit, such as to enable the sale of the Wireless
Telecommunications Facilities.
C) The holder of the Special Use Permit, or its successors or assigns, shall dismantle and remove such
Wireless Telecommunications Facilities, and all associated structures and facilities, from the site and
restore the site to as close to its original condition as is possible, such restoration being limited only
by physical or Commercial Impracticability, within ninety (90) days of receipt of written notice from
the City. However, if the owner of the property upon which the Wireless Telecommunications
Facilities are located wishes to retain any access roadway to the Wireless Telecommunications
Facilities, the owner may do so with the approval of the City.
D) If Wireless Telecommunications Facilities are not removed or substantial progress has not been
made to remove the Wireless Telecommunications Facilities within ninety (90) days after the Permit
holder has received notice, then the City may order officials or representatives of the City to remove
the Wireless Telecommunications Facilities at the sole expense of the owner or Special Use Permit
holder.
E) If, the City removes, or causes to be removed, Wireless Telecommunications Facilities, and the
owner of the Wireless Telecommunications Facilities does not claim and remove it from the site to a
lawful location within ten (10) days, then the City may take steps to declare the Wireless
Telecommunications Facilities abandoned, and sell them and their components.
F) Notwithstanding anything in this Section to the contrary, the City may approve a temporary use
permit/agreement for the Wireless Telecommunications Facilities, for no more ninety (90) days,
during which time a suitable plan for removal, conversion, or re-location of the affected Wireless
Telecommunications Facilities shall be developed by the holder of the Special Use Permit, subject to
the approval of the City, and an agreement to such plan shall be executed by the holder of the
Special Use Permit and the City. If such a plan is not developed, approved and executed within the
ninety (90) day time period, then the City may take possession of and dispose of the affected
Wireless Telecommunications Facilities in the manner provided in this Section.
26. Relief
Any Applicant desiring relief, waiver or exemption from any aspect or requirement of this Ordinance
may request such, provided that the relief or exemption is contained in the submitted Application for
either a Special Use Permit, or in the case of an existing or previously granted Special Use Permit a
request for modification of its Tower and/or facilities. Such relief may be temporary or permanent,
City of Sioux Center, Iowa Zoning Ordinance
Prepared by: NW IA Planning & Development 165
partial or complete. However, the burden of proving the need for the requested relief, waiver or
exemption is solely on the Applicant to prove. The Applicant shall bear all costs of the City in
considering the request and the relief, waiver or exemption. No such relief or exemption shall be
approved unless the Applicant demonstrates by clear and convincing evidence that, if granted the relief,
waiver or exemption will have no significant affect on the health, safety and welfare of the City, its
residents and other service providers.
27. Periodic Regulatory Review by the City
A) The City may at any time conduct a review and examination of this entire Ordinance.
B) If after such a periodic review and examination of this Ordinance, the City determines that one or
more provisions of this Ordinance should be amended, repealed, revised, clarified, or deleted, then
the City may take whatever measures are necessary in accordance with applicable Law in order to
accomplish the same. It is noted that where warranted, and in the best interests of the City, the City
may repeal this entire Ordinance at any time.
C) Notwithstanding the provisions of subsections (A) and (B) of this Section, the City may at any time
and in any manner (to the extent permitted by Federal, State, or local law), amend, add, repeal,
and/or delete one or more provisions of this Ordinance.
28. Adherence to State and/or Federal Rules and Regulations
A) To the extent that the holder of a Special Use Permit for Wireless Telecommunications Facilities has
not received relief, or is otherwise exempt, from appropriate State and/or Federal agency rules or
regulations, then the holder of such a Special Use Permit shall adhere to, and comply with, all
applicable rules, regulations, standards, and provisions of any State or Federal agency, including, but
not limited to, the FAA and the FCC. Specifically included in this requirement are any rules and
regulations regarding height, lighting, security, electrical and RF emission standards.
B) To the extent that applicable rules, regulations, standards, and provisions of any State or Federal
agency, including but not limited to, the FAA and the FCC, and specifically including any rules and
regulations regarding height, lighting, and security are changed and/or are modified during the
duration of a Special Use Permit for Wireless Telecommunications Facilities, then the holder of such
a Special Use Permit shall conform the permitted Wireless Telecommunications Facilities to the
applicable changed and/or modified rule, regulation, standard, or provision within a maximum of
twenty-four (24) months of the effective date of the applicable changed and/or modified rule,
regulation, standard, or provision, or sooner as may be required by the issuing entity.
29. Authority
This local Ordinance is enacted pursuant to applicable authority granted by the State and federal
government.
30. Home Rule
This article is intended to be and shall be construed as consistent with the reservation of local authority
contained in the 25th Amendment to the Iowa Constitution granting cities home rule powers. To such
end, any limitation on the power of the city contained herein is to be strictly construed and the city
reserves to itself the right to exercise all power and authority to regulate and control its local affairs and
all ordinances and regulations of the city shall be enforced against the holders of any lease.
City of Sioux Center, Iowa Zoning Ordinance
Prepared by: NW IA Planning & Development 166
ARTICLE XXVI
Enforcement
Article 26: Enforcement
Section 26.1 Administrative Officer
Section 26.2. Zoning Compliance
Section 26.3. Zoning Permits Required
Section 26.4. Application for Zoning Permit
Section 26.5. Construction and Use to be provided in Application, Plans, and Permit
Section 26.6. Fees
Section 26.7. Special Exceptions
Section 26.8. Administrative Appeals
26.1 ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICER
The purpose of this section is to confirm the existing zoning administrator, and it shall be the duty of
said officer to enforce this ordinance. Such officer may be a person holding other appointive office in
the city, or another governmental agency.
26.2 ZONING COMPLIANCE
If the Zoning Administrator shall find that any of the provisions of this ordinance are being violated,
they shall notify in writing the person responsible for such violations indicating the nature of the
violation and ordering the action necessary to correct it. The Zoning Administrator shall order
discontinuance of illegal use of land, buildings, or structures; removal of illegal buildings or
structures or of additions, alterations or structural changes thereto; discontinuance of any illegal work
being done, or shall take any other action authorized by this ordinance to insure compliance with or
to prevent violation of its provisions.
26.3 ZONING PERMITS REQUIRED
Buildings or other structures shall not be erected, moved, added to, or structurally altered without a
permit issued by the Zoning Administrator. Zoning permits shall be issued in conformance with the
provisions of this ordinance, or upon written order from the Board of Adjustment, but shall be null
and void if the purpose for which the permit is issued is not commenced within six (6) months from
date of issuance.
26.4 APPLICATION FOR ZONING COMPLIANCE PERMIT
Zoning Compliance permits shall be obtained from the Zoning Administrator before starting or
proceeding with the erection, construction, moving into, or the structural alteration of a building or
structure, including billboards. Permits shall be kept of file in the office of the Zoning Administrator,
and copies shall be furnished on request to any person having a proprietary or tenancy interest in the
building affected. Compliance permits shall be issued to complying applicants within seven (7) days
after application is made.
Each application for a compliance permit shall be accompanied by a site plan prepared in accordance
with Article XIX-Site Plans. In the case of moving an existing building, the application shall be
accompanied by a photo of the structure to be moved.
City of Sioux Center, Iowa Zoning Ordinance
Prepared by: NW IA Planning & Development 167
26.5 CONSTRUCTION/USE TO BE AS PROVIDED IN APPLICATION, PLANS &
PERMIT
Zoning compliance permits issued on the basis of plans and applications, approved by the Zoning
Administrator, authorize only that use, arrangement and construction. Use, arrangement and
construction at variance with that authorized shall be deemed a violation of this ordinance and
punishable as provided by Article XXVII-Violation and Penalty.
26.6 FEES
Before receiving a zoning compliance permit the owner or their agent shall pay to the city the permit
fee as provided by resolution of the council. Such fee shall be based on valuation. Fees for permits
issued after the construction, or moving, in the case of house moving, has begun shall double. The
city, county, state and federal governments shall be exempt from paying any scheduled fees.
26.7 SPECIAL EXCEPTIONS
The Zoning Administrator may issue a zoning compliance permit for a special exception after review
by the Planning and Zoning Commission and upon order of the Board of Adjustment.
26.8 ADMINISTRATIVE APPEALS
This procedure is intended to afford review of administrative actions taken pursuant to the Zoning
Ordinance where such actions may be in error.
1) Appeals: Appeals to the Board of Adjustment may be taken by any person aggrieved, or by any
officer, department, or board of the city affected by any administrative decision of the Zoning
Administrator. Such appeal shall be taken within a reasonable time, as provided by the rules of
the Board, by filing with the Zoning Administrator and with the Board of Adjustment a notice of
appeal, which shall specify the grounds thereof. The Zoning Administrator shall forthwith
transmit to the Board all the papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from
was taken.
2) Stay of Proceedings: An appeal from the action of the Zoning Administrator shall stay all
proceedings in furtherance of such action unless the Zoning Administrator certifies to the Board
of Adjustment, after the notice of appeal shall have been filed with him, that by reason of the
facts stated in the certificate a stay would, in his opinion, cause imminent peril to life or property.
In the event the Zoning Administrator shall make and file such certificate, his action shall not be
stayed otherwise than by a restraining order that may be granted by the Board of Adjustment, or
by a court of record, upon application of the party aggrieved by the action of the Zoning
Administrator, and after notice to him and upon due cause shown.
4) Action: The Board of Adjustment shall act on the appeal within 30 days following the closing of
the public hearing. In exercising the powers set out in this section, the Board of Adjustment may,
in conformity with the provisions of this Ordinance, reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may
modify the order, requirement, decision, or determination appealed from, and may take such
order, requirement, decision, or determination as ought to be made, and to that end shall have all
the powers of the Zoning Administrator from whose action the appeal was taken. The Board shall
notify the appellant of its decision by mail.
The concurring vote of three members of the Board of Adjustment shall be necessary to reverse
any order, requirement, decision, or determination of the Zoning Administrator, or to decide in
favor of the applicant any matter upon which it is required to pass under these provisions.
City of Sioux Center, Iowa Zoning Ordinance
Prepared by: NW IA Planning & Development 168
ARTICLE XXVII
Violation and Penalty
Article 27: Violation and Penalty
Section 27.1. Violation and Penalty
Section 27.2. Restraining Order
27.1 VIOLATION AND PENALTY
The violation of any of the provisions of this ordinance shall constitute a misdemeanor. Any person,
firm or corporation who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to comply with or who resists
the enforcement of any of the provisions of this ordinance, upon conviction shall be subject to a fine
of not more than five hundred dollars ($500) or imprisonment of not more than thirty (30) days for
each offence, as permitted by Iowa Code. Each day that a violation is permitted to exist constitutes a
separate offense.
27.2 RESTRAINING ORDER
In case any building or structure is erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, repaired, converted,
or maintained, or any building, structure or land is used in violation of this ordinance, the city
attorney, in addition to other remedies, may institute any proper action or proceed in the name of the
City of Sioux Center to prevent such unlawful erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration,
repair, conversion, maintenance, conduct, business or use in or about said premises.
City of Sioux Center, Iowa Zoning Ordinance
Prepared by: NW IA Planning & Development 169
City of Sioux Center, Iowa Zoning Ordinance
Prepared by: NW IA Planning & Development 170
ARTICLE XXVIII
Planning and Zoning Commission
Article 28: Planning and Zoning Commission
Section 28.1. Confirmation of the Planning and Zoning Commission
Section 28.2. Terms of Office
Section 28.3. Proceedings of the Planning and Zoning Commission
Section 28.4. Powers and Duties
Section 28.5. Decisions of the Planning and Zoning Commission
28.1 CONFIRMATION OF THE PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION
The eleven (11) members of the existing Planning and Zoning Commission are hereby confirmed to
continue their appointed terms of office. The City Council is granted the authority to create an Sioux
Center Planning and Zoning Commission composed of eleven (11) citizens of the city who are
qualified by knowledge and experience to act in matters pertaining to the development of city
planning and zoning, none of whom shall hold any elective position in the city.
28.2 TERMS OF OFFICE
The term of office of commission members shall be five (5) years. The terms of not more than twofifths
(2/5) of the members will expire in any one year. Members of the Planning and Zoning
Commission may be removed from office by the City Council for cause upon written charges and
after a public hearing. Vacancies shall be filled by appointment of the City Council for the unexpired
term of the resigning member.
28.3 PROCEEDINGS OF THE PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION
The Planning and Zoning Commission shall adopt rules necessary to the conduct of its affairs, and in
keeping with the commissions’ responsibilities as outlined in this article. Meetings shall be held at
the call of the chairperson and at such other times as the Planning Commission may determine. The
chairperson, or in his/her absence the acting chairperson, may direct the meetings. All meetings shall
be open to the public. The Planning Commission shall keep minutes of its proceedings showing the
vote of each member upon each action, of if absent or failing to vote indicating such fact. The
Planning Commission shall also keep records of its examinations and other official actions, all of
which shall be made available for public inspection. The presence of six (6) voting members shall
constitute a quorum.
28.4 POWERS AND DUTIES
Said commission shall have and possess the following powers and such powers as may be incidental
to the successful carrying out of the powers invested in it herein or such as may be expressly
conferred upon it by law:
1) PLANS. To make such surveys, studies, maps, plans, or plats of the whole or any portion of the
city and of any land outside thereof, which in the opinion of such commission bears relation to a
comprehensive plan, and shall submit such plan to the council with its studies and
recommendations and it may publish the same.
2) RECOMMEND PLAN CHANGES. To recommend to the council, from time to time, as
conditions require, amendments, supplements, changes, or modifications in the comprehensive
plan prepared by it, and recommend changes to the zoning regulations.
City of Sioux Center, Iowa Zoning Ordinance
Prepared by: NW IA Planning & Development 171
3) ZONING PLAN. To prepare a plan for zoning regarding the height, number of stories, and size
of buildings and other structures; the percentage of ground that may be occupied; the size or
yards, courts, and other open spaces; the density of population; and the location and use of
buildings, structures, and land for trade, industry, residence, or other purposes and to this end
shall prepare a preliminary report and hold public meetings thereon and after such hearings have
been held, to submit its final report and recommendations to the City Council.
4) OFFICIAL MAP. To study and make recommendations on all subdivisions submitted for
approval to the city and to make surveys and plans for an official map as a guideline for such
approval.
5) TRENDS. To study trends of development in industrial, physical and social aspects of the
community and make such reports as it may deem necessary.
6) RECOMMENDATIONS. To review and make recommendations on proposed vacations of
streets and alleys.
7) ANNUAL REPORT. The commission may make a report to the mayor and council of its
proceedings, upon request.
48.5 DECISIONS OF THE PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION
In exercising the above mentioned powers and duties, the Planning and Zoning Commission is
granted the responsibility to provide informed and educated recommendations to the City Council or
Board of Adjustment on matters under review. The Planning and Zoning Commission may
recommend wholly, partly or may modify or request alterations of the original proposal. A
concurring vote of the majority of the Planning Commission quorum shall be necessary in order to
further a recommendation to the City Council or Board of Adjustment for consideration.
City of Sioux Center, Iowa Zoning Ordinance
Prepared by: NW IA Planning & Development 172
ARTICLE XXIX
Board of Adjustment
Article 29: Board of Adjustment
Section 29.1. Confirmation of Existing Board of Adjustment
Section 29.2. Proceedings of the Board of Adjustment
Section 29.3. Hearings, Appeals, and Notice
Section 29.4. Stay of Proceedings
Section 29.5. Powers and Duties
Section 29.6. Variances
Section 29.7. Decisions of the Board of Adjustment
Section 29.8. Appeals from the Board of Adjustment
29.1 CONFIRMATION OF EXISTING BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT
The members of the existing Board of Adjustment are hereby confirmed to continue their appointed
terms of office. Future members of the Board of Adjustment shall be appointed by the City Council
for a term of five (5) years. Members of the Board of Adjustment may be removed from office by the
city council for cause upon written charges and after a public hearing. Vacancies shall be filled by
the City Council for the unexpired term of the resigning member.
29.2 PROCEEDINGS OF THE BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT
The Board of Adjustment shall adopt rules necessary to the conduct of its affairs, and in keeping with
the provisions of this Ordinance. Meetings shall be held at the call of the chairperson and at such
other times as the Board may determine. The chairperson, or in his/her absence the acting
chairperson, may administer oaths and compel attendance of witnesses. All meetings shall be open to
the public. The Board of Adjustment shall keep minutes of its proceedings showing the vote of each
member upon each question, or if absent or failing to vote indicating such fact, and shall keep records
of its examination and other official actions, all of which shall be a public record and be immediately
filed in the office of the board. The presence of three (3) members shall constitute a quorum.
29.3 HEARINGS, APPEALS, AND NOTICE
Appeals to the Board of Adjustment concerning interpretation or administration of this ordinance
may be taken by any person aggrieved or by any officer or bureau of the City of Sioux Center
affected by a decision of the Zoning Administrator. Such appeals should be taken within a reasonable
time, not to exceed sixty (60) days, by filing with the Zoning Administrator and with the Board of
Adjustment, a notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof. The Zoning Administrator shall
forthwith transmit to the Board all papers constituting the record from which the action appealed was
taken.
The Board of Adjustment shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of appeal, give public notices
thereof, as well as due notice to the parties of interest, and decide the same within a reasonable time.
At the hearing any party may appear in person or by agent or attorney.
A fee to be determined by resolution of the City Council shall be paid to the Zoning Administrator at
the time the notice of appeal is filed, which the administrative officer shall forthwith pay to the credit
of the general revenue fund of the city.
City of Sioux Center, Iowa Zoning Ordinance
Prepared by: NW IA Planning & Development 173
29.4 STAY OF PROCEEDINGS
An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action which was appealed, unless the Zoning
Administrator from whom the appeal is taken certifies to the Board of Adjustment after the notice of
appeal is filed, that by reason of facts stated in the certificate, a stay would, cause imminent threat to
life or property. In such case, proceedings shall not be stayed other than by a restraining order which
may be granted by the Board of Adjustment or by a court of record on the application, on notice to
the administrative officer from whom the appeal is taken and on due cause shown.
29.5 POWERS AND DUTIES
The Board of Adjustment shall have the following powers and duties:
1) Administrative Review: To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged that there is error in any
order, requirement, decision, or determination made by the Zoning Administrator in the
enforcement of this ordinance.
2) Special Exceptions: To hear and decide only such exceptions as the Board of Adjustment is
specifically authorized to pass on by the terms of this ordinance, and as provided for in Article
XXV “Special Exceptions.”
3) Variances: To authorize upon appeal in specific cases such variance from the terms of this
ordinance as will not be contrary to the public interest where, owing to the special conditions, a
literal enforcement of the provisions of this ordinance would result in unnecessary hardship.
29.6 VARIANCES
A variance from the terms of this ordinance shall not be granted by the Board of Adjustment unless
and until:
1) An application for the Variance shall be filed with the Zoning Administrator. The application
shall include the following:
a. Name and address of the owner and applicant.
b. Address and legal description of the property.
c. If the applicant is not the legal owner of the property, a statement that the applicant is the
authorized agent of the owner.
d. A statement describing the variance requested and the reasons why it complies with the
criteria for variances provided in this section.
e. The property address, name and mailing address of the owner of each lot within 100 feet of
the subject property.
f. Site plans, as prepared in accordance with Article XIX “Site Plans.”
2) The Zoning Administrator may request additional information necessary to enable a complete
analysis and evaluation of the variance request, and a determination as to whether the
circumstances prescribed for the granting of a variance exist.
3) Notice of public hearing shall be given to immediately adjacent property owners and to those
within 100 feet of the property, as required by law.
4) The public hearing shall be held. Any party may appear in person or by agent or attorney.
City of Sioux Center, Iowa Zoning Ordinance
Prepared by: NW IA Planning & Development 174
5) The Board of Adjustment may grant a variance if it makes affirmative findings of fact on each of
the following criteria:
a. That special conditions and circumstances exist which are peculiar to the land, structure, or
building involved and which are not applicable to other lands, structures, or buildings in the
same district;
b. That literal interpretation of the provisions of this ordinance would deprive the applicant of
rights commonly enjoyed by other properties in the same district under the terms of this
ordinance;
c. That the special conditions and circumstances do not result from the actions of the applicant;
d. That granting the variance requested will not confer on the applicant any special privilege
that is denied by this ordinance to other lands, structures, or buildings in the same district.
No nonconforming use of neighboring lands, structures or buildings in other districts shall be
considered grounds for the issuance of a variance.
6) The Board of Adjustment shall make findings that the applicant for a variance has met the
requirements of this section.
7) The Board of Adjustment shall further make a finding that the reasons set forth in the application
justify the granting of the variance and that the variance is the minimum variance that will make
possible the reasonable use of the land, building or structure.
8) The Board of Adjustment shall further make a finding that the granting of the variance will be in
harmony with the general purpose and intent of this ordinance, and will not be injurious to the
neighborhood, or otherwise detrimental to the public welfare.
9) A fee to be determined by resolution of city council shall accompany the application for a
variance.
Additional Variance Conditions: In granting any variance, the Board of Adjustment may prescribe
appropriate conditions and safeguards in conformity with this ordinance. Violations of such
conditions and safeguards, when made a part of the terms under which the variance is granted, shall
be deemed a violation of this ordinance and punishable under Article 27 “Violation and Penalty.”
Lapse of Variance: Unless a longer time period shall be specifically established as a condition of
approval, a variance shall lapse and shall become void one (1) year following the date on which the
variance became effective, unless prior to the expiration of one year a building permit is issued and
construction is commenced and diligently pursued toward completion on the site which was the
subject of the variance application, or a certificate of occupancy is issued for the site or structure
which was the subject of the variance application, or the site is occupied if no building permit or
certificate of occupancy is required.
Revocation of Variance: Upon violation of any applicable provision of this ordinance, or if granted
subject to the conditions, upon failure to comply with conditions, a variance shall be revoked upon
notification to the owner of the; use or property subject to the variance.
Variance to Run With Land or Structure: Unless otherwise specified at the time a variance is
granted, a variance shall run with the land and shall continue to be valid upon a change of ownership
City of Sioux Center, Iowa Zoning Ordinance
Prepared by: NW IA Planning & Development 175
of the site or structure to which it applies.
29.7 DECISIONS OF THE BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT
1) In exercising the above mentioned powers, the Board of Adjustment may, so long as such action
is in conformity with the terms of this ordinance and Chapter 414, Code of Iowa, reverse or
affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify, order requirements, decision, or determination as ought
to be made and to that end shall have powers of the administrative officer from whom the appeal
is taken. The concurring vote of three members of the board shall be necessary to reverse any
order, requirement, decision or determination of the Zoning Administrator, or to decide in favor
of the applicant on any matter upon which it is required to pass under this ordinance, or to affect
any variation in application of this ordinance.
The action of the Board shall not become effective until it has a written decision describing such
action, the vote of each member participating therein and the reasons for such action, specifying
the manner in which the applicant either satisfied or failed to satisfy each of the applicable
standards, conditions or elements set forth in this Article. Decisions shall be filed promptly
following the Board’s action and shall be open to public inspection.
2) Every variation and exception granted or denied by the Board shall be supported by a written
testimony or evidence submitted in connection therewith.
3) If any application for a variance or exception shall have been denied by the Board of Adjustment,
no new application for the same relief shall be considered for one (1) year by the Board unless
the Board shall find that conditions have changed.
4) Any taxpayer or any officer, department, board, or bureau of the city or persons jointly or
severally aggrieved by any decision of the Board may present to a court of record a petition for
writ of certiorari, duly verified, setting forth that such decision is illegal, in whole or in part,
specifying the grounds of illegality. The petition shall be presented to the court within 30 days
after the filing of the decision in the office of the Board. All decisions of the Board, except
decisions granting use variances or a variance from any separation requirement shall be final
immediately upon filing. Each decision granting a use variance or a variance from separation
requirement shall be referred to the city council for review pursuant to Chapter 414.7, Code of
Iowa. The city council shall review such decision within 30 days after the decision is filed. After
such review, the council may remand the decision to the Board for further study. If the city
council does not act to review the decision within 30 days after it is filed, the decision shall
become effective on the 31st day. If the city council declines to remand a decision, that decision
shall become final on the date of the council’s action. If the city council remands a decision to the
Board, the effective date of the decision is delayed for 30 days from the date of remand.
29.8 APPEALS FROM THE BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT
Any person or persons, or any board, taxpayer, department, board or bureau of the community
aggrieved by any decision of the Board of Adjustment may seek review of such decision of the Board
of Adjustment by a court of record in the manner provided by the laws of the State of Iowa and
particularly by Chapter 414, Code of Iowa.
City of Sioux Center, Iowa Zoning Ordinance
Prepared by: NW IA Planning & Development 176
ARTICLE XXX
Changes and Amendments
Article 30: Changes and Amendments
Section 30.1. Procedures
Section 30.2. Initiation
Section 30.3. Application for Change in Zoning District Boundaries
Section 30.4. Public Hearing
Section 30.5. Protest Provision
Section 30.6. New Application
30.1 PROCEDURES
This ordinance and the district map created by said ordinance may be amended from time to time.
However, no amendment shall become effective unless it shall have been proposed by or shall have
been first submitted to the Planning and Zoning Commission for review and recommendation. The
Planning and Zoning Commission shall have forty-five (45) days in which to submit its report to the
city council. If the Commission fails to submit a report within the forty-five (45) day period, it shall
be deemed to have approved the proposed amendment.
Not more than 30 days following receipt of the recommendation of the Planning and Zoning
Commission, the city council shall hold at least one public hearing on the text amendment or a
rezoning request. Within 30 days following the closing of a public hearing, the city council shall
make a specific finding as to whether the change is consistent with the objectives of this ordinance.
If the city council finds that the change is consistent, it shall introduce an ordinance amending the
text of the zoning regulations or amending the zoning map, whichever is appropriate.
If the city council finds that the change is not consistent, it shall deny the application. The city
council shall not modify a recommendation of the Planning and Zoning Commission on a rezoning or
change until it has requested and considered a report of the Commission on the modification. Failure
of the Commission to report within 30 days after receipt of the city council request shall be deemed
concurrence.
30.2 INITIATION
Requests for rezoning of property or zoning text amendments may be initiated by one of three ways.
1) The Planning and Zoning commission or the city council may initiate a text amendment.
2) The Planning and Zoning Commission or the city council may initiate a rezoning request
3) The owner or the authorized agent of the owner of property may initiate a rezoning request by
filing an application for a change in district boundaries (rezoning) as prescribed in this article. If
the property for which rezoning is proposed is in more than one ownership, all the owners or
their authorized agents shall join in filing the application.
City of Sioux Center, Iowa Zoning Ordinance
Prepared by: NW IA Planning & Development 177
30.3 APPLICATION FOR CHANGE IN ZONING DISTRICT BOUNDARIES
Applications for rezoning requests shall be filed with the Zoning Administrator on a form provided
by the city and shall include the following data and maps:
1) Each application shall be filed and accompanied by a fee as determined by resolution by the city
council and shall contain the following information:
a. The name and address of the owner and applicant.
a. The legal description and local address of the property.
c. If the applicant is not the legal owner of the property, statement that the applicant is the
authorized agent of the owner.
d. The present zoning classification and the zoning classification requested for the property.
e. The existing use and proposed use of the property.
f. The names and addresses of the owners of all property within one hundred (100) feet of the
property for which the change is requested.
g. A statement of the reasons why the applicant feels the present zoning classification is no
longer appropriate.
h. A plat showing existing and proposed locations, dimensions and use of the applicant's
property and all property within two-hundred (200) feet thereof, including streets, alleys,
railroads, and other physical features.
The Zoning Administrator may require additional information or maps if they are necessary to enable
the Commission to determine whether the change is consistent with the objectives of this ordinance.
2) All fees shall be deposited to the general revenue fund of the city. Failure to approve the
requested change shall not be deemed cause to refund the fee to the applicant.
3) Upon receipt of the application by the administrative officer a copy shall be forwarded
immediately to the Planning and Zoning Commission for study and recommendation. The
commission shall, prior to making a recommendation, determine the following:
a. Whether or not the current district classification of the property to be rezoned is valid.
b. Whether there is a need for additional land zoned for the purpose requested.
c. Whether the proposed change is consistent with the current land use plan, considering such
factors as:
i. Whether the rezoning would result in a population density or development which would in
turn cause demand for services and utilities in excess of the capacity planned for the area;
ii. Whether the rezoning would result in the generating of traffic in excess of the capacity of
existing or planned streets in the vicinity.
d. Whether there is intent on the part of the applicant to develop the property to be rezoned
diligently and within a reasonable time.
City of Sioux Center, Iowa Zoning Ordinance
Prepared by: NW IA Planning & Development 178
30.4 PUBLIC HEARING
A public hearing shall be held by the city council before adoption of any proposed amendment to this
ordinance. A notice of such public hearing shall be published not less than seven (7) and no more
than 20 days prior to the date established for such hearing along with notification of the owners of all
property within one hundred (100) feet of the property for which the change is requested. In no case
shall the public hearing be held earlier than the next regularly scheduled city council meeting
following the published notice. Such notice shall include the time and place for the public hearing.
30.5 PROTEST PROVISION
In case the Planning and Zoning Commission does not approve the change, or in a case of a protest
filed with the city council against a change in district boundaries signed by the owners of twenty (20)
percent or more either of the area of the lots included in such proposed change, or of those
immediately adjacent thereto and within one hundred (100) feet of the boundaries thereof, such
amendment shall not be passed except by the favorable vote of three-fourths (3/4) of all the members
of the city council.
30.6 NEW APPLICATION
Whenever a petition requesting an amendment, supplement or change of any regulations prescribed
by this article has been denied by the city council such petition cannot be renewed for one year
thereafter unless it is signed by the owners of at least fifty percent (50%) of the property owners who
previously objected to the change; this provision, however, shall not prevent the city council from
acting on its own initiative in any case or at any time provided in this section.