CODE OF ORDINANCES OF THE CITY OF WEBSTER CITY, IOWA 
____________ 
Published in 2019 by Order of the City Council 
____________ 

> 
CITY OFFICIALS 
____________ 
John Hawkins 
Mayor 
____________ 
Matt McKinney 
Brian Miller 
Jim Talbot 
Logan Welch 
City Council 
____________ 
Kent Harfst 
Interim City Manager 
____________ 
Zack Chizek 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Karyl K. Bonjour 
City Clerk 
PREFACE 
    This Code constitutes a Recodification of the general and permanent ordinances of the City of Webster City, Iowa. 
    Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 1996 Code, as supplemented through February 5, 2018, and ordinances subsequently adopted by the city council. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the 2019 Code, as supplemented, and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
    The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
    The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. 
Page Numbering System 
    The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 
CHARTER CHT:1 RELATED LAWS RL:1 SPECIAL ACTS SA:1 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE CHTCT:1 RELATED LAWS COMPARATIVE TABLE RLCT:1 SPECIAL ACTS COMPARATIVE TABLE SACT:1 CODE CD1:1 CODE APPENDIX CDA:1 CODE COMPARATIVE TABLES CCT:1 STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE SLT:1 CHARTER INDEX CHTi:1 CODE INDEX CDi:1  
Index 
    The index has been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the index itself that stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
    A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up to date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
    Keeping this publication up to date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
    This publication was under the direct supervision of Sandra S. Fox, Senior Code Attorney, and Jean B. Lindsay, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
    The publisher is most grateful to Karyl K. Bonjour, City Clerk, and Ann Smith, Secretary to the City Manager/Deputy City Clerk, for their cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the city readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the city's affairs. 
Copyright 
    All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Webster City, Iowa. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Webster City, Iowa. 
(c) Copyrighted material. 
Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Webster City, Iowa. 2019. 
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 1-1. - Title and citation. 
    This Code of Ordinances shall be known and may be cited as the "Code of Ordinances of the City of Webster City, Iowa". This Code may also be referred to by the shortened title, "Webster City Code." 
(Code 1996, § 1.01; Ord. No. 96-1465) 
Sec. 1-2. - Definitions. 
    Where words and phrases used in this Code are defined by state law, such definitions apply to their use in this Code and are adopted by reference. Those definitions so adopted that need further definition or are reiterated, and other words and phrases used herein, have the following meanings, unless specifically defined otherwise in another portion of this Code: 
    Alley. The term "alley" means a public right-of-way, other than a street, affording secondary means of access to abutting property. 
    City. The term "city" means the City of Webster City, Iowa. 
    Clerk. The term "clerk" means the city clerk of Webster City, Iowa, unless otherwise specifically stated. 
    Code or Code of Ordinances. The term "Code" or "Code of Ordinances" means the "Code of Ordinances of the City of Webster City, Iowa." 
    Council. The term "council" means the city council of Webster City, Iowa. 
    County. The term "county" means Hamilton County, Iowa. 
    Measure. The term "measure" means an ordinance, amendment, resolution or motion. 
    Month. The term "month" means a calendar month. 
    Oath. The term "oath" means an affirmation in all cases in which by law an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the terms "affirm" and "affirmed" are equivalent to the terms "swear" and "sworn." 
    Occupant, tenant. The term "occupant" or "tenant," applied to a building or land, includes any person who occupies the whole or a part of such building or land, whether alone or with others. 
    Ordinances. The term "ordinances" means the ordinances of the city as embodied in this Code, ordinances not repealed by the ordinance adopting this Code, and those enacted after the adoption of this Code. 
    Person. The term "person" means an individual, firm, partnership, domestic or foreign corporation, company, association or joint stock association, trust, or other legal entity, and includes a trustee, receiver, assignee, or similar representative thereof, but does not include a governmental body. Whenever the word "person" is used in any section of this Code prescribing a penalty or fine, then as to partnerships or associations, the word shall include the partners or members thereof and, as to corporations, shall include the officers, agents or members thereof who are responsible for any violation of such section. 
    Preceding, following. The terms "preceding" and "following" mean next before and next after, respectively. 
    Property. The term "property" includes real property and tangible and intangible personal property unless clearly indicated otherwise. 
    Property owner. The term "property owner" means a person owning private property in the city as shown by the county auditor's plats of the city. 
    Public place. The term "public place" includes in its meaning, but is not restricted to, any city-owned open place, such as parks and squares. 
    Public property. The term "public property" means any and all property owned by the city or held in the name of the city by any of the departments, commissions or agencies within the city government. 
    Public way. The term "public way" includes any street, alley, boulevard, parkway, highway, sidewalk, or other public thoroughfare. 
    Sidewalk. The term "sidewalk" means that surfaced portion of the street between the edge of the traveled way, surfacing, or curb line and the adjacent property line, intended for the use of pedestrians. 
    State. The term "state" means the State of Iowa. 
    Statutes or state law. The term "statutes" or "state law," means the latest edition of the Code of Iowa, as amended, referred to throughout this Code as the "Code of Iowa," followed by the appropriate section or chapter number. 
    Street or highway. The term "street" or "highway" means the entire width between property lines of every way or place of whatever nature when any part thereof is open to the use of the public, as a matter of right, for purposes of vehicular traffic. 
    Writing, written. The term "writing" or "written" includes printing, typing, lithographing, or other mode of representing words and letters. 
    Year. The term "year" means a calendar year. 
(Code 1996, § 1.02) 
State Law reference- Definitions regarding municipalities, Code of Iowa § 362.2. 
Sec. 1-3. - Rules of construction. 
    In the construction of this Code, the following rules shall be observed, unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the council or repugnant to the context of the provisions: 
    Extension of authority. Whenever an officer or employee is required or authorized to do an act by a provision of this Code, the provision shall be construed as authorizing performance by a regular assistant, subordinate or a duly authorized designee of said officer or employee. 
    Gender. The masculine gender shall include the feminine and neuter genders. 
    Interpretation. All general provisions, terms, phrases, and expressions contained in this Code shall be liberally construed in order that the true intent and meaning of the council may be fully carried out. 
    Joint authority. Words importing joint authority to three or more persons shall be construed as authority to a majority of such persons. 
    May. The term "may" confers a power. 
    Must. The term "must" states a requirement. 
    Number. Unless otherwise specifically provided by law, the singular includes the plural, and the plural includes the singular. 
    Officers, departments, etc. Officers, departments, boards, commissions and employees referred to in this Code shall mean officers, departments, boards, commissions and employees of the city unless otherwise specifically provided. 
    Shall. The term "shall" imposes a duty. 
    Tense. Words used in the present tense include the future. 
(Code 1996, § 1.05) 
Sec. 1-4. - Catchlines and notes. 
    The catchlines of the several sections of this Code, titles, headings (chapter, division, section and subsection), editor's notes, cross references and state law references, unless set out in the body of the section itself, contained in this Code, do not constitute any part of the law, and are intended merely to indicate, explain, supplement or clarify the contents of a section. 
(Code 1996, § 1.07) 
Sec. 1-5. - Provisions considered as continuations of existing ordinances. 
    The provisions appearing in this Code, so far as they are in substance the same as those of ordinances existing at the time of the adoption of this Code, shall be considered as a continuation thereof and not as new enactments. 
Sec. 1-6. - Repeal of ordinance not to affect liabilities. 
    Whenever any ordinance or part of an ordinance shall be repealed or modified, either expressly or by implication, by a subsequent ordinance, the ordinance or part of an ordinance thus repealed or modified shall continue in force until the subsequent ordinance repealing or modifying the prior ordinance shall go into effect unless therein otherwise expressly provided; but no suit, prosecution, proceeding, right, fine or penalty instituted, created, given, secured or accrued under any ordinance previous to its repeal shall in anywise be affected, released or discharged but may be prosecuted, enjoyed and recovered as fully as if such ordinance or provisions had continued in force, unless it shall be therein otherwise expressly provided. 
Sec. 1-7. - Repeal not to revive former ordinance. 
    When an ordinance repealing a former ordinance, clause or provisions shall itself be repealed, such repeal shall not be construed to revive such former ordinance, clause or provision unless it be expressly so provided and such former ordinance, clause or provision is set forth at length. 
Sec. 1-8. - Ordinances saved from repeal. 
    Nothing contained in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall be construed to repeal or otherwise affect the following: 
(1)  Any offense or act committed or done, any penalty or forfeiture incurred, any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of this Code, any prosecution, suit or proceeding pending on, or any judgment rendered prior to, the effective date of this Code; 
(2)  Any ordinance or resolution promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the city, or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the city or any evidence of the city's indebtedness, or any contract or obligation assumed by the city; 
(3)  The annual tax levy; 
(4)  Any ordinance fixing salaries of officers or employees of the city not inconsistent with such Code; 
(5)  Any appropriation ordinance; 
(6)  Any right or franchise granted by the city council to any person, firm or corporation; 
(7)  Any ordinance dedicating, naming, renaming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, accepting, closing, paving, widening, vacating, or in any way affecting any street or public way in the city; 
(8)  Any ordinance establishing and prescribing the street grades of any street in the city; 
(9)  Any ordinance providing for local improvements or assessing taxes therefor; 
(10)  Any ordinance dedicating or accepting any plat or subdivision in the city, or providing regulations for the subdivision of land; 
(11)  Any ordinance establishing traffic or parking regulations for specific streets or portions thereof, or providing for traffic-control devices at specific locations; 
(12)  Any ordinance providing for the boundaries of the city or of any ward or district therein; 
(13)  Any ordinance accepting a grant; 
(14)  Any ordinance annexing property to the city; 
(15)  Any ordinance adopted for purposes which have been consummated; or 
(16)  Any temporary or special ordinance; 
and all such ordinances are recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length herein. 
Sec. 1-9. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)  By contract or by city personnel, supplements to this Code shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the city council. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive permanent and general parts of ordinances passed by the city council or adopted by initiative and referendum during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages which have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)  In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code which have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c)  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier (meaning the person, agency or organization authorized to prepare the supplement) may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified code. For example, the codifier may: 
(1)  Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions; 
(2)  Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement, and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles; 
(3)  Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers; 
(4)  Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections ______ to ______" (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code which embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code); and 
(5)  Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of ordinance sections inserted into the Code; but in no case shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code. 
Sec. 1-10. - Amendments. 
    All ordinances that amend, repeal or in any manner affect this Code shall include proper reference to chapter, section, subsection or paragraph to maintain an orderly codification of ordinances of the city. 
(Code 1996, § 1.06; Ord. No. 97-1498) 
State Law reference- Amendment of city legislation, Code of Iowa § 380.2. 
Sec. 1-11. - Altering Code. 
    It is unlawful for any unauthorized person to change or amend by additions or deletions, any part or portion of this Code, or to insert or delete pages, or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with this Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the city to be misrepresented thereby. 
(Code 1996, § 1.08) 
State Law reference- Falsifying public documents, Code of Iowa § 380.2. 
Sec. 1-12. - Distribution of copies. 
    The official copy of this Code must be kept by the city clerk and should be identified as the "official copy." In addition, the city clerk is responsible for maintaining an accurate and current record of persons having a copy of this Code. Each official, elected or appointed, shall return to the city, upon leaving office, all documents, records and other materials pertaining to the office, including copies of this Code. 
(Code 1996, § 1.09) 
Sec. 1-13. - Severability. 
    If any section, provision or part of this Code is adjudged invalid or unconstitutional, such adjudication will not affect the validity of this Code as a whole or any section, provision or part thereof not adjudged invalid or unconstitutional. 
(Code 1996, § 1.10) 
Sec. 1-14. - Conflict of provisions. 
    If the provisions of different chapters conflict with each other and no rule for resolving conflicts is provided, then the provisions of each individual chapter shall control all issues arising out of the events and persons intended to be governed by that chapter. If the provisions of different sections of the same chapter conflict with each other, the provision which is more specific in its application to the events or persons raising the conflict shall control over the more general provision. If any of the provisions hereof conflict, and the conflict cannot be resolved by application of this section, the more stringent regulation shall apply and the specific provision shall prevail over the general. 
Sec. 1-15. - General penalty. 
    Unless another penalty is expressly provided by this Code for any particular provision, section or chapter, any person failing to perform a duty, or obtain a license required by, or violating any provision of this Code, or any rule or regulation adopted herein by reference shall be guilty of a simple misdemeanor and, upon conviction, be subject to a fine of less than $65.00 and not more than $625.00 or imprisonment not to exceed 30 days. 
(Code 1996, § 1.09) 
State Law reference- Limitations on municipal powers, Code of Iowa § 364.3; maximum fines for misdemeanors, Code of Iowa § 903.1(1)(a). 
Sec. 1-16. - Infractions. 
(a)  Generally. A violation of, or the omission or failure to perform any act or duty required by, this Code or any ordinance or code herein adopted by reference with the exception of those provisions specifically provided under state law as a felony, an aggravated misdemeanor, or a serious misdemeanor, or a simple misdemeanor under the Code of Iowa chs. 687 through 747, is a municipal infraction punishable by civil penalty as provided in this section. 
(b)  Environmental violations. A municipal infraction which is a violation of the Code of Iowa ch. 455B or 459, subchapters II and III, or a violation of a standard established by the city in consultation with the state department of natural resources, or both, may be classified as an environmental violation. However, the provisions of this section shall not be applicable until the city has offered to participate in informal negotiations regarding the violation or to the following specific violations: 
(2)  The discharge of airborne residue from grain, created by the handling, drying or storing of grain, by a person not engaged in the industrial production or manufacturing of grain products or by a person engaged in such industrial production or manufacturing if such discharge occurs from September 15 to January 15. 
(3)  The discharge of airborne residue from grain, created by the handling, drying, or storing of grain by a person engaged in industrial production or manufacturing of grain products, shall not be subject to an ordinance, the violation of which is classified as an environmental violation, if the discharge occurs from September 15 to January 15. 
(c)  Standard civil penalties. Except as otherwise provided in subsection (d) of this section, a municipal infraction is punishable each day the violation occurs or is permitted to exist by the following civil penalties: 
First offense $750.00 Second repeat offense $1,000.00 Additional repeat offenses $1,000.00  
(d)  Special civil penalties. A municipal infraction arising from noncompliance with a pretreatment standard or requirement, referred to in 40 CFR 403.8, by an industrial user is punishable by a penalty of not more $1,000.00 for each day a violation exists or continues. A municipal infraction classified as an environmental violation is punishable by a penalty of not more than $1,000.00 for each occurrence. However, an environmental violation is not subject to such penalty if all of the following conditions are satisfied: 
(1)  The violation results solely from conducting an initial startup, cleaning, repairing, performing scheduled maintenance, testing, or conducting a shutdown of either equipment causing the violation or the equipment designed to reduce or eliminate the violation. 
(2)  The city is notified of the violation within 24 hours from the time that the violation begins. 
(3)  The violation does not continue in existence for more than eight hours. 
(Code 1996, §§ 9.01, 9.02, 9.03) 
State Law reference- Municipal infractions, Code of Iowa § 364.22. 
Sec. 1-17. - Civil citations. 
    Any officer authorized by the city to enforce this Code may issue a civil citation to a person who commits a municipal infraction. The citation may be served by personal service as provided in Rule of Civil Procedure 56.1, by certified mail addressed to the defendant at defendant's last-known mailing address, return receipt requested, or by publication in the manner as provided in Rule of Civil Procedure 60 and subject to the conditions of Rule of Civil Procedure 60.1. A copy of the citation shall be retained by the issuing officer, and one copy shall be sent to the clerk of the district court. The citation shall serve as notification that a civil offense has been committed and shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The name and address of the defendant. 
(2)  The name or description of the infraction attested to by the officer issuing the citation. 
(3)  The location and time of the infraction. 
(4)  The amount of civil penalty to be assessed or the alternative relief sought, or both. 
(5)  The manner, location, and time in which the penalty may be paid. 
(6)  The time and place of court appearance. 
(7)  The penalty for failure to appear in court. 
(Code 1996, § 9.04) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Iowa § 364.22. 
Sec. 1-18. - Alternative relief. 
    Seeking a civil penalty as authorized in this chapter does not preclude the city from seeking alternative relief from the court in the same action. Such alternative relief may include, but is not limited to, an order for abatement or injunctive relief. 
(Code 1996, § 9.05) 
State Law reference- Municipal infractions, Code of Iowa § 364.22. 
Sec. 1-19. - Criminal penalties. 
    Nothing in this chapter does not preclude a peace officer from issuing a criminal citation for a violation of this Code or any other regulation if criminal penalties are also provided for the violation, nor does it preclude or limit the authority of the city to enforce the provisions of this Code by criminal sanctions or other lawful means. 
(Code 1996, § 9.06) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Iowa § 364.22. 
Sec. 1-20. - Indemnity arising from issuance of city permits or licenses. 
(a)  The applicant for any permit or license under this Code, by making such application, assumes and agrees to pay for all injury to or death of any person, and all loss of or damage to property including all costs and expenses incident thereto, arising from or related to, directly, indirectly or remotely, the issuance of the permit or license, or the doing of anything thereunder, or the failure of such applicant, or the agents, employees or servants of such applicant, to abide by or comply with any of the provisions of this Code or the terms and conditions of such permit or license, 
(b)  The applicant, by making such application, forever agrees to indemnify the city and its officers, agents and employees, and agrees to save them harmless from any claims, demands, lawsuits or liability whatsoever for any loss, damage, injury or death, including all costs and expenses incident thereto, by reason of the foregoing. This section shall apply even though acts or omissions of the city, or its officers, agents and employees, may have caused or contributed to such damage, injury or death. This section shall apply even though the city, or its officers, agents and employees, may have knowledge of any act, omission or condition which caused or contributed to such loss, damage, injury or death. 
(c)  The provisions of this section shall be deemed to be a part of any permit or license issued under this Code or any other ordinance of the city whether expressly recited therein or not. 
(Code 1996, § 1.04) 
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 2-1. - City charter. 
    Ordinance No. 1003 adopting a charter for the city was passed and approved by the council on November 20, 1972, and published on November 30, 1972. A copy of the charter and adopting ordinance is available in the office of the city clerk. 
Sec. 2-2. - Form of government. 
    The form of government of the city is the council manager-at-large form of government. 
(Code 1996, §§ 2.02, 2.04, 2.05) 
State Law reference- Organization of city government, Code of Iowa ch. 372; council-manager-at-large form of government, Code of Iowa § 372.6. 
Sec. 2-3. - Corporate limits. 
    The corporate limits of the city are described as follows: 
Commencing at the SW corner of the SE 1/4 SE 1/4 of section 36-89-26; thence north to the NW corner of the NE 1/4 SE 1/4 of section 36-89-26; thence east on the quarter section line to the center of section 32-89-25; thence north to the NW corner of the SW 1/4 NE 1/4 of section 32-89-25; thence east to the NE corner of the SW 1/4 NE 1/4 of section 32-89-25; thence south to the SE corner of the SW 1/4 NE 1/4 of section 32-89-25; thence east to the SW corner of the SE 1/4 SE 1/4 NE 1/4 of section 32-89-25; thence north to the NW corner of the S 1/2 SE 1/4 SE 1/4 NE 1/4 of section 32-89-25; thence east to the east line of section 32-89-25; thence north to the NW corner of the SW 1/4 SW 1/4 NW 1/4 of section 33-89-25; thence east to the NE corner of the SW 1/4 SW 1/4 NW 1/4 of section 33-89-25; thence south to the NE corner of the NW 1/4 SW 1/4 SW 1/4 of section 33-89-25; thence east to the centerline of Maple Avenue; thence north along the centerline of Maple Avenue to the east and west centerline of section 33-89-25; thence east to the SE corner of the SW 1/4 NE 1/4 of section 33-89-25; thence north to the NE corner of the SW 1/4 NE 1/4 of section 33-89-25; thence west to the NW corner of the SW 1/4 NE 1/4 of section 33-89-25; thence south along the west line of the SW 1/4 NE 1/4 of section 33-89-25, 693 feet; thence west 550 feet; thence southwesterly to a point on the east and west centerline of section 33-89-25, said point being 726.00 feet west of the center of section 33-8'9-25; thence west to the SW corner of the SE 1/4 NW 1/4 of section 33-89-25; thence north to the NW corner of the NE 1/4 NW 1/4 of section 33-89-25; thence east to the NW corner of section 34-89-25; thence south to the SW corner of the NW 1/4 NW 1/4 of section 34-89-25; thence east to the SW corner of the NW 1/4 NE 1/4 of section 34-89-25; thence north to the NW corner of the NW 1/4 NE 1/4 of section 34-89-25; thence east to the NE corner of the NW 1/4 NE 1/4 of section 34-89-25; thence south to the NW corner of the SE 1/4 SE of section 34-89-25; thence east along the north line of the SE 1/4 of the SE 1/4 of section 34-89-25 383 feet; thence south 738.58 feet; thence north 89 degrees 53"30' east 50 feet; thence north 89 degrees 47"00' east 583.22 feet; thence north 444 feet; thence east 300 feet to the east line of the SE 1/4 SE 1/4 of section 34-89-25; thence south on the east line of the SE 1/4 SE 1/4 747 feet to the north right-of-way line of the Chicago Central and Pacific Railroad; thence in a southwesterly direction along the north right-of-way line of the Chicago Central and Pacific Railroad to the west line of the SE 1/4 SE 1/4 of section 34-89-25; thence south to the SE corner of the SW 1/4 SE 1/4 of section 34-89-25; thence south along previously mentioned line, extended, to the south line of the NE 1/4 NE 1/4 of section 5-88-25; thence west to the SE corner of the NE 1/4 NE 1/4 of section 6-88-25; thence south to the SE corner of section 6-88-25; thence east to the NE corner of the NW 1/4 of the NW 1/4 of section 8-88-25; thence south on the east line of the NW 1/4 of the NW 1/4 of section 8-88-25 to the centerline of the Boone River; thence in a northeasterly direction along the centerline of the Boone River to its intersection with the north line of section 8-88-25; thence east along the north line of the NE 1/4 of the NW 1/4 to a point on the centerline of the Boone River; thence southwesterly along the centerline of the Boone River to the south line of the NE 1/4 of section 18-88-25; thence west to the center of section 18-88-25; thence south along the west line of the SE 1/4 of said section 18 to the easterly right-of-way of Iowa Highway 17; thence southeasterly along the said easterly right-of-way to the south line of the NW 1/4 SE 1/4 of said section 18; thence westerly on the said south line of the NW 1/4 SE 1/4 of section 18 to the westerly right-of-way of Iowa Highway 17; thence northerly along the said westerly right-of-way of Iowa Highway 17 to the southeast corner of county auditor's Parcel Letter "C" of section 18-88-25, also being the southerly right-of-way line of Virginia Parkway; thence southwesterly 98.62 feet along the south line of said Parcel Letter "C" also being the southerly right-of-way line of Virginia Parkway; thence southwesterly 79.05 feet along the south line of said Parcel Letter 'C', also being the southerly right-of-way line of Virginia Parkway to the west line of the SE 1/4 of said section 18; thence southwesterly to the northeast corner of Lot 8 of Gourley's Minor Subdivision; ; thence south along a line parallel with and 25 feet west of the east line of the SW 1/4 of said section 18 to a point 100 feet north of the south line of said section 18; thence west along a line parallel with and 100 feet north of the south line of the SE 1/4 SW 1/4 of said section 18 a distance of 675 feet; thence south to the south line of the SE 1/4 SW 1/4 of said section 18; thence west along said south line to the SW corner of the SE 1/4 SW 1/4 of said section 18; thence west along the south line of the SW 1/4 SW 1/4 of said section 18 to the centerline of the Boone River; thence northeasterly along the centerline of the Boone River to the west right-of-way of Iowa Highway 17; thence northwesterly along the westerly right-of-way of said Highway to a point 140 feet north of the south line of the SE 1/4 NW 1/4 of said section 18; thence west along a line parallel with and 140 feet north of the south line of said SE 1/4 NW 1/4 to the west line of said SE 1/4 NW 1/4 thence south along said west line to the south line of said SE 1/4 NW 1/4 thence west along the said south line to the SW corner of the NW 1/4 of said section 18; thence north along the west line of the NW 1/4 of said section 18 to the SE corner of section 12-88-26; thence west to the SW corner of section 12-88-26; thence north to a point 319.13 feet north of the NE corner of the SE 1/4 NE of section 11-88-26; thence west 383 feet to a point 319.13 feet north of the north line of the SE 1/4 NE 1/4 of section 11-88-26; thence south to a point 165 feet south and 383 feet west of the NE corner of the SE 1/4 NE 1/4 of section 11-88-26; thence west to a point on the west line of the SE 1/4 NE 1/4 of section 11-88-26; thence south to the SE corner of the SW 1/4 NE 1/4 of section 11-88-26; thence west to the SW corner of the NE 1/4 of section 11-88-26; thence south to the SE corner of the NE 1/4 SW 1/4 of section 11-88-26; thence west to the SW corner of the NE 1/4 SW 1/4 of section 11-88-26; thence north to the NW corner of the NE 1/4 SW 1/4 of section 11-88-26; thence east to a point 104.35 feet west of the center of section 11-88-26; thence northeasterly to a point on the west line of the NE 1/4 of section 11-88-26, said point being a point 104.35 feet north of the center of section 11-88-26; thence north to a point 247' south of the center of section 2-88-26; thence west 671' along a line 247' south of and parallel to the centerline of section 2-88-26; thence north to a point on east west centerline of said section, said point being 671' west of the center of said section 2-88-26; thence west on the centerline to the west line of section 2-88-26; thence continuing west on the centerline of section 3-88-26 to a point directly south of the point of beginning; thence north to the point of beginning. 
(Code 1996, § 3.01) 
Sec. 2-4. - City council precincts. 
    The city shall be divided into precincts as required by the Code of Iowa ch. 49 in the following manner: 
(1)  The first precinct in the city shall consist of that portion of the city bounded by a line commencing at the intersection of the south corporate boundary and Inkpaduta Avenue, northward to the northern terminus of Aldrich Drive, continuing northwesterly and northeasterly along census blocks 190799603003035 and 190799603003036 to Des Moines Street, thence northward to Ohio Street, thence westward to Grove Street, thence northward to Elm Street, thence westward to Funk Street, thence northward to Division Street, thence eastward to River Street, thence southward to Bank Street, thence eastward along Bank Street and Dubuque Street to Bell Avenue, thence southward to Buxton Drive, thence eastward to the east corporate boundary, thence beginning southward following the corporate boundary to the point of beginning. 
(2)  The second precinct in the city of the city shall consist of that portion of the city of the city bounded by a line commencing at the point the west corporate boundary of the city intersects 220th Street, thence eastward to 2nd Street, thence southward and eastward to West Avenue, thence southward to 1st Street, thence eastward to Beach Street, thence southward to Division Street, thence eastward to Funk Street, thence southward to Elm Street, thence eastward to Grove Street, thence southward to Ohio Street, thence eastward to Des Moines Street, thence southward to the southern terminus of Des Moines Street, continuing southwesterly and southeasterly along census blocks 190799603003036 and 190799603003035 to Aldrich Drive, thence southward to the south corporate boundary, thence beginning westward following the corporate boundary to the point of beginning. 
(3)  The third precinct in the city shall consist of that portion of the city of the city bounded by a line commencing at the intersection of the west corporate boundary and 220th Street, thence eastward to 2nd Street, thence southward and eastward to West Avenue, thence southward to 1st Street, thence eastward to Beach Street, thence southward to Division Street, thence eastward to River Street, thence southward to Bank Street, thence eastward along Bank Street and Dubuque Street to Bell Avenue, thence southward to Buxton Drive, thence eastward to the east corporate boundary, thence beginning northward following the corporate boundary to the point of beginning. 
(4)  The third precinct in the city of the city shall also contain that unincorporated portion of Cass Township in Hamilton County surrounded by the corporate boundaries of the city of the city on all sides and by Kendall Young Road on the north and west sides. 
(Code 1996, § 3.02) 
Sec. 2-5. - Nominations for elective city offices; successful candidates. 
(a)  Purpose; state law applicable. The purpose of this chapter is to designate the method by which candidates for elective municipal offices in the city shall be nominated and elected. All candidates for elective municipal offices shall be nominated under the provisions of the Code of Iowa ch. 45. 
(b)  Methods of nomination. Nominations for elective municipal offices of the city may be made by nomination papers signed by not less than 25 eligible electors, residents of the city. The name of a candidate placed upon the ballot by any other method than by petition shall not be added by petition for the same office. 
(c)  Petition form. Each eligible elector shall add to the signature the elector's residence address, and date of signing. The person whose nomination is proposed by the petition may not sign it. Before filing the petition, there shall be endorsed thereon or attached thereto an affidavit executed by the candidate, which affidavit shall contain: 
(1)  Name and residence. The name and residence (including street and number, if any) of the nominee, and the office to which nominated. 
(2)  Name on ballot. A request that the name of the nominee be printed upon the official ballot for the election. 
(3)  Eligibility. A statement that the nominee is eligible to be a candidate for the office and if elected will qualify as such officer. 
(4)  Organization statement. A statement, in the form required by state law, concerning the organization of the candidate's committee. 
Such petition when so verified shall be known as a nomination paper. 
(d)  Filing, presumption, withdrawals and objections. The time and place of filing nomination petitions, the presumption of validity thereof, the right of a candidate so nominated to withdraw and the effect of such withdrawal, and the right to object to the legal sufficiency of such petitions, or to the eligibility of the candidate, shall be governed by the appropriate provisions of the Code of Iowa ch. 44 
(e)  Successful candidates. The candidates who receive the greatest number of votes for each office on the ballot are elected, to the extent necessary to fill the positions open. 
(Code 1996, §§ 6.041-6.07) 
State Law reference- Nominations by petition, Code of Iowa ch. 45; persons elected in city elections, Code of Iowa § 376.8. 
Sec. 2-6. - Keeping of city books and records; transfer to successor. 
    All city books and records required to be kept by law or ordinance shall be open to inspection by the public upon request, unless some other provisions of law expressly limit such right or require such records to be kept confidential. Each officer shall transfer to the officer's successor in office all books, papers, records, documents and property in the officer's custody and appertaining to that office. 
(Code 1996, §§ 5.04, 5.05) 
State Law reference- Examination of public records, Code of Iowa ch. 22; right to examine, Code of Iowa § 22.2. 
Sec. 2-7. - Open meetings. 
    All meetings of the council, any board or commission, or any multimembered body formally and directly created by any of the foregoing bodies shall be held in open session unless closed sessions are expressly permitted by law. Notice of any such meeting shall be provided pursuant to law. 
(Code 1996, § 5.06) 
State Law reference- Meeting of governmental bodies, Code of Iowa § 21.3; public notice of meetings, Code of Iowa § 21.4; closed sessions, Code of Iowa § 21.5. 
Sec. 2-8. - City seal. 
    The city seal shall be in the custody of the clerk and shall be attached by the clerk to all transcripts, orders and certificates which it may be necessary or proper to authenticate. The city seal shall be circular in form, in the center of which shall be the words "INCORPORATED 1874" and around the margin the words "SEAL OF WEBSTER CITY, IOWA." 
(Code 1996, § 20.13; Ord. No. 2014-1771) 
Secs. 2-9-2-34. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CITY COUNCIL 

Sec. 2-35. - Powers and duties. 
    The powers and duties of the council include, but are not limited to, the following: 
(1)  General. All powers of the city are vested in the council except as otherwise provided by law or ordinance. 
(2)  Wards. By ordinance, the council may divide the city into wards based upon population, change the boundaries of wards, eliminate wards, or create new wards. 
(3)  Fiscal authority. The council shall apportion and appropriate all funds, and audit and allow all bills, accounts, payrolls and claims, and order payment thereof. It shall make all assessments for the cost of street improvements, sidewalks, sewers and other work, improvement, or repairs which may be specially assessed. 
(4)  Public improvements. The council shall make all orders for the doing of work, or the making or construction of any improvements, bridges, or buildings. 
(5)  Contracts. The council shall make or authorize the making of all contracts, and no contract shall bind or be obligatory upon the city unless either made by ordinance or resolution approved by the council, or reduced to writing and approved by the council, or expressly authorized by ordinance or resolution adopted by the council. 
(6)  Employees. The council shall authorize, by resolution, the number, duties, and compensation of employees not otherwise provided for by this Code or state law. 
(7)  Records. The council shall require the clerk to maintain records of its proceedings. 
(Code 1996, § 17.02) 
State Law reference- Powers and duties of cities, Code of Iowa ch. 364; city councils, Code of Iowa § 372.13. 
Sec. 2-36. - Manner of exercising power. 
    The council shall exercise a power only by the passage of a motion, a resolution, an amendment, or an ordinance in the following manner: 
(1)  Action by council. Passage of an ordinance, amendment, or resolution requires a majority vote of all of the members of the council. Passage of a motion requires a majority vote of a quorum of the council. A resolution must be passed to spend public funds in excess of $25,000.00 on any one project, or to accept public improvements and facilities upon their completion. Each council member's vote on a measure must be recorded. A measure which fails to receive sufficient votes for passage shall be considered defeated. 
(2)  Measures become effective. Measures passed by the council become effective in one of the following ways: 
a.  An ordinance or amendment signed by the mayor becomes effective when the ordinance or a summary of the ordinance is published, unless a subsequent effective date is provided within the ordinance or amendment. 
b.  A resolution signed by the mayor becomes effective immediately upon signing. 
c.  A motion becomes effective immediately upon passage of the motion by the council. 
d.  If the mayor takes no action on an ordinance, amendment or resolution, a resolution becomes effective 14 days after the date of passage, and an ordinance or amendment becomes law when the ordinance or a summary of the ordinance is published, but not sooner than 14 days after the date of passage, unless a subsequent effective date is provided within the ordinance or amendment. 
The term "all of the members of the council" means all of the seats of the council, including a vacant seat and a seat where the member is absent, but does not include a seat where the council member declines to vote by reason of a conflict of interest. 
(Code 1996, § 17.03; Ord. No. 97-1498) 
State Law reference- City legislation, Code of Iowa ch. 380. 
Sec. 2-37. - Meetings. 
(a)  Regular meetings. The time and place of the regular meetings of the council shall be fixed by resolution of the council. 
(b)  Special meetings. Special meetings shall be held upon call of the mayor or upon the written request of a majority of the members of the council submitted to the clerk. Notice of a special meeting shall specify the date, time, place and subject of the meeting and such notice shall be given personally or left at the usual place of residence of each member of the council. A record of the service of notice shall be maintained by the clerk. 
(c)  Quorum. A majority of all council members is a quorum. 
(d)  Rules of procedure. The council shall determine the rules of its own proceedings by resolution and the clerk shall keep such rules on file for public inspection. 
(e)  Compelling attendance. Any three members of the council can compel the attendance of the absent members at any regular, adjourned, or duly called meeting, by serving a written notice upon the absent members to attend at once. 
(f)  Notice of meetings. The council shall give reasonable notice, as defined by state law, of the time, date and place of each meeting, and its tentative agenda. 
(g)  Meetings open. All meetings shall be held in open session unless closed sessions are held as expressly permitted by state law. 
(h)  Minutes. Minutes shall be kept of all meetings showing the date, time and place, the members present, and the action taken at each meeting. The minutes shall show the results of each vote taken and the vote of each member present shall be made public. 
(i)  Closed session. A closed session may be held only by affirmative vote of either two-thirds of the council or all of the members present at the meeting and in accordance with the Code of Iowa ch. 21. 
(j)  Cameras and recorders. The public may use cameras or recording devices at any open session. 
(k)  Electronic meetings. A meeting may be conducted by electronic means only in circumstances where such a meeting in person is impossible or impractical and then only in compliance with the provisions of the Code of Iowa ch. 21. 
(Code 1996, § 17.04) 
Sec. 2-38. - Number and term of council members. 
    The council consists of five council members elected at-large for overlapping terms of four years. The mayor is elected by the council for a term of two years from among the members of the council. 
(Code 1996, § 17.01) 
State Law reference- Council-manager-at-large form of government, Code of Iowa § 372.6; terms of city officers, Code of Iowa § 376.2. 
Sec. 2-39. - Member duties and responsibilities. 
(a)  All council members have the following duties and responsibilities: 
(1)  Members shall fully participate in council meetings and other public forums while demonstrating respect, kindness, consideration and courtesy to others. 
(2)  Members shall serve as a model of leadership and civility to the community. 
(3)  Members shall inspire public confidence and trust in city government. 
(4)  Members shall demonstrate honesty and integrity in every action and statement. 
(5)  Council members have the duty and responsibility to respect the confidentiality of information concerning the city-operated utilities, city property, city personnel or any other affairs of the city. Any disclosure of confidential information, knowingly and intentionally provided without proper legal authorization by a council member, shall be considered as harmful to the city and grounds for removal of the council member from office. 
(6)  In order to ensure independence and impartiality on behalf of the common good, members shall not use their official positions to influence government decisions to which they have a material financial interest or where they have an organizational responsibility or personal relationship, which may give the appearance of a conflict of interest. In accordance with the law, no member shall participate in the disposition of any matter in which he is interested. For purposes herein, the term "interested" includes any direct or indirect financial or personal interest held by a member or member of his family. Before any matter is heard, a member having an interest shall state it and withdraw from participation, or he may disclose the facts involved and request a determination made by the council of whether a conflict of interest exists. 
(7)  Members shall not take any special advantage of services or opportunities for personal gain, by virtue of their public office that is not available to the public in general. They shall refrain from accepting any gifts, favors or promises of future benefits which might compromise their independence of judgment or action or give the appearance of being compromised. 
(8)  Council members shall not use public resources not available to the public in general, including city staff time, the offices of city clerk and city attorney, equipment, supplies or facilities, for private gain or personal purposes. 
(9)  In keeping with their role as stewards of the public interest, members of council shall not appear on behalf of the private interests of third parties before the council or any board, commission or proceeding of the city. 
(10)  Members shall publicly share substantive information that is relevant to a matter under consideration by the council, which they may have received from sources outside of the public decision-making process. 
(b)  The conduct of any council member who intentionally or repeatedly fails to perform any of the above stated duties and responsibilities or combination thereof, shall be considered as willful or habitual neglect or refusal to perform the duties and responsibilities of the office and grounds for removal of the council member from office. 
(Code 1996, § 17.07) 
Sec. 2-40. - Compensation. 
    The salary of each council member shall be $50.00 for each meeting of the council attended, payable in January unless other payment arrangements are made by resolution of the council. 
(Code 1996, § 17.06) 
Sec. 2-41. - Removal from office. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Confidential information includes any matter discussed or disclosed to council members in closed session under the Code of Iowa § 21.5 and all records deemed confidential under the Code of Iowa § 22.7. 
    Willful misconduct or malfeasance in office means a breach of a council responsibility committed knowingly and with the intent to do harm to the city. 
    Willful or habitual neglect or refusal to perform the duties and responsibilities of the office means a willful disregard or a continuous neglect of the council's responsibilities. 
(b)  Grounds for dismissal. Any council person may be removed from office, which would be grounds for an equitable action for removal in the state district court under the Code of Iowa ch. 66. Any council person may be removed from office on the following grounds: 
(1)  Willful or habitual neglect or refusal to perform the duties and responsibilities of the office. 
(2)  Willful misconduct or malfeasance in office. 
(3)  Corruption. 
(4)  Extortion. 
(5)  Conviction of a felony. 
(6)  Intoxication or upon conviction of being intoxicated. 
(7)  Violations of campaign finance provisions under the Code of Iowa ch. 68A. 
(8)  Disclosure of confidential information. 
(c)  Petition for removal. A petition for removal of a council member from office may be brought before the city council by five registered voters of the city or before the state district court under the provisions of the Code of Iowa ch. 66. Said petition shall set forth the grounds for removal. 
(d)  Hearing before the city council. Upon the filing of a written petition with the city alleging grounds for the removal of a council member, the city council shall set a date for hearing and provide notice to the council member at least 20 days prior to hearing. The city council shall conduct a hearing under established rules for procedure and make a finding as to whether the facts justify a council member's removal from office. Removal of a council member can be made only by a two-thirds vote of the entire council. Proceedings before the city council shall not be a bar to proceedings in the state district court under the Code of Iowa ch. 66. 
(Code 1996, § 17.07) 
State Law reference- Removal from office, Code of Iowa ch. 66. 
Secs. 2-42-2-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-71. - Appointments. 
(a)  Officials. The council shall appoint the following officials and prescribe their powers, duties, compensation, and term of office: 
(1)  City clerk. 
(2)  Deputy city clerk. 
(3)  City attorney. 
(4)  City manager. 
(b)  Boards and commissions. The council shall appoint the following boards and commissions and prescribe their powers, duties and terms of office: 
(1)  Airport zoning board of adjustment. 
(2)  Hotel-motel tax board. 
(3)  Park and recreation advisory board. 
(4)  Senior citizen advisory board. 
(5)  Zoning board of adjustment. 
(6)  Airport commission. 
(7)  Airport zoning commission. 
(8)  Civil service commission. 
(9)  Planning and zoning commission. 
(10)  Youth advisory commission. 
(11)  Wilson Brewer Historic Park committee. 
(12)  Traffic study committee. 
(Code 1996, § 17.05) 
Sec. 2-72. - Terms of appointed officers. 
    The terms of all appointed officers that are not otherwise fixed by law or ordinance shall be one year, such terms expiring at the time of the organizational meeting of the council in January of each year and the appointment of a successor. 
(Code 1996, § 5.08) 
Sec. 2-73. - Compensation of elected officers. 
    By ordinance, the council shall prescribe the compensation of the mayor, council members, and other elected city officers, but a change in the compensation of the mayor does not become effective during the term in which the change is adopted, and the council shall not adopt such an ordinance changing the compensation of any elected officer during the months of November and December in the year of a regular city election. A change in the compensation of council members becomes effective for all council members at the beginning of the term of the council members elected at the election next following the change in compensation. 
(Code 1996, § 17.02) 
Sec. 2-74. - Oaths. 
(a)  Qualify for office. All elected officers and the following appointed officers shall qualify for office by taking the prescribed oath and by giving, when required, a bond: 
(1)  City manager. 
(2)  City clerk. 
(3)  Deputy city clerk. 
(4)  Peace officers. 
(5)  Fire chief. 
The oath shall be taken, and bond provided, after being certified as elected but not later than noon of the first day which is not a Sunday or a legal holiday in January of the first year of the term for which the officer was elected. 
(b)  Prescribed oath. The prescribed oath is: "I, (name), do solemnly swear that I will support the constitution of the United States and the Constitution of the State of Iowa, and that I will faithfully and impartially, to the best of my ability, discharge all duties of the office of (name of office) in Webster City as now or hereafter required by law." 
(c)  Officers empowered to administer oaths. The following are empowered to administer oaths and to take affirmations in any matter pertaining to the business of their respective office: 
(1)  Mayor. 
(2)  City clerk. 
(3)  Members of all boards, commissions or bodies created by law. 
(Code 1996, § 5.01) 
State Law reference- Administrations of oaths, Code of Iowa ch. 63A; form of oath for civil officers, Code of Iowa § 63.10; time and manner of qualifying for municipal office, Code of Iowa § 63.1. 
Sec. 2-75. - Surety bonds; required. 
    The council shall provide by resolution for a surety bond or blanket position bond running to the city and covering the mayor, clerk, treasurer and such other officers and employees as may be necessary and advisable. Bonds shall be approved by the council and, after approval and proper record, shall be filed with the clerk. The clerk shall keep a book, to be known as the "record of official bonds" in which shall be recorded the official bonds of all city officers, elective or appointive. 
(Code 1996, § 5.02) 
State Law reference- Official and private bonds, Code of Iowa ch. 64; bonds of municipal officers, Code of Iowa § 64.13; approval of bonds, Code of Iowa § 64.19; filing of bonds and oaths, Code of Iowa § 64.23; recording bonds, Code of Iowa § 64.24. 
Sec. 2-76. - Powers and duties of city and officers. 
(a)  Each municipal officer shall exercise the powers and perform the duties prescribed by state law and this Code or as otherwise directed by the council unless contrary to state law or city charter. 
(b)  The city may, except as expressly limited by the state constitution, and if not inconsistent with state law, exercise any power and perform any function it deems appropriate to protect and preserve the rights, privileges and property of the city and of its residents, and preserve and improve the peace, safety, health, welfare, comfort and convenience of its residents and each and every provision of this Code shall be deemed to be in the exercise of the foregoing powers and the performance of the foregoing functions. 
(Code 1996, §§ 1.03, 2.03, 5.03) 
State Law reference- Powers and duties of cities, Code of Iowa § 364.1; city councils, Code of Iowa § 372.13. 
Sec. 2-77. - Resignations. 
    An elected officer who wishes to resign may do so by submitting a resignation in writing to the clerk so that it shall be properly recorded and considered. A person who resigns from an elective office is not eligible for appointment to the same office during the time for which the person was elected, if during that time the compensation of the office has been increased. 
(Code 1996, § 5.09) 
Sec. 2-78. - Removal of appointed officers and employees. 
    Except as otherwise provided by state or city law, all persons appointed to city office or employment may be removed by the officer or body making the appointment, but every such removal shall be by written order. The order shall give the reasons, be filed in the office of the clerk, and a copy shall be sent by certified mail to the person removed, who, upon request filed with the clerk within 30 days after the date of mailing the copy, shall be granted a public hearing before the council on all issues connected with the removal. The hearing shall be held within 30 days after the date the request is filed, unless the person removed requests a later date. 
(Code 1996, § 5.10) 
State Law reference- Removal of appointees, Code of Iowa § 372.15. 
Sec. 2-79. - Vacancies. 
    A vacancy in an elective city office during a term of office shall be filled, at the council's option, by one of the two following procedures: 
(1)  Appointment. By appointment following public notice by the remaining members of the council within 40 days after the vacancy occurs, except that if the remaining members do not constitute a quorum of the full membership, or if a petition is filed requesting an election, the council shall call a special election as provided by law. 
(2)  Election. By a special election held to fill the office for the remaining balance of the unexpired term as provided by law. 
(Code 1996, § 5.11) 
Sec. 2-80. - Conflicts of interest. 
    A city officer or employee shall not have an interest, direct or indirect, in any contract or job of work or material or the profits thereof or services to be furnished or performed for the city, unless expressly permitted by law. A contract entered into in violation of this section is void. The provisions of this section do not apply to: 
(1)  Compensation of officers. The payment of lawful compensation of a city officer or employee holding more than one city office or position, the holding of which is not incompatible with another public office or is not prohibited by law. 
(2)  Investment of funds. The designation of a bank or trust company as a depository, paying agent, or for investment of funds. 
(3)  Stock interests. Contracts in which a city officer or employee has an interest solely by reason of employment, or a stock interest of the kind described in subsection (8) of this section, or both, if the contract is for professional services not customarily awarded by competitive bid, if the remuneration of employment will not be directly affected as a result of the contract, and if the duties of employment do not directly involve the procurement or preparation of any part of the contract. 
(4)  Newspaper. The designation of an official newspaper. 
(5)  Existing contracts. A contract in which a city officer or employee has an interest if the contract was made before the time the officer or employee was elected or appointed, but the contract may not be renewed. 
(6)  Volunteers. Contracts with volunteer firefighters or civil defense volunteers. 
(7)  Corporations. A contract with a corporation in which a city officer or employee has an interest by reason of stock holdings when less than five percent of the outstanding stock of the corporation is owned or controlled directly or indirectly by the officer or employee or the spouse or immediate family of such officer or employee. 
(8)  Contracts. Contracts made by the city upon competitive bid in writing, publicly invited and opened. 
(9)  Cumulative purchases. Contracts not otherwise permitted by this section, for the purchase of goods or services which benefit a city officer or employee, if the purchases benefiting that officer or employee do not exceed a cumulative total purchase price of $1,500.00 in a fiscal year. 
(10)  Frachise agreements. Franchise agreements between a city and a utility and contracts entered into by a city for the provision of essential city utility services. 
(11)  Contracts. A contract that is a bond, note, or other obligation of the city and the contract is not acquired directly from the city, but is acquired in a transaction with a third party who may or may not be the original underwriter, purchaser, or obligee of the contract. 
(Code 1996, § 5.07) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Iowa § 362.5. 
Sec. 2-81. - Gifts. 
    The following regulations shall apply to the soliciting, acceptance or reporting of gifts by city officials or employees: 
(1)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Immediate family members mean the spouse and minor children of a person required to file reports pursuant to this section. 
    Official or employee means an official or employee of the city and includes a firm of which such official or employee is a partner and a corporation of which such official or employee holds ten percent or more of the stock either directly or indirectly. 
(2)  Gifts solicited or accepted. A city official or employee or such person's immediate family members shall not, directly or indirectly, solicit, accept, or receive from any one donor in any one calendar day a gift or series of gifts having a value of $3.00 or more. 
(3)  Reporting of gifts. An official or employee of the city, or that person's immediate family members, and any donor of a gift to any such official, employee, or immediate family members shall disclose in writing on a report form developed by the secretary of state, the nature, amount, date, name of the donor, and name of the donee with respect to any gift which exceed $15.00 in cumulative value in any one calendar day. However, food and beverages provided for immediate consumption in the presence of the donor need not be reported. By the 15th day of the month following the month in which the gift has been received, a copy of the report disclosing the gift or gifts shall be filed with the city clerk and in the office of the county auditor. 
(Code 1996, § 5.13) 
State Law reference- Government ethics and lobbying, Code of Iowa ch. 68B; gifts accepted and received, Code of Iowa § 68B.22. 
Sec. 2-82. - Unlawful use of city property. 
    No officer or employee of the city shall use or permit any other person to use the property owned by the city for any private purpose and for personal gain, to the detriment of the city. 
(Code 1996, § 5.12) 
State Law reference- Nonfelonious misconduct in office, Code of Iowa § 721.2; government ethics and lobbying, Code of Iowa ch. 68B. 
Secs. 2-83-2-107. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - MAYOR[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Mayor, Code of Iowa § 380.5. 

Sec. 2-108. - Term of office. 
    The mayor shall be elected by the council from among its members for a term of two years. 
(Code 1996, § 15.01) 
Sec. 2-109. - Powers and duties. 
    The powers and duties of the mayor shall be as follows: 
(1)  Presiding officer. Act as presiding officer at all regular and special council meetings. The mayor pro tem shall serve in this capacity in the mayor's absence. 
(2)  Special meetings. Call special meetings of the council when the mayor deems such meetings necessary to the interests of the city. 
(3)  Negotiations. Represent the city in all negotiations properly entered into in accordance with law or ordinance. The mayor shall not represent the city where this duty is specifically delegated to another officer by law, ordinance, or council direction. 
(4)  Contracts. Whenever authorized by the council, sign contracts on behalf of the city. 
(5)  Licenses and permits. Sign all licenses and permits which have been granted by the council, except those designated by law or ordinance to be issued by another municipal officer. 
(6)  Absentee officer. Make appropriate provision that duties of any absentee officer be carried on during such absence. 
(Code 1996, § 15.02) 
Sec. 2-110. - Compensation. 
    The salary of the mayor shall be $60.00 per council meeting attended. Said compensation shall be paid the following January unless other payment arrangements are made by resolution of the council. 
(Code 1996, § 15.04) 
Sec. 2-111. - Voting and veto. 
    The mayor is a member of the council and may vote on all matters before the council. The mayor may not veto an ordinance, amendment or resolution. 
(Code 1996, § 15.05; Ord. No. 97-1498) 
Secs. 2-112-2-135. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - MAYOR PRO TEM 

Sec. 2-136. - Term of office. 
    The mayor pro tem shall be elected by the council, from among its members, for a term of two years. 
(Code 1996, § 16.01) 
Sec. 2-137. - Vice-president of council. 
    The mayor pro tem shall be vice-president of the council. 
(Code 1996, § 16.02) 
Sec. 2-138. - Powers and duties. 
    Except for the limitations otherwise provided herein, the mayor pro tem shall perform the duties of the mayor in cases of absence or inability of the mayor to perform such duties. In the exercise of the duties of the office the mayor pro tem shall not have power to employ, or discharge from employment, officers or employees that the mayor has the power to appoint, employ or discharge without the approval of the council. 
(Code 1996, § 16.03) 
Sec. 2-139. - Voting rights. 
    The mayor pro tem shall have the right to vote as a member of the council. 
(Code 1996, § 16.04) 
Sec. 2-140. - Compensation. 
    If the mayor pro tem performs the duties of the mayor during the mayor's absence or disability for a continuous period of 15 days or more, the mayor pro tem may be paid for that period the compensation as determined by the council, based upon the mayor pro tem's performance of the mayor's duties and upon the compensation of the mayor. 
(Code 1996, § 16.05) 
Secs. 2-141-2-163. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - CITY CLERK 

Sec. 2-164. - Appointment and compensation. 
    At its first meeting in January each year between election years when no new council members take office, the council shall appoint by majority vote a city clerk and a deputy city clerk to serve for a term of two years. The clerk shall receive such compensation as established by resolution of the council. 
(Code 1996, § 20.01; Ord. No. 2014-1771) 
Sec. 2-165. - General powers and duties. 
    The clerk, or in the clerk's absence or inability to act, the deputy clerk, has the powers and duties as provided in this division, this Code and state law. 
(Code 1996, § 20.02; Ord. No. 2014-1771) 
Sec. 2-166. - Recording and publication of meeting minutes. 
    The clerk shall attend all regular and special council meetings and within 15 days following a regular or special meeting shall cause the minutes of the proceedings thereof to be published. Such publication shall include a list of all claims allowed, a summary of all receipts and the gross amount of the claims approved. 
(Code 1996, § 20.03; Ord. No. 2014-1771) 
Sec. 2-167. - Recording measures. 
    The clerk shall promptly record each measure considered by the council and record a statement with the measure, where applicable. 
(Code 1996, § 20.04; Ord. No. 2014-1771) 
Sec. 2-168. - Publication. 
    The clerk shall cause to be published all ordinances, enactments, proceedings and official notices requiring publication as follows: 
(1)  Time. If notice of an election, hearing, or other official action is required by this Code or state law, the notice must be published at least once, not less than four or more than 20 days before the date of the election, hearing or other action, unless otherwise provided by law. 
(2)  Manner of publication. A publication required by this Code or by state law must be in a newspaper published at least once weekly and having general circulation in the city. 
(Code 1996, § 20.05; Ord. No. 2014-1771) 
Sec. 2-169. - Authentication. 
    The clerk shall authenticate all measures except motions with the clerk's signature, certifying the time and manner of publication when required. The clerk's certification is presumptive evidence of the facts stated therein. 
(Code 1996, § 20.06; Ord. No. 2014-1771) 
Sec. 2-170. - Certify measures. 
    The clerk shall certify all measures establishing any zoning district, building lines, or fire limits and a plat showing the district, lines, or limits to the county recorder containing the affected parts of the city. 
(Code 1996, § 20.07; Ord. No. 2014-1771) 
Sec. 2-171. - Records. 
    The clerk shall maintain the specified city records in the following manner: 
(1)  Ordinances and codes. Maintain copies of all effective city ordinances and codes for public use. 
(2)  Custody. Have custody and be responsible for the safekeeping of all writings or documents in which the city is a party in interest unless otherwise specifically directed by law or ordinance. 
(3)  Maintenance. Maintain all city records according to the record retention schedule adopted by the city council. 
(4)  Provide copy. Furnish upon request to any municipal officer a copy of any record, paper or public document under the clerk's control when it may be necessary to such officer in the discharge of such officer's duty; furnish a copy to any citizen when requested upon payment of the fee set by council resolution; under the direction of the mayor or other authorized officer, affix the seal of the city to those public documents or instruments which by ordinance of this Code are required to be attested by the affixing of the seal. 
(5)  Filing of communications. Keep and file all communications and petitions directed to the council or to the city generally. The clerk shall endorse thereon the action of the council taken upon matters considered in such communications and petitions. 
(Code 1996, § 20.08; Ord. No. 2014-1771) 
Sec. 2-172. - Attendance at meetings. 
    At the direction of the council, the clerk shall attend meetings of committees, boards and commissions. The clerk shall record and preserve a correct record of the proceedings of such meetings. 
(Code 1996, § 20.09; Ord. No. 2014-1771) 
Sec. 2-173. - Issue licenses and permits. 
    The clerk shall issue or revoke licenses and permits when authorized by this Code and keep a record of licenses and permits issued which shall show date of issuance, license or permit number, official receipt number, name of person to whom issued, term of license or permit and purpose for which issued. 
(Code 1996, § 20.10; Ord. No. 2014-1771) 
Sec. 2-174. - Notify appointees. 
    The clerk shall inform all persons appointed by the mayor or council to offices in the city government of their position and the time at which they shall assume the duties of their office. 
(Code 1996, § 20.11; Ord. No. 2014-1771) 
Sec. 2-175. - Elections. 
    The clerk shall perform the following duties relating to elections and nominations: 
(1)  In the event of a change in the method of nomination process used by the city, certify to the commissioner of elections the type of nomination process to be used by the city no later than 77 days before the date of the regular city election. 
(2)  Accept the nomination petition of a candidate for a city office for filing if on its face it appears to have the requisite number of signatures and is timely filed. 
(3)  Designate other employees or officials of the city who are ordinarily available to accept nomination papers if the clerk is not readily available during normal working hours. 
(4)  Note upon each petition and affidavit accepted for filing the date and time that the petition was filed. 
(5)  Deliver all nomination petitions, together with the text of any public measure being submitted by the council to the electorate, to the county commissioner of elections not later than 5:00 p.m. on the day following the last day on which nomination petitions can be filed. 
(Code 1996, § 20.12; Ord. No. 2014-1771) 
Sec. 2-176. - City funds. 
    The clerk shall perform the following duties relating to city funds: 
(1)  Deposits. All moneys belonging to the city shall be promptly deposited by the city clerk or authorized alternate in depositories selected by the council in amounts not exceeding the authorized depository limitation established by the council or invested in accordance with state law, as authorized by the Code of Iowa § 384.21. 
(2)  Checks. Checks shall be prenumbered and signed by an authorized signer following council approval, except as otherwise provided in this section. 
(3)  Immediate payment authorized. The council may by resolution authorize the clerk to issue checks for immediate payment of amounts due, which if not paid promptly would result in loss of discount, penalty for late payment or additional interest cost. Any such payments made shall be reported to the council for review and approval with and in the same manner as other claims at the next meeting following such payment. The resolution authorizing immediate payment shall specify the type of payment so authorized and may include, but is not limited to, payment of utility bills, contractual obligations, payroll and bond principal and interest. 
(Code 1996, § 20.14; Ord. No. 2014-1771) 
Secs. 2-177-2-205. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - CITY ATTORNEY 

Sec. 2-206. - Appointment and compensation. 
    The city attorney shall be appointed by majority vote of the council and receive such compensation as shall be established by resolution. 
(Code 1996, § 22.01) 
Sec. 2-207. - Attorney for city. 
    The city attorney shall act as attorney for the city in all matters affecting the city's interest and appear on behalf of the city before any court, tribunal, commission or board. The city attorney shall prosecute or defend all actions and proceedings when so requested by the mayor or council. 
(Code 1996, § 22.02) 
Sec. 2-208. - Power of attorney. 
    The city attorney shall sign the name of the city to all appeal bonds and to all other bonds or papers of any kind that may be essential to the prosecution of any cause in court, and when so signed the city shall be bound upon the same. 
(Code 1996, § 22.03) 
Sec. 2-209. - Ordinance preparation. 
    The city attorney shall prepare those ordinances which the council may desire and direct to be prepared and report to the council upon all such ordinances before their final passage by the council and publication. 
(Code 1996, § 22.04) 
Sec. 2-210. - Review and comment. 
    The city attorney shall, upon request, make a written report to the council and interested department heads, giving an opinion on all contracts, documents, resolutions, or ordinances submitted to or coming under the city attorney's notice. 
(Code 1996, § 22.05) 
Sec. 2-211. - Opinion on contracts. 
    The city attorney shall, at the request of the council, offer a written opinion on and recommend alterations pertaining to contracts involving the city before they become binding upon the city. 
(Code 1996, § 22.06) 
Sec. 2-212. - Provide legal opinion. 
    The city attorney shall, upon request, give a legal opinion in writing upon all questions of law relating to city matters submitted by the council, any board or the head of any city department. 
(Code 1996, § 22.07) 
Sec. 2-213. - Attendance at council meetings. 
    The city attorney shall attend meetings of the council at the request of the mayor or council. 
(Code 1996, § 22.08) 
Sec. 2-214. - Prepare documents. 
    The city attorney shall, upon request, formulate drafts for contracts, forms and other writings which may be required for the use of the city. 
(Code 1996, § 22.09) 
Sec. 2-215. - Other services. 
    In addition, the city attorney shall perform the following extraordinary legal services on behalf of the city: 
(1)  Counsel with city officials, including council members, the city manager, clerk and department heads and provide legal advice in regard to city matters. 
(2)  Assist bond attorneys retained by the city in the assimilation and preparation of materials for the issuance of municipal bonds. 
(3)  Provide any other legal services required or requested in the administration of the governmental functions of the city. 
(Code 1996, § 22.10) 
Sec. 2-216. - Payment for other services. 
    The city attorney shall be compensated for all services not established by resolution as provided in section 2-206 at the current rate established by the firm with which the city attorney is associated. 
(Code 1996, § 22.11) 
Sec. 2-217. - Assistants. 
    The city attorney shall have the authority to retain such assistants as may be necessary to carry out the legal functions of municipal government, subject to approval of the council. Specifically authorized and approved as assistants to the city attorney are those attorneys with whom the city attorney is associated with or in partnership with in the private practice of law. When the city attorney deems it necessary because of an apparent conflict of interest, the city attorney shall have authority, subject to approval of the council, to retain any qualified attorney as a special assistant to carry out the legal functions of municipal government. 
(Code 1996, § 22.12) 
Secs. 2-218-2-242. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - CITY MANAGER[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- City manager in council-manager-at-large form of government, Code of Iowa § 372.6. 

Sec. 2-243. - Appointment; compensation. 
    The city manager is the chief administrative officer of the city. As soon as possible after the beginning of the new term following each city election, the council shall appoint a manager. Such appointment must be made on the basis of qualifications and not on the basis of political affiliation. The manager shall receive such annual salary as the council shall from time to time determine by resolution. 
(Code 1996, §§ 23.01, 23.02, 23.03) 
Sec. 2-244. - Powers and duties. 
    The city manager shall exercise the following powers and duties: 
(1)  City law. Supervise enforcement and execution of the city laws. 
(2)  Council meetings. Attend all meetings of the council unless excused by the mayor. 
(3)  Recommendations. Recommend to the council such measures as deemed necessary or expedient for the good government and welfare of the city. 
(4)  Supervision. Supervise the official conduct of all officers of the city appointed by the manager, and take active control of the police, fire, and engineering departments of the city. 
(5)  Contracts. Supervise the performance of all contracts for work to be done for the city; make all purchases of material and supplies; and see that such material and supplies are received and are of the quality and character called for by the contract. 
(6)  Property and improvements. Supervise the construction, improvement, repair, maintenance and management of all city property, capital improvements and undertakings of the city, including the making and preservation of all surveys, maps, plans, drawings, specifications and estimates for capital improvements, except property, improvements and undertakings managed by a utility board of trustees. 
(7)  Cooperation. Cooperate with any administrative agency or utility board of trustees. 
(8)  Streets and solid waste. Be responsible for the cleaning, sprinkling and lighting of streets, alleys and public places, and the collection and disposal of waste. 
(9)  Licenses and permits. Provide for and cause records to be kept of the issuance and revocation of licenses and permits authorized by city law. 
(10)  Advise council. Keep the council fully advised of the financial and other conditions of the city, and of its future needs. 
(11)  Budget. Cause to be prepared and submit to the council annually the required budgets. 
(12)  Accounting. Conduct the business affairs of the city and cause accurate records to be kept by modern and efficient accounting methods. 
(13)  Financial reports. Make to the council not later than the tenth day or second council meeting of each month an itemized financial report in writing, showing the receipts and disbursements for the preceding month. Copies of financial reports must be available at the clerk's office for public distribution. 
(14)  Other. Perform other duties at the council's direction. 
(Code 1996, § 23.04) 
Sec. 2-245. - Additional powers. 
    The city manager may: 
(1)  Administrative assistants. Appoint administrative assistants, with the approval of the council. 
(2)  Employees. Employ, reclassify or discharge all employees and fix their compensation, subject to civil service provisions and the provisions of the Veterans Preference Law, Code of Iowa ch. 35C, except the city clerk, deputy city clerk and city attorney. 
(3)  Appointments. Make all appointments not otherwise provided for. 
(4)  Dismissal of employees. Suspend or discharge summarily any officer, appointee or employee that the manager has power to appoint or employ, subject, however to civil service provisions and the provisions of the Veterans Preference Law, Code of Iowa ch. 35C. 
(5)  Investigations. Summarily and without notice investigate the affairs and conduct of any department, agency, officer, or employee under the manager's supervision, and compel the production of evidence and attendance of witnesses. 
(6)  Oaths. Administer oaths. 
(Code 1996, § 23.05) 
Sec. 2-246. - Council relations. 
    The city manager shall not take part in any election for council member, other than by casting a vote, and shall not appoint a council member to city office or employment or shall a council member accept such appointment. 
(Code 1996, § 23.06) 
Sec. 2-247. - Bid lettings. 
    In all cases where bids or proposals are required to be taken in connection with any public improvements, the city manager or, in the absence of the city manager, the clerk is hereby designated the duty of conducting and presiding over such public meeting or hearing as may be required by the council in connection with receiving and opening such bids and announcing the results, and upon announcing the results, the city manager or, in the absence of city manager, the clerk shall thereupon report the results of such bidding together with recommendations thereon, to the council at its next meeting. 
(Code 1996, § 23.07) 
Sec. 2-248. - Appointments of officials. 
    The manager shall appoint the following officials, subject to council approval: 
(1)  Administrative services director. 
(2)  Finance director. 
(3)  Fire chief. 
(4)  Planning and zoning director. 
(5)  Police chief. 
(6)  Public grounds/parks and recreation director. 
(7)  Public works director. 
(Code 1996, § 23.08) 
Secs. 2-249-2-274. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - BOARDS, COMMISSIONS AND SIMILAR BODIES 

Sec. 2-275. - Applicability. 
    This article applies to all boards and commissions appointed or authorized by the city and shall equally apply to their members appointed or approved by the city council. 
(Code 1996, § 24.01; Ord. No. 2010-1720) 
Sec. 2-276. - Grounds for removal from office. 
    All board and commission members appointed or approved by the city council shall be subject to the requirements set forth in section 2-39. Furthermore, missing any two of three consecutive meetings without an excused absence by the chairperson of the board or commission shall also be grounds for removal from office. 
(Code 1996, § 24.02; Ord. No. 2010-1720) 
Sec. 2-277. - Gender balance. 
    All boards and commissions covered by this article shall be subject to the requirements of the Code of Iowa § 69.16A as currently required by law or may hereafter be amended, regarding the gender balance of all appointed boards and commissions in this state. 
(Code 1996, § 24.03; Ord. No. 2010-1720) 
Secs. 2-278-2-302. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - MUNICIPAL BUILDINGS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 2-303-2-322. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - WEAPONS IN CITY BUILDINGS 

Sec. 2-323. - Purpose. 
    Municipal buildings owned, leased or occupied by the city, specifically city hall, 400 Second Street, and Fuller Hall, 625 Bank Street, are declared to be firearm/weapon free zones. It is unlawful for any person, except a peace officer, a member of the U.S. Armed Forces or the National Guard or other person in the service of the United States, or correctional officer serving in an institution under authority of the state department of corrections to carry, possess or display any weapon or firearm within city hall or Fuller Hall. 
(Code 1996, § 53.01) 
Sec. 2-324. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Firearm means any device or instrument designed to propel, or used in the propulsion of any bullet, shot, pellet, slug, BB, dart or other projectile by the action of an explosive, or by mechanical or electrical means, within or connected to the device or instrument. The term "firearm" includes pistols, revolvers, derringers, handguns, pellet guns, rifles, shotguns, muskets or other devices which can expel or may be readily converted to expel any form of projectile so as to strike an object or person. 
    Municipal building means any structure, dwelling, garage or shelter owned, leased or otherwise occupied by the city, and used for any municipal or public purposes by the city. 
    Weapon means and includes all weapons as defined or described in the Code of Iowa §§ 724.1 and 724.4. 
(Code 1996, § 53.02) 
Sec. 2-325. - Detection. 
    Persons entering any municipal building may, upon probable cause to believe they are carrying or in possession of a weapon or firearm, be subject to metal detection testing or personal search. 
(Code 1996, § 53.03) 
Sec. 2-326. - Penalties. 
    Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision, section or paragraph of this chapter shall be subject to the general penalty provisions of this Code for simple misdemeanor violations. 
(Code 1996, § 53.04) 
Chapter 4 - AIRPORT 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 4-1. - Airport commission. 
(a)  Established. The city has established an airport administrative agency pursuant to the Code of Iowa ch. 392, known as the airport commission, consisting of three resident voters of the city. 
(b)  Member appointment and term; vacancies; compensation. Members shall be appointed by the city council for four years and terms to commence on June 1. Vacancies shall be filled by appointment of the council to fill out the unexpired term for which the appointment was made, the method of which shall be determined by the city council. Members of the commission shall serve without compensation. 
(c)  Officers. The commission shall elect from its own members a chairperson and secretary who shall serve for such term as the commission shall determine. 
(d)  Powers and duties. The commission shall have and exercise the following powers and duties. 
(1)  General. The commission has all the powers in relation to airports granted to cities under state law except powers to sell the airport. 
(2)  Budget. The commission shall annually certify the amount of tax to be levied for airport purposes, and upon such certification the council may include all or a portion of the amount in its budget. 
(3)  Funds. All funds derived from taxation or otherwise for airport purposes is under the full and absolute control of the commission for the purposes prescribed by law and shall be deposited with the treasurer or city clerk to the credit of the commission and shall be disbursed only on the written orders of the airport commission, including the payment of all indebtedness arising from the acquisition and construction of airports and the maintenance, operation, and extension thereof. 
(4)  Annual report. The commission shall immediately after the close of each municipal fiscal year, file with the city clerk a detailed and audited written report of all money received and disbursed by the commission during the fiscal year and shall publish a summary thereof in an official newspaper. 
(5)  Other. The commission shall have such other powers and perform such other duties as may be provided by the council, the ordinances of the city or state law. 
(Code 1996, §§ 195.01-195.07) 
State Law reference- Establishment of city administrative agencies by ordinance, Code of Iowa § 392.1; no restriction on administrative agencies, Code of Iowa § 330.23. 
Sec. 4-2. - Airport zoning commission. 
(a)  Established; members; chair. There shall be an airport zoning commission consisting of five members, two of whom shall be selected by the county board of supervisors, two of whom shall be selected by the city council, and one of whom, to act as chairperson, selected by a majority vote of the members selected by the county and city. 
(b)  Term of office. The terms of the members of the commission shall be six years. The terms of the city council-appointed members shall commence on June 1. 
(c)  Removal; vacancies. Members of the commission may be removed for cause by the appointing authority upon written charges after public hearing. Vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired term of any member whose office becomes vacant in the same manner in which the member was selected. 
(d)  Powers and duties. The commission shall have all the powers, duties and authority vested in it by state law, now in effect or which may be hereafter enacted, and by resolution and ordinances of the county and city. 
(Code 1996, §§ 197.01-197.04) 
State Law reference- Procedure for adopting zoning regulations and zoning commission, Code of Iowa § 329.9. 
Sec. 4-3. - Board of adjustment. 
(a)  There is hereby created a board of adjustment to have and exercise the following powers: 
(1)  To hear and decide appeals from any order, requirement, decision, or determination made by the city planning department in the enforcement of this chapter; 
(2)  To hear and decide special exceptions to the terms of this chapter upon which such board of adjustment under such regulations may be required to pass; and 
(3)  To hear and decide specific variances. 
(b)  The board of adjustment shall consist of five members appointed by the city council/board of supervisors and each shall serve for a term of five years until a successor is duly appointed and qualified. Terms of city appointments shall commence on June 1. 
(c)  The board of adjustment shall adopt rules for its governance and in harmony with the provisions of this chapter. Meetings of the board of adjustment shall be held at the call of the chairperson and at such other times as the board of adjustment may determine. The chairperson or, in the absence of the chairperson, the acting chairperson may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses. All hearings of the board of adjustment shall be public. The board of adjustment shall keep minutes of its proceedings showing the vote of each member upon each question; or if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact, and shall keep records of its examinations and other official actions, all of which shall immediately be filed in the office of the city planning department and on due cause shown. 
(d)  The board of adjustment shall make written findings of facts and conclusions of law giving the facts upon which it acted and its legal conclusions from such facts upon which it acted and its legal conclusions from such facts in reversing, affirming, or modifying any order, requirement, decision, or determination which comes before it under the provisions of this chapter. 
(e)  The concurring vote of a majority of the members of the board of adjustment shall be sufficient to reverse any order, requirement, decision, or determination of the city planning department or decide in favor of the applicant on any matter upon which it is required to pass under this chapter, or to effect variation to this chapter. 
(Code 1996, § 196.09) 
Secs. 4-4-4-24. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ZONING REGULATIONS 

Sec. 4-25. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Administrative authority means the department charged with enforcement of city zoning regulations. 
    Airport elevation means the highest point of an airport's usable landing area measured in feet from sea level as shown on the registered landing area certificate issued by state department of transportation. 
    Approach surface means a surface longitudinally centered on the extended runway centerline, extending outward and upward from the end of the primary surface and at the same slope as the approach zone height limitation slope set forth in section 4-27. In plan, the perimeter of the approach surface coincides with the perimeter of the approach zone. 
    Board of adjustment means a board consisting of five members appointed by the city council pursuant to the Code of Iowa § 329.12. 
    Conical surface means a surface extending outward and upward from the periphery of the horizontal surface at a slope of 20 to one for a horizontal distance of 4,000 feet. 
    Hazard to air navigation means an obstruction determined to have a substantial adverse effect on the safe and efficient utilization of the navigable airspace. 
    Height means the purpose of determining the height limits in all zones set forth in this article and shown on the zoning map, the datum shall be mean sea level elevation unless otherwise specified. 
    Horizontal surface means a horizontal plane 150 feet above the established airport elevation, the perimeter of which, in plan, coincides with the perimeter of the horizontal zone. 
    Nonconforming use means any pre-existing structure, object of natural growth, or use of land which is inconsistent with the provisions of this article or an amendment thereto. 
    Nonprecision instrument runway means a runway having an existing instrument approach procedure utilizing air navigation facilities with only horizontal guidance, or area type navigation equipment, for which a straight-in nonprecision instrument approach procedure has been approved or planned. 
    Obstruction means any structure, growth, or other object, including a mobile object, which exceeds a limiting height set forth in section 4-27. 
    Primary surface means a surface longitudinally centered on a runway. When the runway has a specially prepared hard surface, the primary surface extends 200 feet beyond each end of that runway; for military runways or when the runway has no specially prepared hard surface, or planned hard surface, the primary surface ends at each end of that runway. The width of the primary surface is set forth in section 4-26. The elevation of any point on the primary surface is the same as the elevation of the nearest point on the runway centerline. 
    Runway means a defined area on an airport prepared for landing and take-off of aircraft along its length. 
    Structure means an object, including a mobile object, constructed or installed by man, including, but without limitation, buildings, towers, cranes, smokestacks, earth formation, and overhead transmission lines. 
    Transitional surfaces mean these surfaces which extend outward at 90-degree angles to the runway centerline and the runway centerline extended at a slope of seven feet horizontally for each foot vertically from the sides of the primary and approach surfaces to where they intersect the horizontal and conical surfaces. Transitional surfaces for those portions of the precision approach surfaces which project through and beyond the limits of the conical surface, extend a distance of 5,000 feet measured horizontally from the edge of the approach surface and at 90-degree angles to the extended runway centerline. 
    Tree means any object of natural growth. 
    Utility runway means a runway that is constructed for and intended to be used by propeller driven aircraft of 12,500 pounds maximum gross weight and less. 
    Visual runway means a runway intended solely for the operation of aircraft using visual approach procedures. 
(Code 1996, § 196.02) 
Sec. 4-26. - Airport zones. 
    In order to carry out the provisions of this article, there are hereby created and established certain zones which include all of the land lying beneath the approach surfaces, transitional surfaces, horizontal surfaces, and conical surfaces as they apply to the city's airport. Such zones are shown on the city municipal airport official zoning map which is attached to this article and made a part hereof. An area located in more than one of the following zones is considered to be only in the zone with the more restrictive height limitation. The various zones are hereby established and defined as follows: 
(1)  Utility runway visual approach zone. The inner edge of this approach zone coincides with the width of the primary surface and is 250 feet wide. The approach zone expands outward uniformly to a width of 1,250 feet at a horizontal distance of 5,000 feet from the primary surface. Its centerline is the continuation of the centerline of the runway. 
(2)  Utility runway nonprecision instrument approach zone. The inner edge of this approach zone coincides with the width of the primary surface and is 500 feet wide. The approach zone expands outward uniformly to a width of 2,000 feet at a horizontal distance 5,000 feet from the primary surface. Its centerline is the continuation of the runway. 
(3)  Horizontal zone. The horizontal zone is established by swinging arcs of 5,000 feet radii from the center of each end of the primary surface of each runway and connecting the adjacent arcs by drawing lines tangent to those arcs. The horizontal zone does not include the approach and transitional zones. 
(4)  Conical zone. The conical zone is established as the periphery of the horizontal zone area that commences and extends outward therefrom a horizontal distance of 4,000 feet. 
(Code 1996, § 196.03) 
Sec. 4-27. - Airport zone height limitations. 
    Except as otherwise provided in this article, no structure shall be erected, altered, or maintained, and no tree shall be allowed to grow in any zone created by this article to a height in excess of the applicable height limit herein established for such zone. Such applicable height limitations are hereby established for each of the zones in question as follows: 
(1)  Utility runway visual approach zone. Slopes 20 feet outward for each foot upward beginning at the end of and at the same elevation as the primary surface and extending to a horizontal distance of 5,000 feet along the extended runway centerline. 
(2)  Utility runway nonprecision instrument approach zone. Slopes 20 feet outward for each foot upward beginning at the end of and at the same elevation as the primary surface and extending to a horizontal distance of 5,000 feet along the extended runway centerline. 
(3)  Transitional zones. Slopes seven feet outward for each foot upward beginning at the sides of and at the same elevation as the primary surface and the approach surface and extending to a height of 150 feet above the airport elevation which is 1,117 feet above mean sea level. In addition to the foregoing, there are established height limits sloping seven feet outward for each foot upward beginning at the sides of and at the same elevation as the approach surface and extending to where they intersect the conical surface. Where the precision instrument runway approach zone projects beyond the conical zone, there are established height limits sloping seven feet outward for each foot upward beginning at the sides of and at the same elevation as the approach surface and extending a horizontal distance of 5,000 feet measured at 90-degree angles to the extended runway centerline. 
(4)  Horizontal zone. Established at 150 feet above the airport elevation or at a height of 1,267 feet above mean sea level. 
(5)  Conical zone. Slopes 20 feet outward for each foot upward beginning at the periphery of the horizontal zone and at 150 feet above the airport elevation and extending to a height of 350 feet above the airport elevation. 
(6)  Prohibited sructures. No structure shall be erected in the county that raises the published minimum descent altitude or decision height for an instrument approach to any runway, nor shall any structure be erected that causes the minimum obstruction clearance altitude or minimum en route altitude to be increased on any federal airway in the county. 
(7)  Excepted height limitations. Nothing in this article shall be construed as prohibiting the construction or maintenance of any structure, or growth of any tree to a height up to 50 feet above the surface of the land. 
(Code 1996, § 196.04) 
Sec. 4-28. - Use restrictions. 
    Notwithstanding any other provisions of this article, no use may be made of land or water within any zone established by this article in such a manner as to create electrical interference with navigational signals or radio communication between the airport and aircraft, make it difficult for pilots to distinguish between airport lights and others, result in glare in the eyes of pilots using the airport, impair visibility in the vicinity of the airport, create bird strike hazards, or otherwise in any way endanger or interfere with the landing, takeoff, or maneuvering of aircraft intending to use the airport. 
(Code 1996, § 196.05) 
Sec. 4-29. - Nonconforming uses. 
(a)  Regulations not retroactive. The regulations prescribed by this article shall not be construed to require the removal, lowering or other change or alteration of any structure or tree not conforming to these regulations as of the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived, or otherwise interfere with the continuance of a nonconforming use. Nothing contained herein shall require any change in the construction, alteration, or intended use of any structure, the construction or alteration of which was begun prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived and is diligently prosecuted. 
(b)  Marking and lighting. Notwithstanding the preceding provision of this section, the owner of any existing nonconforming structure or tree is hereby required to permit the installation, operation, and maintenance thereon of such markers and lights as shall be deemed necessary by the city planning department to indicate to the operators of aircraft in the vicinity of the airport the presence of such airport obstruction. Such markers and lights shall be installed, operated, and maintained at the expense of the property owners. 
(Code 1996, § 196.06) 
Sec. 4-30. - Permits. 
(a)  Future uses. Except as specifically provided in subsections (a), (b), and (c) of this section, no material change shall be made in the use of land, no structure shall be erected or otherwise established, and no tree shall be planted in any zone hereby created unless a permit therefor shall have been applied for and granted. Each application for a permit shall indicate the purpose for which the permit is desired, with sufficient particularity to permit it to be determined whether the resulting use, structure, or tree would conform to the regulations herein prescribed. If such determination is in the affirmative, the permit shall be granted. No permit for a use inconsistent with the provisions of this article shall be granted unless a variance has been approved in accordance with subsection (d) of this section. 
(1)  In the area lying within the limits of the horizontal zone and conical zone, no permit shall be required for any tree or structure less than 75 feet of vertical height above the ground, except when, because of terrain, land contour, or topographic features, such tree or structure would extend above the height limits prescribed for such zones. 
(2)  In areas lying within the limits of the approach zones, but at a horizontal distance of not less than 4,200 feet from each end of the runway, no permit shall be required for any tree or structure less than 75 feet of vertical height above the ground, except when such tree or structure would extend above the height limit prescribed for such approach zones. 
(3)  In the area lying within the limits of the transition zones beyond the perimeter of the horizontal zone, no permit shall be required for any tree or structure less than 75 feet of vertical height above the ground, except when such tree or structure, because of terrain, land contour, or topographic features, would extend above the height limit prescribed for such transition zones. 
Nothing contained in any of the foregoing exceptions shall be construed as permitting or intending to permit any construction, or alteration of any structure, or growth of any tree in excess of any of the height limits established by this article except as set forth in section 4-27(7). 
(b)  Existing uses. No permit shall be granted that would allow the establishment or creation of an obstruction or permit a nonconforming use, structure, or tree to become a greater hazard to air navigation than it was on the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived or any amendments thereto or than it is when the application for a permit is made. Except as indicated, all applications for such a permit shall be granted. 
(c)  Nonconforming uses abandoned or destroyed. Whenever the city planning department determines that a nonconforming tree or structure has been abandoned or more than 80 percent torn down, physically deteriorated, or decayed, no permit shall be granted that would allow such structure or tree to exceed the applicable height limit or otherwise deviate from the zoning regulations. 
(d)  Variances. Any person desiring to erect or increase the height of any structure, or permit the growth of any tree, or use property, not in accordance with the regulations prescribed in this article, may apply to the board of adjustment for a variance from such regulations. The application for variance shall be accompanied by a determination from the Federal Aviation Administration as to the effect of the proposal on the operation of air navigation facilities and the safe, efficient use of variable airspace. Such variances shall be allowed where it is duly found that a literal application or enforcement of the regulations will result in unnecessary hardship and relief granted, will not create a hazard to air navigation, will do substantial justice, and will be in accordance with the spirit of this article. Additionally, no application for variance to the requirements of this article may be considered by the board of adjustment unless a copy of the application has been furnished to the city planning department for advice as to the aeronautical effects of the variance. If the city planning department does not respond to the application within 15 days after receipt, the board of adjustment may act on its own to grant or deny the application. 
(e)  Obstruction marking and lighting. Any permit or variance granted may, if such action is deemed advisable to effectuate the purpose of this article and be reasonable in the circumstances, be so conditioned as to require the owner of the structure or tree in question to install, operate, and maintain, at the owner's expense, such markings and lights as may be necessary. If deemed proper by the board of adjustment, this condition may be modified to require the owner to permit the lessee at its own expense, to install, operate, and maintain the necessary markings and lights. 
(Code 1996, § 196.07) 
Sec. 4-31. - Enforcement. 
    It shall be the duty of the city planning department to administer and enforce the regulations prescribed herein. Applications for permits and variances shall be made to the city planning department upon a form published for that purpose. Applications required by this article to be submitted to the city planning department shall be promptly considered and granted or denied. Application for action by the board of adjustment shall be forthwith transmitted by the city planning department. 
(Code 1996, § 196.08) 
Sec. 4-32. - Appeals. 
(a)  Any person aggrieved, or any taxpayer affected, by any decision of the city planning department made in the administration of this article, may appeal to the board of adjustment. 
(b)  All appeals hereunder must be taken within a reasonable time as provided by the rules of the board of adjustment, by filing with the city planning department a notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof. The city planning department shall forthwith transmit to the board of adjustment all the papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken. 
(c)  An appeal shall stay all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from unless the city planning department certifies to the board of adjustment, after the notice of appeal has been filed with it, that by reason of the facts stated in the certificate a stay would in the opinion of city planning department cause imminent peril to life or property. In such case, proceedings shall not be stayed except by the order of the board of adjustment on notice to the city planning department and on due cause shown. 
(d)  The board of adjustment shall fix a reasonable time for hearing appeals, give public notice and due notice to the parties in interest, and decide the same within a reasonable time. Upon the hearing, any party may appear in person or by agent or by attorney. 
(e)  The board of adjustment may, in conformity with the provisions of this article, reverse or affirm, in whole or in part, or modify the order, requirement, decision, or determination appealed from and may make such order, requirement, decision, or determination as may be appropriate under the circumstances. 
(Code 1996, § 196.10) 
Sec. 4-33. - Judicial review. 
    Any person aggrieved, or any taxpayer affected, by any decision of the board of adjustment, may appeal to the court of record as provided in the Code of Iowa § 414.5. 
(Code 1996, § 196.11) 
Sec. 4-34. - Conflicting regulations. 
    Where there exists a conflict between any of the regulations or limitations prescribed in this article and any other regulations applicable to the same area, whether the conflict is with respect to the height of structures or trees, and the use of land, or any other matter, the more stringent limitation or requirement shall govern and prevail. 
(Code 1996, § 196.13) 
Chapter 6 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 6-1. - Definitions. 
    The definitions of the Code of Iowa § 123.3 shall apply to this chapter. 
(Code 1996, § 145.01) 
State Law reference- Definitions, Code of Iowa § 123.3. 
Sec. 6-2. - General prohibition. 
    It is unlawful to manufacture for sale, sell, offer or keep for sale, possess, or transport alcoholic liquor, wine, or beer except upon terms, conditions, limitations, and restrictions enumerated in state law and this chapter. 
(Code 1996, § 145.02) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Iowa § 123.2. 
Sec. 6-3. - Persons under legal age. 
(a)  A person shall not sell, give, or otherwise supply alcoholic liquor, wine or beer to any person knowing or having reasonable cause to believe that person to be under legal age. 
(b)  A person under legal age shall not purchase or attempt to purchase or individually or jointly have alcoholic liquor, wine or beer in their possession or control; except in the case of liquor, wine or beer given or dispensed to a person under legal age within a private home and with the knowledge, presence and consent of the parent or guardian, for beverage or medicinal purposes or as administered to the person by either a physician or dentist for medicinal purposes and except to the extent that a person under legal age may handle alcoholic beverages, wine, and beer during the regular course of the person's employment by a liquor control licensee, or wine or beer permittee under state laws. 
(c)  A person under legal age shall not misrepresent the person's age for the purpose of purchasing or attempting to purchase any alcoholic beverage, wine or beer from any licensee or permittee. 
(Code 1996, § 145.03) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Iowa § 123.47. 
Sec. 6-4. - Public consumption or intoxication. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Arrest means the same as defined in the Code of Iowa § 804.5 and includes taking into custody pursuant to the Code of Iowa § 232.19. 
    Chemical test means a test of a person's blood, breath, or urine to determine the percentage of alcohol present by a qualified person using devices and methods approved by the commissioner of public safety. 
    Peace officer means the same as defined in of the Code of Iowa § 801.4 
(b)  A person shall not use or consume alcoholic liquor, wine or beer upon the public streets or highways. A person shall not use or consume alcoholic liquor in any public place, except premises covered by a liquor control license. A person shall not possess or consume alcoholic liquors, wine or beer on public school property or while attending any public or private school-related function. A person shall not be intoxicated or simulate intoxication in a public place. A person violating this subsection is guilty of a simple misdemeanor. 
(c)  When a peace officer arrests a person on a charge of public intoxication under this section, the peace officer shall inform the person that the person may have a chemical test administered at the person's own expense. If a device approved by the commissioner of public safety for testing a sample of a person's breath to determine the person's blood alcohol concentration is available, that is the only test that need be offered the person arrested. In a prosecution for public intoxication, evidence of the results of a chemical test performed under this subsection is admissible upon proof of a proper foundation. The percentage of alcohol present in a person's blood, breath, or urine established by the results of a chemical test performed within two hours after the person's arrest on a charge of public intoxication is presumed to be the percentage of alcohol present at the time of arrest. 
(Code 1996, § 145.04) 
State Law reference- Similar provision, Code of Iowa § 123.46. 
Sec. 6-5. - Open container on streets and highways. 
(a)  A driver of a motor vehicle upon a public street or highway in the city shall not possess in the passenger area of the motor vehicle an open or unsealed bottle, can, jar, or other receptacle containing an alcoholic beverage. The term "passenger area" means the area designed to seat the driver and passengers while the motor vehicle is in operation and any area that is readily accessible to the driver or a passenger while in their seating positions, including the glove compartment. 
(b)  An open or unsealed receptacle containing an alcoholic beverage may be transported in the trunk of the motor vehicle. 
(c)  An unsealed receptacle containing an alcoholic beverage may be transported behind the last upright seat of the motor vehicle if the motor vehicle does not have a trunk. 
(d)  A person convicted of a violation of this section is guilty of a simple misdemeanor punishable as a scheduled violation under Code of Iowa § 805.8A(14)(e). A person under the age of 21 years who violates this section is guilty of a violation of Code of Iowa § 123.47. 
(Code 1996, § 145.05) 
Sec. 6-6. - Treatment for intoxicated persons. 
(a)  A person who appears to be intoxicated or incapacitated by a chemical substance in a public place and in need of help may be taken to a licensed treatment facility by a peace officer. If the person refuses the proffered help, the person may be arrested and charged with intoxication. 
(b)  If no licensed treatment facility is readily available the person may be taken to an emergency medical service customarily used for incapacitated persons. 
(c)  The person being taken to a treatment facility is in protective custody and is not under arrest and no entry or other record shall be made to indicate that the person has been arrested or charged with a crime. 
(Code 1996, §§ 145.05, 145.06, 145.07) 
State Law reference- Similar provision, Code of Iowa § 125.34. 
Secs. 6-7-6-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - BEER, LIQUOR, AND WINE PERMITS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Beer provisions, Code of Iowa § 123.122 et seq.; wine provisions, Code of Iowa § 123.171 et seq. 

Sec. 6-31. - License or permit required. 
    It is unlawful for any person to manufacture for sale, sell, offer or keep for sale, possess or transport alcoholic liquor, wine or beer without first securing a liquor control license, wine permit or beer permit in accordance with the provisions of this Code and state law. 
(Code 1996, § 146.01) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Iowa §§ 123.122, 123.171. 
Sec. 6-32. - Nature of license or permit. 
    A liquor control license, wine permit or beer permit is a personal privilege and is revocable for cause. It is not property or is it subject to attachment and execution or alienable or assignable, and it shall cease upon the death of the permittee or licensee. However, the administrator has the discretion to allow the executor or administrator of a permittee or licensee to operate the business of the decedent for a reasonable time not to exceed the expiration date of the permit or license. Every permit or license shall be issued in the name of the applicant and no person holding a permit or license shall allow any other person to use it. 
(Code 1996, § 146.02) 
Sec. 6-33. - Beer permits-Classes. 
    Beer permits shall be classed as follows: 
(1)  Class "B." A class "B" beer permit shall allow the holder to sell beer at retail for consumption on or off the premises. 
(2)  Class "C." A class "C" beer permit shall allow the holder to sell beer at retail for consumption off the premises only. Such sales shall be in original containers only. No class "C" permit shall be issued to any person except the owner or proprietor of a grocery store or pharmacy. 
(Code 1996, § 146.03) 
Sec. 6-34. - Liquor licenses-Classes. 
    Liquor control licenses shall be classed as follows: 
(1)  Class "A." A class "A" liquor control license issued to a club authorizes the holder to purchase alcoholic liquors from class "E" liquor control licensees only, wine only from class "A" wine permittees or class "B" wine permittees who also hold class "E" liquor control licenses, and native wines from native wine manufacturers and to sell liquors, wine, and beer, to bona fide members and their guests by the individual drink for consumption on the premises only. 
(2)  Class "B." A class "B" liquor control license issued to a hotel or motel authorizes the holder to purchase alcoholic liquors from class "E" liquor control licensees only, wine only from class "A" wine permittees or class "B" wine permittees who also hold class "E" liquor control licenses, and native wines from native wine manufacturers and to sell liquors, wine, and beer, to patrons by the individual drink for consumption on the premises only; however, beer may also be sold for consumption off the premises. Each such license shall be effective throughout the premises described in the application. 
(3)  Class "C." A class "C" liquor control license issued to a commercial establishment must be issued in the name of the individual or individuals who actually own the entire business and authorizes the holder or holders to purchase alcoholic liquors from class "E" liquor control licensees only, wine only from class "A" wine permittees or class "B" wine permittees who also hold class "E" liquor control licenses and native wines from native wine manufacturers and to sell liquors, wine, and beer, to patrons by the individual drink for consumption on the premises only; however, beer may also be sold for consumption off the premises. 
(4)  Special Class "C." A special class "C" liquor control license may be issued and authorizes the holder to purchase wine only from class "A" wine permittees or class "B" wine permittees who also hold class "E" liquor control licenses, and to sell wine and beer to patrons by the individual drink for consumption on the premises; however, beer may also be sold for consumption off the premises. The license issued to holders of a special class "C" license shall clearly state on its face that the license is limited. 
(5)  Class "E." A class "E" liquor control license may be issued and authorizes the holder to purchase alcoholic liquor from the alcoholic beverages division of the state department of commerce only and to sell the alcoholic liquor to patrons for consumption off the licensed premises and to other liquor control licensees. A class "E" license shall not be issued to premises at which gasoline is sold. A holder of a class "E" liquor control license may hold other retail liquor control licenses or retail wine or beer permits, but the premises licensed under a class "E" liquor control license shall be separate from other licensed premises, though the separate premises may have a common entrance. However, the holder of a class "E" liquor control license may also hold a class "B" wine or class "C" beer permit or both for the premises licensed under a class "E" liquor control license. 
(6)  Class "B" Wine Permits. A class "B" wine permit allows the holder to sell wine at retail for consumption off the premises. A class "B" wine permittee who also holds a class "E" liquor control license may sell wine to class "A," class "B" and class "C" liquor control licensees in quantities of less than one case of any wine brand but not more than one such sale shall be made to the same liquor control licensee in a 24 hour period and only if the licensed premises of the liquor control licensee is located within the geographic territory of the class "A" wine permittee from which the wine was originally purchased by the class "B" wine permittee. A class "B" wine permittee shall not sell wine to other class "B" wine permittees. 
(Code 1996, § 146.04) 
Sec. 6-35. - Application. 
    A verified application for the original issuance or the renewal of a liquor control license, a beer permit or a wine permit shall be filed at such time, in such number of copies and in such form as the administrator shall prescribe, on forms prescribed by the administrator. 
(Code 1996, § 146.05) 
Sec. 6-36. - License and permit fees; bond filed. 
    The application shall be accompanied by the necessary fee and bond, if required, in accordance with the Iowa Alcoholic Beverage Control Act or regulations thereunder and shall be filed with the council. 
(Code 1996, § 146.06) 
Sec. 6-37. - Conditions. 
    No liquor control license or wine or beer permit shall be approved unless: 
(1)  Character of applicant. The applicant is a person of good moral character and in the case of a club, corporation or partnership, the officers of the club or corporation and the partners of a partnership are of good moral character. 
(2)  Right of entry. The applicant gives consent in writing on the application that members of the fire and police departments and any other city official authorized by state law may enter upon the areas of the premises where alcoholic beverages are stored, served or sold, without warrant during business hours of the applicant, to inspect for violations of the provisions of state law and of this Code. 
(3)  Access to residential or sleeping quarters. No interior access to residential or sleeping quarters is permitted or maintained unless permission is granted by the administrator in the form of a living quarters permit. 
(4)  Location of premises. The premises are located within areas where such businesses are, or hereafter are, permitted by a valid zoning ordinance. 
(5)  Conform to applicable laws. The premises conform to all applicable laws, ordinances, resolutions, and health and fire regulations. 
(6)  Seating capacity. With respect to a class "B" beer permit or a class "C" liquor control license, the premises are, at the time of the application and continue to be, equipped with sufficient tables and seats to accommodate 25 persons at one time. 
(Code 1996, § 146.07) 
Sec. 6-38. - Civil liability. 
    Every liquor control licensee and class "B" beer permittee shall furnish proof of financial responsibility either by the existence of a liability insurance policy or by posting bond in such amount as determined by the division. 
(Code 1996, § 146.08) 
Sec. 6-39. - Separate locations; retail beer and wine sales. 
    Every person holding a class "B" or class "C" beer permit or a class "B" wine permit having more than one place of business where such beer or wine is sold is required to have a separate license for each separate place of business, except as otherwise provided by state law. 
(Code 1996, § 146.09) 
Sec. 6-40. - Investigation. 
    Upon receipt of an original application for a liquor license, wine or beer permit by the clerk, it shall be forwarded to the police chief, who shall conduct an investigation and submit a written report as to the truth of the facts averred in the application and a recommendation to the council as to the approval of the license or permit. It is the duty of the fire chief to inspect the premises to determine if they conform to the requirements of the city, and no license or permit shall be approved until or unless an approving report has been filed with the council by such officers. 
(Code 1996, § 146.10) 
Sec. 6-41. - Action by council. 
    The council shall either approve or disapprove an application. Action taken by the council shall be so endorsed on the application and thereafter the application, necessary fee and bond, if required, shall be forwarded to the division for such further action as is provided by law. 
(Code 1996, § 146.11) 
Sec. 6-42. - Multi-day and seasonal permits and licenses. 
    Five-day, 14-day and six- or eight-month seasonal licenses and permits may be issued as provided by state law. No seasonal license or permit shall be renewed except after a period of two months. 
(Code 1996, § 146.12) 
Sec. 6-43. - Expiration of license or permit. 
    All liquor control licenses, wine permits, and beer permits, other than seasonal and five- or 14-day licenses or permits, unless sooner suspended or revoked, shall expire one year from date of issuance. Sixty days' notice of such expiration must be given in writing by the administrator. 
(Code 1996, § 146.13) 
Sec. 6-44. - Refunds. 
(a)  Any licensee or permittee, or the licensee's or permittee's executor, or administrator, or any person duly appointed by the court to take charge of and administer the property or assets of the licensee or permittee for the benefit of the licensee's or permittee's creditors, may voluntarily surrender a license or permit to the division and shall notify the city, and the division or the city shall refund to the person surrendering the license or permit, a proportionate amount of the fee received by the division or the city for the license or permit as follows: 
(1)  If surrendered during the first three months of the period for which it was issued, the refund shall be three-fourths of the amount of the fee; 
(2)  If surrendered more than three months but not more than six months after issuance, the refund shall be one-half of the amount of the fee; 
(3)  If surrendered more than six months but not more than nine months after issuance, the refund shall be one-fourth of the amount of the fee. 
(b)  No refund shall be made, however, for a liquor control license, wine permit, or beer permit surrendered more than nine months after issuance. 
(c)  No refund shall be made to any licensee or permittee, upon the surrender of the license or permit, if there is at the time of surrender, a complaint filed with the division or the city, charging the licensee or permittee with a violation of the chapters in this Code pertaining to beer, liquor and wine control or provisions of the Iowa Alcoholic Beverage Control Act, Code of Iowa ch. 123. If upon a hearing on a complaint the license or permit is not revoked or suspended, then the licensee or permittee is eligible, upon surrender of the license or permit, to receive a refund; but if the license or permit is revoked or suspended upon hearing the licensee or permittee is not eligible for the refund of any portion of his license or permit fee. 
(d)  No refund shall be made for seasonal licenses or permits. 
(Code 1996, § 146.14) 
Sec. 6-45. - Transfers. 
    The council may, in its discretion, authorize a licensee or permittee to transfer the license or permit from one location to another within the city, provided that the premises to which the transfer is to be made would have been eligible for a license or permit in the first instance and such transfer will not result in the violation of any law or ordinance. 
(Code 1996, § 146.15) 
Sec. 6-46. - Application for renewal. 
    Upon receipt of an application for the renewal of a liquor license, wine permit, or beer permit, it shall be forwarded to the police chief, who shall conduct an investigation and shall submit a written report as to the truth of the facts contained in the application and a recommendation to the council as to the approval of the renewal of the license or permit. 
(Code 1996, § 146.16) 
Sec. 6-47. - Prohibited sales and acts. 
    A person or club holding a liquor license or wine or beer permit and the person's or club's agents or employees shall not do any of the following: 
(1)  Intoxicated persons. Sell, dispense or give to any intoxicated person, or one simulating intoxication, any alcoholic liquor, wine or beer. 
(2)  Hours of operation. Sell or dispense any alcoholic beverage, wine or beer on the premises covered by the license or permit, or permit its consumption thereon between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. on a weekday, and between the hours of 2:00 a.m. on Sunday and 6:00 a.m. on the following Monday; however, a holder of a license or permit granted the privilege of selling alcoholic liquor, beer or wine on Sunday may sell or dispense alcoholic liquor, beer or wine between the hours of 8:00 a.m. on Sunday and 2:00 a.m. of the following Monday, and further provided that a holder of any class of liquor control license or the holder of a class "B" beer permit may sell or dispense alcoholic liquor, wine or beer for consumption on the premises between the hours of 8:00 a.m. on Sunday and 2:00 a.m. on Monday when that Monday is New Year's Day and beer for consumption off the premises between the hours of 8:00 a.m. on Sunday and 2:00 a.m. on the following Monday when that Sunday is the day before New Year's Day. 
(3)  Credit sales. Sell alcoholic beverages, wine or beer to any person on credit, except with bona fide credit card. This provision does not apply to sales by a club to its members or to sales by a hotel or motel to bona fide registered guests. 
(4)  Employment of minors. Employ a person under 18 years of age in the sale or serving of alcoholic liquor, wine or beer for consumption on the premises where sold. 
(5)  Selling of alcoholic beverage to minors. Sell, give or otherwise supply any alcoholic beverage, wine or beer to any person, knowing or having reasonable cause to believe the person to be under legal age, or permit any person, knowing or having reasonable cause to believe the person to be under legal age, to consume any alcoholic beverage, wine or beer. 
(6)  Mixing of alcoholic beverage. In the case of a retail beer or wine permittee, knowingly allow the mixing or adding of alcohol or any alcoholic beverage to beer, wine or any other beverage in or about the permittee's place of business. 
(7)  Soliciting and disorderly conduct. Knowingly permit any gambling, except in accordance with state law, or knowingly permit any solicitation for immoral purposes, or immoral or disorderly conduct on the premises covered by the license or permit. 
(8)  Brand signs prohibited. Permit any signs or other matter advertising any brand of beer or wine to be erected or placed upon the outside of any premises occupied by a licensee or permittee authorized to sell alcoholic liquor, beer or wine at retail. 
(9)  Public indecent exposure prohibited. Allow or permit any of the following: 
a.  The actual or simulated public performance of any sex act upon or in such licensed premises. 
b.  The exposure of the genitals or buttocks or female breast of any person who acts as a waiter or waitress. 
c.  The exposure of the genitals or female breast nipple of any person who acts as an entertainer, whether or not the owner of the licensed premises in which the activity is performed employs or pays any compensation to such person to perform such activity. 
d.  Any person to remain in or upon the licensed premises who exposes to public view his genitals, pubic hair, or anus. 
e.  The displaying of moving pictures, films, or pictures depicting any sex act or the display of the pubic hair, anus, or genitals upon or in such licensed premises. 
The provisions of this subsection do not apply to a theater, concert hall, art center, museum, or similar establishment which is primarily devoted to the arts or theatrical performances and in which any of the circumstances contained in this section are permitted or allowed as part of such art exhibits or performances. 
(10)  Minors prohibited. Permit or allow any person under legal age to remain upon licensed premises unless over 50 percent of the dollar volume of the business establishment comes from the sale and serving of prepared foods. This provision does not apply to holders of a class "C" beer permit only. 
(Code 1996, § 146.17) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Iowa § 123.49. 
Sec. 6-48. - Optional suspension or revocation. 
    Following a written notice and hearing, as provided by this article, a liquor license, wine permit or beer permit may be suspended by the council for a period up to one year for violations of this Code or suspended for a period up to one year or revoked by the council for any of the following causes: 
(1)  Misrepresentation. Misrepresentation of any material fact in the application for the license or permit. 
(2)  Violations. Violation of any of the provisions of the Iowa Alcoholic Beverage Control Act, Code of Iowa ch. 123. 
(3)  Change in ownership. Any change in the ownership or interest in the business operated under a class "A," class "B," or class "C" liquor control license, or any wine or beer permit, which change was not previously reported to and approved by the city and the division. 
(4)  Original disqualifications. An event which would have resulted in disqualification from receiving the license or permit when originally issued. 
(5)  Sale or transfer. Any sale, hypothecation or transfer of the license or permit. 
(6)  Payment of taxes. The failure or refusal on the part of any licensee or permittee to render any report or remit any taxes to the division under the state law. 
(7)  Commission of prohibited sale or act. The conviction of any liquor control licensee, wine permittee or beer permittee for a violation of state law regulating alcoholic beverages, Code of Iowa ch. 123 et seq. , is grounds for the suspension or revocation of the license or permit by the city. 
(Code 1996, § 146.18) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Iowa § 123.39. 
Sec. 6-49. - Mandatory suspension or revocation. 
    A license or permit shall be suspended or revoked by the city council in accordance with the following: 
(1)  Sale to minors or "spiking." If any licensee, wine permittee, beer permittee, or employee of a licensee or permittee is convicted of a violation of the Code of Iowa § 123.47 or 123.49(2)(i), the city shall, in addition to the other penalties fixed for such violations by this article, assess a penalty as follows: 
a.  Upon a first conviction, the violator's liquor control license, wine permit or beer permit shall be suspended for a period of 14 days. However, if the conviction is for a violation which occurred on or after January 1, 1988, the violator's liquor control license or wine or beer permit shall not be suspended, but the violator shall be assessed a civil penalty in the amount of $300.00. Failure to pay the civil penalty will result in automatic suspension of the license or permit for a period of 14 days. 
b.  Upon a second conviction within a period of two years, the violator's liquor control license, wine permit or beer permit shall be suspended for a period of 30 days. 
c.  Upon a third conviction within a period of five years, the violator's liquor control license, wine permit or beer permit shall be suspended for a period of 60 days. 
d.  Upon a fourth conviction within a period of five years, the violator's liquor control license, wine permit or beer permit shall be revoked. 
(2)  Gambling, solicitation, disorderly conduct, use of containers. If any liquor control licensee is convicted of any violation of the Code of Iowa § 123.49(2)(a), (2)(d) or (2)(e), or any wine or beer permittee is convicted of a violation of Code of Iowa § 123.49(2)(a)or (e), the liquor control license, wine permit, or beer permit shall be revoked and shall immediately be surrendered by the holder, and the bond, if any, of the license or permit holder shall be forfeited to the division. 
(Code 1996, § 146.19) 
Sec. 6-50. - Hearing on suspension or revocation. 
    The council shall conduct a hearing on each suspension or revocation in the following manner: 
(1)  Notice. The permit holder, and the surety on the permit holder's bond, shall be served with written notice containing a copy of the complaint against the permit holder, the ordinance provisions or state statutes allegedly violated, and the date, time and place for hearing on the matter. 
(2)  Hearing. The council shall conduct a hearing, at which both the permit holder and complainants shall be allowed to be present, the purpose of which is to determine the truth of the facts alleged in the complaint. Should the permit holder or authorized representative fail to appear without good cause, the council may proceed to a determination of the complaint. 
(3)  Rights of permit holder. The permit holder shall have the right to be represented by counsel, to testify and present witnesses in the permit holder's own behalf, and to cross-examine adverse witnesses. 
(4)  Evidence. The council shall admit only reliable and substantial evidence into the revocation or suspension proceeding, and shall give all admitted evidence its natural probative value. 
(5)  Criminal charges. In the event that criminal charges have been brought against the permit holder on the same facts and circumstances as are the basis for the revocation or suspension complaint, the council shall await a judgment in the criminal action before conducting the revocation or temporary suspension hearing required by this section. Neither a conviction or an acquittal in the criminal action shall be conclusive for purposes of the revocation or suspension proceeding held under this section. 
(6)  Record and determination. The council shall make and record findings of fact and conclusions of law, and shall revoke or suspend a permit under this section only when, upon review of the entire record, it finds clear and convincing evidence of a substantial violation of this Code or state law. 
(Code 1996, § 146.20) 
Sec. 6-51. - Division notified. 
    When the council revokes or suspends a liquor license, wine permit or beer permit, the division shall be given written notice thereof stating the reasons for the revocation or suspension and the length of same. 
(Code 1996, § 146.21) 
Sec. 6-52. - Appeal to state and court. 
    The right of appeal to the division hearing board shall be afforded an applicant whose application has been disapproved, or a liquor control licensee, wine permittee or beer permittee whose license or permit has been suspended or revoked. Any applicant, licensee or permittee who feels aggrieved by a decision of the administrator or city disapproving, suspending or revoking issuance of a liquor control license, wine permit or beer permit may, provided the person has exercised the right of appeal to the hearing board as provided by state law, appeal from said decision in accordance with the provisions of the Iowa Administrative Procedure Act, Code of Iowa ch. 17A, or may file a petition for judicial review in the district court of the county. The city may seek judicial review of a decision of the hearing board in accordance with the terms of the Iowa Administrative Procedure Act, Code of Iowa ch. 17A, within 30 days. 
(Code 1996, § 146.22) 
Sec. 6-53. - Effect of revocation. 
    Any liquor control licensee, wine permittee or beer permittee whose license or permit is revoked under the Iowa Alcoholic Beverage Control Act, Code of Iowa ch. 123, shall not thereafter be permitted to hold a liquor control license, wine permit or beer permit in the state for a period of two years from the date of revocation. A spouse or business associate holding ten percent or more of the capital stock or ownership interest in the business of a person whose license or permit has been revoked shall not be issued a liquor control license, wine permit or beer permit, and no liquor control license, wine permit or beer permit shall be issued which covers any business in which such person has a financial interest for a period of two years from the date of revocation. If a license or permit is revoked, the premises which have been covered by the license or permit shall not be relicensed for one year. 
(Code 1996, § 146.23) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Iowa § 123.40. 
Secs. 6-54-6-79. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SOCIAL HOST 

Sec. 6-80. - Findings and purpose. 
(a)  The city intends to protect the interest, welfare, health, and safety within the city by prohibiting the services to and consumption of alcoholic beverages by persons under the age of 21 years, at unsupervised parties on private property where alcohol is consumed by minors are harmful to the minors themselves and to the community where such parties are held. 
(b)  The police department's ability to abate gatherings where alcohol is consumed by minors on private property will result in a decrease in abuse of alcohol by minors, physical altercations and injuries, neighborhood vandalism, and excessive noise disturbances thereby improving public safety. 
(c)  Problems associated with such gatherings are difficult to resolve unless the police department has the legal authority to direct the host to disperse the group. 
(d)  Control of large parties, gatherings, or events on private property where minors are consuming alcohol is necessary when such activity is determined to be a threat to the peace, health, safety, or general welfare of the public. 
(e)  In addition, police officers frequently have been required to make calls to a location of a party, gathering, or event in order to disperse uncooperative participants, causing a drain of manpower and resources and in some cases, leaving other areas of the city with inadequate police protection. 
(f)  Based on these findings, the city council has deemed it necessary to enact the following regulations in the city. 
(Code 1996, § 147.01) 
Sec. 6-81. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Emergency responders means firefighters, law enforcement officers, emergency medical service personnel, and other personnel having emergency response duties. 
    Enforcement services means the salaries and benefits of emergency responders for the amount of time actually spent responding to or remaining at an event, gathering, or party and administrative costs attributable to the incident; the actual costs for medical treatment for any injured emergency responder, and the costs of repairing any damage to equipment or vehicles. 
    Event, gathering, or party means any group of three or more persons who have assembled or gathered together for a social occasion or other activity. 
    Juvenile means a person under the age of 18 years. 
    Parent means any person having legal custody of a juvenile: 
(1)  As a natural parent, adoptive parent, or step-parent; 
(2)  As a legal guardian; 
(3)  As a person to whom legal custody has been given by order of the court. 
    Possession or control means actual possession or constructive possession based on facts, which permit the inference of intent to possess or control alcoholic beverages. 
    Premises means any home, yard, farm, field, land, apartment, condominium, hotel or motel room, other dwelling unit, hall or meeting room, garage, barn, park, tent, camper/RV, or any other place conducive to assembly, public or private, whether occupied on a permanent or temporary basis, whether occupied as a dwelling or specifically for an event, gathering, or party, and whether owned, leased, rented or used with or without permission or compensation. 
    Social host means any person who allows, organizes, supervises, controls or permits an event, gathering, or party. The term "social host" includes, but is not limited to: 
(1)  The person who owns, rents, leases, or otherwise has control of the premises where the event, gathering, or party takes place; 
(2)  The person in charge of the premises; or 
(3)  The person responsible for organizing the event, gathering, or party. 
    Underage person means any person under the age of 21 years. 
(Code 1996, § 147.02) 
Sec. 6-82. - Applicability. 
    This article does not apply to a social host who is a juvenile; however, if the social host is a juvenile and the parent of the juvenile knows or reasonably should know of the event, gathering, or party and knows or reasonably should know that the consumption of alcohol is occurring, the parent shall be liable for violations of this article. 
(Code 1996, § 147.02) 
Sec. 6-83. - Affirmative duties. 
    It is the duty of the social host of an event, gathering, or party to take all reasonable steps to prevent alcoholic beverages from being possessed or consumed by underage persons on the premises. Reasonable steps include, but are not limited to: 
(1)  Controlling underage persons' access to alcoholic beverages. 
(2)  Controlling the quantity of alcoholic beverages. 
(3)  Verifying the age of persons being served, in the possession of, or consuming alcoholic beverages at the event, gathering, or party by inspecting drivers' licenses or other government-issued identification cards. 
(4)  Supervising the activities of underage persons at the party. 
(5)  Notifying law enforcement of underage possession or consumption of alcoholic beverages, and allowing law enforcement to enter the premises for the purpose of stopping the possession or consumption by underage persons. 
(Code 1996, § 147.03) 
Sec. 6-84. - Prohibitions. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any social host of an event, gathering, or party on the social host's premises to knowingly permit or allow underage persons to consume alcoholic beverages, or knowingly permit or allow underage persons to possess alcoholic beverages on the premises, whether the social host is present on the premises. 
(b)  A social host has an affirmative defense if the social host took reasonable steps to prevent the possession or consumption of alcohol, or notified law enforcement and allowed law enforcement to enter the premises for the purpose of stopping illegal activities. 
(Code 1996, § 147.04) 
Sec. 6-85. - Exceptions. 
(a)  This article shall not apply to: 
(1)  Conduct solely between an underage person and his parents while present in the parents' household; 
(2)  Legally protected religious observances; or 
(3)  Situations where underage persons are lawfully in possession of alcoholic beverages during the course and scope of employment. 
(b)  The exceptions outlined in subsection (a)(1) of this section shall not apply under circumstances in which the underage person leaves the home, religious gathering, or place of employment and subsequently violates the Code of Iowa § 123.46(2), regarding consumption or intoxication in public places. 
(Code 1996, § 147.05) 
Sec. 6-86. - Enforcement. 
    The provisions of this article shall be enforced by the city police department. The city police department shall have primary but not exclusive enforcement responsibility for this article. 
(Code 1996, § 147.06) 
Sec. 6-87. - Penalties. 
(a)  Violations of section 6-84(a) are declared to be city ordinance infractions, punishable by civil penalty. A $500.00 civil penalty shall be imposed for a social host's first offense. A $750.00 civil penalty shall be imposed for a social host's second or subsequent offense. The city may also seek reimbursement for enforcement services provided by emergency responders related to the event, gathering, or party. 
(b)  In determining if a violation charged is a second or subsequent offense, conviction for violation of this section, the Code of Iowa § 123.47, or an ordinance of any city or county in this state that substantially corresponds to this section or the Code of Iowa § 123.47, shall be counted as previous offenses. 
(Code 1996, § 147.07) 
Chapter 8 - ANIMALS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Dogs and other animals, Code of Iowa ch. 351. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 8-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Animal means any nonhuman vertebrate. 
    At-large means an animal off the premises of the owner. An animal shall not be deemed at-large if such animal: 
(1)  Is confined within a suitable enclosure under the control of a competent person; 
(2)  Is confined within a motor vehicle under the control of a competent person; 
(3)  Is under the control of a person competent to restrain and control the animal, either by leash, cord, chain, or other similar restraint not more than ten feet in length, or properly restrained within a motor vehicle; or 
(4)  Is properly housed in a veterinary hospital or licensed kennel, pet shop, or city-designated animal pound. 
    Bite means any puncture, laceration, abrasion, scratch or any other break in the skin of a human being or animal, caused by an animal. 
    Dangerous wild animal means any animal as set forth in the Code of Iowa ch. 717F. 
    Domestic animal means any animal owned by a person as a pet, for profit, or for any other purpose, and the animal is allowed to reside within the city limits as defined by this chapter. 
    Livestock means an animal belonging to the bovine, caprine, equine, ovine, or porcine species; ostriches, rheas and emus; farm deer as defined in the Code of Iowa § 170.1; or poultry. 
    Owner means any person owning, keeping, sheltering or harboring an animal. 
(Code 1996, § 85.01) 
Sec. 8-2. - Adoption of state law. 
    The city adopts the provisions of the Code of Iowa ch. 717E, Pets as Prizes, and Code of Iowa ch. 717F, Dangerous Wild Animals, by reference as though fully set forth in this chapter. 
Sec. 8-3. - Violations; citations. 
    The police chief or designee is authorized to issue and deliver citations to persons accused of violating any of the provisions of this chapter. Scheduled fines for any violation of this chapter shall be in such amount established by resolution by the city council. However, nothing in this chapter shall be construed so as to limit the city's authority to proceed in accordance with the nuisance or municipal infraction provisions of this Code or other law concerning animal control. 
(Code 1996, § 85.24) 
Secs. 8-4-8-24. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CARE AND CONTROL REGULATIONS 

Sec. 8-25. - Cruelty prohibited. 
    No person who impounds or confines, in any place, any domestic animal, or fowl, or dog or cat, shall fail to supply such animal with a sufficient quantity of food and water, or shall fail to provide the animal with adequate shelter appropriate for the type and breed and the environmental conditions, or shall torture, torment, deprive of necessary sustenance, mutilate, overdrive, overload, drive when overloaded, beat, or kill any such animal by any means which causes unjustified pain, distress or suffering, whether intentionally or negligently. 
(Code 1996, § 85.02) 
State Law reference- Animal abuse, Code of Iowa § 717B.2; animal neglect, Code of Iowa § 717B.3. 
Sec. 8-26. - Abandonment prohibited. 
    A person who has ownership of a cat or dog shall not abandon the cat or dog, except the person may deliver the cat or dog to another person who will accept ownership and custody or the person may deliver the cat or dog to an animal shelter or pound. 
(Code 1996, § 85.03) 
State Law reference- Abandonment of cats and dogs, Code of Iowa § 717B.8. 
Sec. 8-27. - Malicious injury prohibited. 
    No person, having no right to do so, shall maliciously kill, maim, or disfigure any animal of another, or maliciously administer poison to any such animal, or expose any poisonous substance with the intent that the same should be taken by any such animal. 
(Code 1996, § 85.04) 
State Law reference- Injury to animals other than livestock, Code of Iowa ch. 717B. 
Sec. 8-28. - Unhealthy or unsanitary conditions prohibited. 
    No person shall harbor or maintain such animals in such a condition as shall create an unhealthy or unsanitary condition for humans occupying the premises or any neighboring premises or create any other such conditions constituting a nuisance. 
(Code 1996, § 85.20) 
Sec. 8-29. - Keeping of livestock restricted. 
    No person shall keep, own or shelter any livestock within the city limits, except that livestock may be kept in compliance with the city's zoning regulations and chickens (gallus gallus domesticus) may be kept subject to the following restrictions: 
(1)  Only hens are allowed, excluding any and all roosters and capons. 
(2)  Hens are only allowed for those residences that have a rear yard. 
(3)  Hens are also allowed at any community garden or project, as approved by the city council. 
(4)  All hens must be kept within an enclosure or coop located in the rear yard of the residence. No person shall keep hens inside a single-family dwelling unit, multi family dwelling unit or rental dwelling unit. 
(5)  Hens shall not be kept or raised on any residential premises for any business or commercial purposes, including, but not limited to, egg production, chicken breeding or fertilizer production. 
(Code 1996, § 85.05) 
Sec. 8-30. - Animal exhibitions and fights restricted. 
    No person shall arrange, promote, or stage an exhibition at which any animal is tormented, or any fight between animals or between a person and an animal, or shall keep a place where such exhibitions and fights are staged for the entertainment of spectators. 
(Code 1996, § 85.07) 
State Law reference- Animal contest events, Code of Iowa ch. 717D. 
Sec. 8-31. - Animals at-large prohibited. 
    It is unlawful for any owner to allow an animal to run at-large within the corporate limits of the city. Animals found at-large in violation of this section shall be seized and impounded, or at the discretion of the peace officer, the owner may be served a summons to appear before a proper court to answer charges made thereunder. 
(Code 1996, §§ 85.09, 85.10) 
State Law reference- Dogs running at-large, Code of Iowa § 351.37. 
Sec. 8-32. - Animal nuisances prohibited. 
    The following acts and circumstances are hereby declared to be prohibited nuisances: 
(1)  An owner that keeps an animal on private property in such number or in such manner that allows for the accumulation of solid waste of such animal which becomes a detriment to or menace to the health of the animal, or an annoyance to humans. 
(2)  An owner that allows or permits any dog, cat or animal to cause serious annoyance or disturbance to any person or persons by frequent and habitual howling, baying, barking, whining, growling, meowing or making a sound of any kind or nature. 
(3)  An owner that allows an animal to cause any damage or defilement to public or private property. 
(4)  An owner that allows an animal to threaten, harass, attack, bite or claw any person or animal on public or private property who has a legitimate reason to be thereon. 
(Code 1996, § 85.11) 
State Law reference- Nuisances, Code of Iowa ch. 657. 
Sec. 8-33. - Trap-neuter-return (TNR) program for stray or feral cats. 
    Those parties that receive prior written permission from the city council, shall be allowed to implement a trap-neuter-return (TNR) program, subject to the following requirements: 
(1)  Such parties shall be allowed to live-trap any stray or feral cats in a humane manner to allow for the cats to be processed through the TNR program, so long as they receive prior written permission from the property owner in which the traps will be placed. 
(2)  Once a stray or feral cat has been live-trapped, the cats shall be spayed or neutered, ear-tipped and vaccinated against rabies. 
(3)  Such parties participating in the TNR program shall provide a written report annually to the city council outlining the number of cats spayed and neutered pursuant to the TNR program. 
(4)  Nothing in this section shall waive section 8-35 or any other section of this article. 
(5)  Failure by any party to abide by this section shall subject them to revocation by the city council of their right to continue a TNR program. 
(Ord. No. 2018-1814, § 1(85.12A), 3-19-2018) 
Sec. 8-34. - Animal waste deposits restricted. 
    No owner of any dog, cat or other animal, or person having control or responsibility therefore, shall allow such animal to leave waste on private property, without the consent of the owner of such property, or on public property, including public rights-of-way between the curb lines of public streets and alleys. 
(Code 1996, § 85.21) 
Sec. 8-35. - Feeding and watering stray or feral animals prohibited. 
    It shall be illegal for any person to feed and water any stray or feral animal. Owners shall only put out food and water sufficient to meet the needs of the animals under their care. For purposes of this article, the term "stray or feral animal" means an animal that is unowned, unclaimed, or a cat or dog that does not possess a collar, harness or microchip pursuant to section 8-38(b). This section does not apply to the feeding of wild birds or squirrels. 
(Code 1996, § 85.12) 
Sec. 8-36. - Feeding of deer restricted; exceptions. 
(a)  Feeding on property within city prohibited. No person shall engage in the artificial feeding of deer on public or private property within the city limits. There shall be a rebuttable presumption that either of the following acts are for the purpose of feeding deer: 
(1)  The placement of salt, mineral, grain, fruit, or vegetable material in an aggregate quantity of greater than one-half gallon at the height of less than six feet. 
(2)  The placement of salt, mineral, grain, fruit, or vegetable material in an aggregate quantity of greater than one-half gallon in a drop feeder, automatic feeder, or similar device regardless of the height of the material. 
(b)  Exception. This section shall not apply to the following situations: 
(1)  Naturally growing materials. Naturally growing grain, fruit or vegetable material, including gardens, ornamental plants, and residue for lawns, gardens, and other vegetable material maintained as a mulch pile. 
(2)  Bird feeders. Unmodified commercially purchased bird feeders or their equivalent used only for the purpose of feeding birds. 
(3)  Authorized by the city council. Deer feeding may be authorized on a temporary basis by the city council for a specific public purpose as determined by the council. 
(4)  Stored crops. Stored crops, provided that the stored crop is not intentionally made available to deer. 
(5)  Incidental spills. Spills of seed materials intended for planting or to crop materials that have been harvested if the spills are incidental to normal agricultural operations and such materials are not intentionally made available to deer. 
(6)  Deer in official custody or under official management. Veterinarians, city animal control officers, county, state or federal game officials who in the course of their duties have deer in custody or under their management. 
(Code 1996, §§ 87.01, 87.02) 
Sec. 8-37. - Property damage or interference with property by animals prohibited. 
    It is unlawful for the owner of an animal to allow or permit such animal to pass upon the premises of another thereby causing damage to, or interference with, the premises. 
(Code 1996, § 85.13) 
State Law reference- Trespassing or stray livestock, Code of Iowa ch. 169C; liability of owner for property damage caused by dog, Code of Iowa § 351.28. 
Sec. 8-38. - Rabies vaccinations and tags required; exceptions. 
(a)  Every owner of a dog or cat shall obtain a rabies vaccination for each animal between four and six months of age and at such intervals thereafter as stipulated by the manufacturers of the vaccines used. This section applies to all dogs and cats kept within the city, brought into the city for shows, exhibitions or performance, or in transit. This section does not apply to dogs and cats in transit that are continuously held in secure cages and dogs and cats assigned to research, production of biologics, and licensed animal care shelters or similar facilities. 
(b)  All dogs and cats over the age of six months shall wear a collar or harness to which a valid rabies tag is attached. In lieu of the collar and tag, a dog or cat may be micro chipped with a chip that contains the appropriate vaccination and ownership information. This section shall not apply to dogs being exhibited or trained at a kennel club event or while being transported to and from such event if the dog is properly controlled and the owner or trainer has in their possession documentation of valid vaccination and registration. 
(Code 1996, §§ 85.22, 85.23) 
Sec. 8-39. - Procedure for animals that have injured humans or are suspected of rabies. 
(a)  Duty of animal owner. It is the duty of the owner of any dog, cat or other animal which has attacked, bitten or clawed a person or any person having knowledge of such incident to report this act to a local health or law enforcement official. 
(b)  Duty of physicians and veterinarians. It is the duty of physicians and veterinarians to report to the local board of health the existence of any animal known or suspected to be suffering from rabies. 
(c)  Confinement by owner. When a local board of health or law enforcement official receives information that any person or animal has been bitten by an animal or that a dog or animal is suspected of having rabies, it shall order the owner to confine such animal in the manner the police chief or designee appointed directs. 
(d)  Seizure and confinement of animal by police. If the owner fails to confine such animal in the manner directed, the animal shall be seized and impounded by the police chief or designee appointed. Any animal so seized shall be impounded for a period not to exceed 14 days. 
(e)  Disposition of animal following confinement or impoundment. After the designated time period for impoundment has expired, the police chief or designee appointed may deem the animal recoverable in accordance with section 8-40(c), humanely destroy or otherwise dispose of the animal in accordance with law. 
(Code 1996, §§ 85.15, 85.16) 
State Law reference- Duty of animal owners, physicians and veterinarians regarding animal bites or attacks, Code of Iowa § 351.38; confinement of animal that has bitten human or is suspected of rabies, Code of Iowa § 351.39; rabies quarantine, Code of Iowa § 351.40. 
Sec. 8-40. - Impoundment; reclamation or other disposition. 
(a)  Notice to owner. When an animal has been seized and impounded, written notice shall be given within two days to the owner, if known and located, outlining the complaint as presented, the relevant sections of this article, and any other relevant information pertaining to the incident. 
(b)  Disposal of animal when owner is unknown or cannot be located. If the owner is unknown or cannot be located within 14 days, the animal shall be placed for adoption in a suitable home, humanely destroyed or otherwise disposed of in accordance with the relevant sections of this article. 
(c)  Recovery by owner; fees. Impounded animals that the police chief or designee or the court deems to be recoverable may be recovered by the owner upon payment of impounding costs, boarding fees, veterinarian expenses, or any other costs incurred in the care of the animal. The refusal to recover any impounded animal shall not relieve the owner of the duty to pay the impoundment fees, boarding fees, veterinarian expenses, or any other costs incurred in the care of the animal. 
(Code 1996, §§ 85.17, 85.18, 85.19) 
Sec. 8-41. - Vicious and dangerous wild animals. 
(a)  Prohibited; defined. No person shall keep, own or shelter any dangerous wild animals or vicious animal within the city limits. An animal is deemed to be vicious when: 
(1)  It shall have attacked, bitten or clawed a person or persons causing puncture injuries breaking the skin; 
(2)  It shall have attacked, bitten or clawed a person or persons, not causing puncture injuries breaking the skin, on two separate occasions within a 24-month period following the first occurrence; 
(3)  It shall have attacked, bitten or clawed a person or persons on the command of the owner or person in control of the animal, unless such attack was for the legitimate protection of persons or property, or the animal was under the control and use of a law enforcement officer; 
(4)  It shall have attacked, bitten or clawed another domestic animal, livestock, or fowl, and the animal died as a result of the attack; 
(5)  It shall have attacked, bitten or clawed another domestic animal, livestock, or fowl, other than that of the owner of the attacking animal, on three separate occasions within a 24-month period following the first occurrence; or 
(6)  It shall have previously been deemed or adjudicated to be a vicious animal in any other jurisdiction. 
(b)  Investigation and seizure. When any city official or employee receives information that any person is keeping, sheltering or harboring a vicious animal or dangerous wild animal in the city, the police chief or designee shall cause the matter to be investigated. If, after investigation, the facts indicate that the person named in the complaint is keeping, sheltering or harboring any such animal in the city, the police chief or designee shall immediately seize the animal. 
(c)  Impoundment; destruction or other disposition. The animal so seized shall be impounded for a period of 14 days. If, at the end of the impoundment period, the individual or entity keeping, sheltering or harboring such animal has not petitioned the county district court for return of such animal, the police chief or designee shall cause the animal to be humanely destroyed or otherwise disposed of in accordance with law. 
(d)  City has no duty to seize or confine. The city is under no duty to attempt to seize, capture or confine a vicious animal or dangerous wild animal found at-large nor shall it have a duty to notify the owner of such animal prior to its destruction if such animal's at-large status is deemed to have created a hazard to persons or property and where seizure, capture or confinement would be a hazard to those tasked with seizing the animal. 
(Code 1996, §§ 85.06 85.14, 85.16A) 
State Law reference- Dangerous wild animals, Code of Iowa ch. 717F. 
Chapter 10 - BUILDINGS AND CONSTRUCTION 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 10-1. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this chapter is to protect public health, property, welfare and safety by establishing reasonable minimum requirements for the construction, repair, moving, demolition and use of buildings, structures and related equipment, fixtures and systems. 
(Code 1996, § 132.02) 
Secs. 10-2-10-19. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CONSTRUCTION CODES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 10-20. - Adoption of building codes. 
    Except as added to, deleted, modified or amended in this article, the codes described in this article are adopted as and shall constitute the building codes of the city, effective May 1, 2017. 
(Code 1996, § 132.03) 
Sec. 10-21. - International Building Code. 
    The International Building Code, 2015 edition, published by the International Code Council, Inc. is adopted by reference in full except for the following portions that are deleted, modified or amended: 
(1)  Section 103. Delete. 
(2)  Section 105.2 Building. 6-Delete sidewalks and driveways. 
(3)  Chapter 27. Delete-Electrical. 
(4)  Chapter 29. Delete-Plumbing. 
(5)  Any reference made to fuel gas provisions shall comply with the "International Fuel Gas Code" adopted by the city. 
(6)  Section 202, Add definition of a bedroom. For the purposes of this code, the term "bedroom" means any room with a permanently built in closet, designed for and potentially used for sleeping purposes at the present time or in the future. Bedrooms shall meet all the minimum provisions of this code to include a minimum of 70 square feet of floor area with the least horizontal dimension of seven feet, glazing for natural light to be not less than eight percent of floor area, heat provided in the room to maintain a minimum of 68 degrees, three feet from the floor and two feet from the exterior walls, a height of seven feet in the rooms shall be maintained, shall meet the minimum emergency escape and rescue opening, shall have a permanently powered smoke alarm device with battery backup. Bedrooms include dens, offices, playrooms, family rooms, storage areas, and other rooms with built in closets. For the purpose of this chapter, the term "bedrooms" and "sleeping rooms" shall be synonymous with each other. 
(7)  Section 3202.3.1, Delete last sentence and insert in lieu thereof, "Awnings, canopies, marquees, and signs shall be supported entirely by the building." 
(8)  Section 202, Definitions of the IBC, are amended by deleting the definition of accessory structure and swimming pool and inserting in lieu thereof the following: 
a.  Swimming pool. Any structure intended for swimming, recreational bathing or wading that is capable of containing water over 24 inches deep. This includes in-ground, above-ground and on-ground pools, hot tubs, spas and fixed-in-place wading pools, but excludes manmade lakes or ponds created through the collection of stormwater or drainage runoff. 
b.  Accessory structures. Accessory structures shall be defined as and shall conform to applicable zoning requirements and shall include, but not be limited to, structures and equipment with a fixed location on the ground, including wind energy systems, generators and equipment shelters. 
(9)  Subsection 406.3.4, Separation of the IBC, is amended by deleting subsection 1 and inserting in lieu thereof the following: The private garage shall be separated from the dwelling unit and its attic area by means of minimum 5/8-inch type "X" fire code gypsum board or equivalent applied to the garage side. Where the separation is a floor-ceiling assembly, the structure supporting the separation shall also be protected by not less than 5/8-inch type "X" fire code gypsum board or equivalent throughout. Garages beneath habitable rooms shall be separated by not less than 5/8-inch type "X" fire code gypsum board or equivalent throughout. Door openings between a private garage and the dwelling unit shall be equipped with either solid wood doors or solid or honeycomb core steel doors not less than 1 3/8 inches thick, or doors in compliance with 716.5.3. Openings from a private garage directly into a room used for sleeping purposes shall not be permitted. Doors shall be self-closing and self-latching. 
(Code 1996, § 132.03(1)) 
Sec. 10-22. - International Residential Code for One- and Two-Family Dwellings. 
    The International Residential Code, for One- and Two-Family Dwellings, 2015 Edition and Appendices B, C, D, E, G, H, and J (herein after to be known as the I.R.C.), as published by the International Code Council, Inc. is adopted by reference in full except for the following portions that are deleted, modified or amended: 
(1)  Chapters 34, 35, 36, 37, 38, 39, 40, 41 and their appendices: Delete and insert in lieu thereof all electrical codes shall comply with the adopted "Electrical Code" for the city. 
(2)  Chapters 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31, 32 and their appendices: Delete and insert in lieu thereof all Plumbing Codes shall comply with the adopted "Plumbing Code" for the city. 
(3)  Chapters 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22 and their appendices: Delete and insert in lieu thereof, mechanical codes shall comply with the adopted "Mechanical Code" for the city. 
(4)  Chapter 24 and its appendices: Delete and insert in lieu thereof, fuel gas codes shall comply with the adopted "Fuel Gas Code" for the city. 
(5)  Section R105.2 Building: #5.-Delete sidewalks and driveways. 
(6)  Section R106.1.3. Delete and insert in lieu thereof chapter 131. 
(7)  Section R107.3. Delete reference to NFPA 70 and insert in lieu thereof 2014 NEC. 
(8)  Amend Table R301.2(1) as follows: 
a.  Roof snow load: 30 PSF. 
b.  Wind speed (MPH): 90. 
c.  Seismic design category: A. 
d.  Subject to damage from: 
1.  Weathering: Severe. 
2.  Frost line depth: 42 inches. 
3.  Termite: Slight to moderate. 
4.  Decay: Slight to moderate. 
e.  Winter design temp: five degrees. 
f.  Flood hazards: Delete and insert in lieu thereof chapter 131. 
(9)  Section R301.2.4. Delete. 
(10)  Section R310.2.1. Delete exception. 
(11)  Section R322. Delete and insert in lieu thereof the following: The provisions of division VII of 661 Iowa Admin Code ch. 302 shall apply to all matters governing accessibility. 
(12)  Section R322. Delete and insert in lieu thereof the following: All references to flood resistant construction shall be those provisions contained in chapter 50. 
(13)  Section R202. Definition of a bedroom. For the purposes of this code, the word "bedroom" means any room with a permanently built-in closet, designed for and potentially used for sleeping purposes at the present time or in the future. Bedrooms shall meet all the minimum provisions of this code to include a minimum of 70 square feet of floor area with the least horizontal dimension of seven feet, glazing for natural light to be not less than eight percent of floor area, heat provided in the room to maintain a minimum of 68 degrees, three feet from the floor and two feet from the exterior walls, a height of seven feet in the rooms shall be maintained, shall meet the minimum emergency escape and rescue opening, shall have a permanently powered smoke alarm device with battery backup. Bedrooms include dens, offices, playrooms, family rooms, storage areas, and other rooms with built in closets. For the purpose of this chapter the term "bedrooms" and "sleeping rooms" shall be synonymous with each other. 
(14)  Section R202, Definitions of the IRC, are amended by deleting the definition of accessory structure and swimming pool and inserting in lieu thereof the following: 
a.  Swimming pool. Any structure intended for swimming, recreational bathing or wading that is capable of containing water over 24 inches deep. This includes in-ground, above-ground and on-ground pools, hot tubs, spas and fixed-in-place wading pools, but excludes manmade lakes or ponds created through the collection of stormwater or drainage runoff. 
b.  Accessory structures. Accessory structures shall be defined as and shall conform to applicable zoning requirements and shall include but not be limited to structures and equipment with a fixed location on the ground, including wind energy systems, generators and equipment shelters. 
(15)  Subsection R302.1, Exterior walls, of the IRC, is amended by deleting all exceptions and inserting in lieu thereof the following exception: 
Accessory structures less than ten feet from a dwelling or less than three feet from a property line shall be provided with 5/8-inch "X" fire code sheetrock or equivalent throughout the interior, including the walls and ceiling. Any accessory structure openings in walls parallel to and less than ten feet from dwelling unit walls shall be fire rated in accordance with this code. 
(16)  Table R302.1, Exterior walls, of the IRC, is amended by modifying the table as follows: 
Table R302.1(1), Exterior Walls 
Exterior Wall Element Minimum Fire-Resistance

Rating Minimum

Fire

Separation

Distance Walls (Fire-resistance rated) 1 hour with exposure from both sides per ASTM E 119 or UL 263 &lt 3 feet (Not fire-resistance rated) 0 hours = 3 feet Projections (Fire-resistance rated) 1 hour on the underside 2 feet (Not fire-resistance rated) 0 hours = 2 feet Openings Not allowed N/A &lt 3 feet 25 percent maximum wall area 0 hours 3 feet Unlimited 0 hours 5 feet Penetrations All Comply with section R302.4 &lt 3 feet None required 3 feet  
(17)  Subsection R313.2, One-and two-family automatic fire sprinkler system, of the IRC, is amended by adding the following exception: 
Dwelling units in which the gross square footage of the dwelling spaces, including all floor levels whether finished or unfinished and all basement areas whether finished or unfinished (exclusive of attached garage area), does not exceed 8,000 square feet. 
(18)  Subsection R403.1.4.1, Frost protection, of the IRC, is amended by deleting all existing exceptions and inserting in lieu thereof the following: Detached garages of light frame wood construction of 720 square feet or less in size and detached garages of 400 square feet or less in size of other than light frame wood construction and more than ten feet from a dwelling or attached garage may be provided with a floating slab which shall include a thickened slab edge of a minimum eight inches thick and tapered or squared from a width of six inches to 12 inches and have floors of Portland Cement Concrete (PCC) not less than four inches thick. Garage areas shall have all sod or debris removed prior to installation of the floor. 
(19)  Subsection 406.3.4, Separation, of the IBC, is amended by deleting subsection 1 and inserting in lieu thereof the following: The private garage shall be separated from the dwelling unit and its attic area by means of minimum 5/8-inch type "X" fire code gypsum board or equivalent applied to the garage side. Where the separation is a floor-ceiling assembly, the structure supporting the separation shall also be protected by not less than 5/8-inch type "X" fire code gypsum board or equivalent throughout. Garages beneath habitable rooms shall be separated by not less than 5/8-inch type "X" fire code gypsum board or equivalent throughout. Door openings between a private garage and the dwelling unit shall be equipped with either solid wood doors or solid or honeycomb core steel doors not less than 1 3/8 inches thick, or doors in compliance with 716.5.3. Openings from a private garage directly into a room used for sleeping purposes shall not be permitted. Doors shall be self-closing and self-latching. 
(Code 1996, § 132.03(2)) 
Sec. 10-23. - Uniform Plumbing Code. 
    The Uniform Plumbing Code, 2015 edition and all appendices, published by the International Association of Plumbing and Mechanical Officials, is adopted by reference in full except for the following portions that are deleted, modified or amended: 
(1)  Any reference made to electrical code provisions shall comply with the electrical code adopted by the city. 
(2)  Any reference made to mechanical code provisions shall comply with the mechanical code adopted by the city. 
(3)  The provisions of division VIII of 661 Iowa Admin. Code ch. 16 shall apply to all matters governing the design and construction of buildings for energy efficiency. 
(4)  The provisions of 661 Iowa Admin. Code ch. 303 (2015 International Energy Conservation Code) shall apply to all matters governing the design and construction of buildings for energy efficiency. 
(5)  Any reference made to fuel gas provisions shall comply with the fuel gas code adopted by the city. 
(6)  Any lead water service pipe that is exposed shall be replaced. 
(7)  Foundation drain and sump-pump connection: The drain line or sump pump shall be connected to a public storm sewer, sub-drain line, or storm sewer intake if such exists adjacent to the property. 
(8)  Section 707.4-Delete exception (4) and insert in lieu thereof the following: All new sewers and replacement of existing sewers shall have a clean out installed outside the structure. 
(9)  All connections to city sewer shall be by a saddle type connection or a "y" type fitting installed in-line with the sewer. 
(Code 1996, § 132.03(3)) 
Sec. 10-24. - International Mechanical Code. 
    The International Mechanical Code (IMC), 2015 edition, as published by the International Code Council, Inc., is adopted by reference in full and all appendices is adopted by reference in full except for the following portions that are deleted, modified or amended: 
(1)  Section 101.1. Insert "city." 
(2)  Any reference made to electrical code provisions shall comply with the electrical code adopted by the city. 
(3)  Any reference made to plumbing code provisions shall comply with the plumbing code adopted by the city. 
(4)  The provisions of Iowa Administrative Code chapter 661-303 (2015 International Energy Conservation Code) shall apply to all matters governing the design and construction of buildings for energy efficiency. 
(5)  Any reference made to fuel gas provisions shall comply with the fuel gas code adopted by the city. 
(Code 1996, § 132.03(4)) 
Sec. 10-25. - National Electrical Code. 
    The National Electrical Code (NEC), 2014 edition, and all its appendices is adopted by reference in full. 
(Code 1996, § 132.03(5)) 
Sec. 10-26. - International Fuel Gas Code. 
    The International Fuel Gas Code (IFGC), 2015 edition, and all appendices, as published by the International Code Council, Inc., is adopted by reference in full. 
(Code 1996, § 132.03(6)) 
Sec. 10-27. - International Fire Code. 
    The International Fire Code (IFC), 2015 edition, and appendices B, C and D as published by the International Code Council, Inc., is adopted by reference in full except for the following portions that are deleted, modified or amended by this article: 
(1)  Any reference made to electrical code provisions shall comply with the electrical code adopted by the city. 
(2)  Any reference made to plumbing code provisions shall comply with the plumbing code adopted by the city. 
(3)  Any reference made to fuel gas provisions shall comply with the fuel gas code adopted by the city. 
(4)  Section 105. Delete. 
(5)  Section 111.4. "Failure to comply". Amend last sentence to read: shall be liable to a fine of not less than that which is set in section 9.03. 
(6)  Section 113. Delete. 
(7)  Section 307. "Open burning". Delete and insert in lieu thereof the following: All references to open burning shall be those provisions contained in section 22-38. 
(8)  Section 308.3.1.1. Delete. 
(9)  Section 308.1.4. Delete. 
(10)  Section 308.2. Delete. 
(11)  Section 903.4.2. Amend first sentence to include "and visual." 
(12)  Section 3308.2. Amend last sentence to read "shall be provided to the city council. The city council will issue fireworks permits." 
(Code 1996, § 132.03(7)) 
Sec. 10-28. - International Existing Building Code. 
    The International Existing Building Code (IEBC), 2015 edition, and all appendices as published by the International Code Council, Inc., is adopted by reference in full. 
(Code 1996, § 132.03(8)) 
Sec. 10-29. - International Property Maintenance Code. 
    The International Property Maintenance Code (IPMC), 2015 edition, as published by the International Code Council, Inc., for regulating and governing the conditions and maintenance of all property, buildings, and structures by providing the standards for supplied utilities and facilities and other physical things and conditions essential to ensure that structures are safe, sanitary and fit for occupation and use, and the condemnation of buildings and structures unfit for human occupancy and use and the demolition of such existing structures in the city, is adopted by reference in full except for the following portions that are deleted, modified or amended by this subsection: 
(1)  Section 101.1. Insert: "the city." 
(2)  Section 101.2. Delete the words "all existing residential and non-residential" in the first sentence and insert in lieu thereof "all existing rental residential." 
(3)  Section 102.3. Delete and replace: "Repairs, additions or alterations to a structure, or changes of occupancy, shall be done in accordance with the procedures and provisions of the city building code, electrical code, plumbing code, mechanical code, and fire code. Nothing in this code shall be construed to cancel, modify or set aside any provision of the zoning ordinance of the city." 
(4)  Section 102.6. Insert at the end of the sentence: "or would alter the historic character or appearance." 
(5)  Section 102.7. Delete first sentence and replace with "The codes and standards referenced in this Code shall be the codes and standards adopted by the city." 
(6)  Section 103.1. Delete and replace: "The enforcement of this code is under the city inspection department." 
(7)  Section 103.2. Delete. 
(8)  Section 103.3. Delete. 
(9)  Section 103.5. Add: "Fee schedule to be adopted by the city council by resolution." 
(10)  Section 105.3, 105.3.1, 105.3.2. Delete. 
(11)  Section 106.1. Add: "If a person, firm or corporation has a total of three violations on any of their properties during any 90-day period, enforcement procedures will be subject to chapter 32, art. III of the Code of Ordinances, chronic nuisances." 
(12)  Section 106.3. Delete and replace: "Any person failing to comply with a notice of violation or order served in accordance with section 107 shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor or civil infraction as determined by the local municipality pursuant to chapter 1 of the Code of Ordinances." 
(13)  Section 107.2.6. Delete and insert in lieu thereof: "Include a statement of the right to file a lien." 
(14)  Section 108.2. Change first sentence to read, "If the structure is vacant or unfit for human habitation and occupancy..." 
(15)  Sections 111.2 through 111.8. Delete and insert: 111.2 Board of appeals. Appeals shall be to the board of appeals created by chapter 132.06. 
(16)  Section 201.3. Delete and replace: "Terms defined in other codes. Where terms are not defined in this code and are defined in the city building codes, electrical code, plumbing code, mechanical code, fire code, or zoning ordinance, such terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them as in those codes." 
(17)  Section 302.4. Insert: "8". 
(18)  Section 303. Delete. 
(19)  Sections 304.2 and 304.8. Delete. 
(20)  Section 304.9. Delete last sentence. 
(21)  Section 304.13.1. Add: "Glazing, as regulated by chapter 24 of the International Building Code, shall not be covered up with, closed by, or replaced by wood, plywood, OSB, or any other non-glazing material. Other means of closure may be allowed by variance issued by the Board of Appeals. This requirement is not intended to prevent the partial or complete in-fill of any opening by a properly constructed wall covered by an exterior finish material that is architecturally compatible with the remainder of the building." 
(22)  Sections 304.14, 304.16, 304.17, 304.18, 304.18.1, 304.18.3, 305.6. Delete. 
(23)  Section 402.3. Delete. 
(24)  Sections 502.2, 502.3, 502.4, 502.4.1, 503.2, 503.3, 503.4, 504.2, 504.3. Delete. 
(25)  Section 505.1. Delete "International Plumbing Code" and insert "Uniform Plumbing Code." 
(26)  Section 506.3. Delete. 
(27)  Section 602.2. Delete "based on the winter outdoor design temperature for the locality indicated in Appendix D of the International Plumbing Code." 
(28)  Sections 602.3, 602.4, 602.5, 603.6. Delete. 
(29)  Section 604.2. Delete "NFPA 70" and insert "National Electrical Code." 
(30)  Sections 606.1 and 606.2. Delete. 
(31)  Chapter 8. Delete. 
(Code 1996, § 132.03(9)) 
Sec. 10-30. - International Energy Conservation Code. 
    The International Energy Conservation Code (IECC), 2015 edition, as published by the International Code Council, Inc., is adopted by reference in full. 
(Code 1996, § 132.03(10)) 
Sec. 10-31. - Copies filed. 
    Official copies of the building codes and the standard codes adopted therein are on file in the office of the clerk. 
(Code 1996, § 132.04) 
Secs. 10-32-10-50. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ADDITIONAL LOCAL REGULATIONS 

Sec. 10-51. - Excavation and demolition work. 
    No person shall perform any demolition or excavation work except in conformance with the following safety regulations: 
(1)  Fencing required. All demolition work and any excavation work on public or private property deeper than two feet, shall be completely fenced in during the hours when workers are not on the premises. Fencing shall be a minimum of four feet in height and shall be a snow fence in good repair or equal. 
(2)  Barricades required. Any excavation work on public property less than two feet deep shall be barricaded during the hours when workers are not present on-site. 
(3)  Warning lights. During the hours of darkness, all fencing or barricades on public property shall have red lights, warning lights or flares placed on or about the premises to ensure safety for pedestrian and vehicular traffic. 
(4)  Temporary walkways. If the demolition or excavation work is immediately bordering a walkway, sidewalk or thoroughfare, temporary footwalks beyond the curb shall be substantially constructed and provided with protection on both sides. In addition, on every demolition job or construction job above a sidewalk, a deck will be provided over the walkway to protect the pedestrians from falling objects. 
(5)  Signs. Danger signs shall be conspicuously posted around the property, and all doorways or thoroughfares giving access to the property shall be kept barricaded except during the actual passage of workers or equipment. 
(Code 1996, § 48.21) 
Secs. 10-52-10-75. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 10-76. - Building official. 
    The city manager shall appoint the building official who is authorized and directed to enforce all the provisions of this article. The building official shall have the following powers and duties: 
(1)  Assistants. In accordance with established procedure and with the approval of the city manager, the building official may appoint such number of officers, inspectors and assistants, and other employees as shall be authorized from time to time. 
(2)  Annual report. The building official shall submit a report to the city manager not less than once a year, covering the administration and enforcement of this article during the preceding period. The report shall incorporate a summary of recommendations as to desirable amendments to this article. 
(3)  Records. The building official shall keep a permanent, accurate account of all fees and other moneys collected and received under this article, the names of the persons upon whose account the same were paid, the date and amount thereof, together with the location of the building or premises to which they relate. 
(4)  Right of entry. Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce any of the provisions of this article or whenever the building official or an authorized representative of the building official has reasonable cause to believe that there exists in any building or upon any premises, any condition which makes such building or premises unsafe as defined in this article, the building official or authorized representative may enter such building or premises at all reasonable times to inspect the same or to perform any duty imposed upon the building official by this article, provided that if such building or premises be unoccupied, the building official shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other persons having charge or control of the building or premises and demand entry. If such entry is refused, the building official or authorized representative shall have recourse to every remedy provided by law to secure entry. No owner or occupant or any other person having charge, care of control of any building or premises shall fail or neglect, after proper demand is made as herein provided, to promptly permit entry therein by the building official, or authorized representative, for the purpose of inspection and examination pursuant to this article. Any person violating this subsection shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(5)  Stop orders. Whenever any work is being done contrary to the provisions of this article, the building official may order the work stopped by notice in writing served on any persons engaged in the doing or causing such work to be done, and any such persons shall forthwith stop such work until authorized by the building official to proceed with the work. 
(6)  Occupancy violations. Whenever any structure is being used contrary to the provisions of this article, the building official may order such use discontinued and the structure, or portion thereof, vacated by notice served on any person causing such use to be continued. Such person shall discontinue the use within ten days after receipt of such notice or make the structure, or portion thereof, comply with the requirements of this article; provided, however, that in the event of an unsafe building the procedures for the abatement of a nuisance shall apply. 
(7)  Authority to condemn equipment. Whenever the building official learns or ascertains that any equipment, as defined in this article, has become hazardous to life, health, or property, the building official shall order, in writing, that such equipment be restored to a condition of safety or be dismantled or removed from its present location. The written notice shall fix a time limit for compliance with such order. No person shall use or maintain the defective equipment after receiving such notice. 
(8)  Liability. The building official or any employee charged with the enforcement of this article, acting in good faith and without malice for the city in the discharge of duties, shall not thereby become liable personally and is relieved from all personal liability for any damage that may accrue to persons or property as a result of any act required or by reason of any act or omission in the discharge of duties. Any suit brought against the building official or employees, because of such act or omission performed by them in the enforcement of any provisions of this article, shall be defended by the city until final termination of the proceedings. 
(9)  Cooperation of other officials. The building official may request and shall receive so far as may be necessary in the discharge of any duties, the assistance and cooperation of other officials of the city. 
(Code 1996, § 132.05) 
Sec. 10-77. - Building official to determine value used for calculating permit and plan review fees. 
    The determination of value for fee and other purposes under this article, shall be made by the building inspector. The valuation to be used in computing the permit and plan review fees shall be the total value of all construction work for which the permit is issued, as well as all finish work, roofing, elevators and any other permanent work or permanent equipment. The building inspector will use, as a guide to determine the valuation, the latest "building valuation data" and the "regional modifiers" as published by the International Conference of Building Officials unless the applicant can show that the actual cost will be less. 
(Code 1996, § 198.06) 
Sec. 10-78. - Board of appeals. 
    In order to determine the suitability of alternate materials and methods of construction and to provide for reasonable interpretations of the provisions of this article, there shall be and is created a board of appeals, consisting of those serving on the zoning board of adjustment at the time of the appeal. The fire chief and the city building official shall be ex officio members with the city clerk acting as the secretary for the board. The board shall adopt reasonable rules and regulations for conducting its investigations and shall render all decisions and findings in writing to the building official with a copy to the appellant. 
(Code 1996, § 132.06) 
Sec. 10-79. - Violations. 
    It is unlawful for any person to erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve, remove, convert or demolish, equip, use, occupy, or maintain any building or structure in the city, or cause the same to be done, contrary to or in violation of any of the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1996, § 132.39) 
Secs. 10-80-10-101. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERMITS AND CERTIFICATES 

Sec. 10-102. - Permits required. 
    Permits shall be required as follows: 
(1)  Building. No person shall erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, remove, convert, or demolish any building or structure in the city, or cause the same to be done, without first obtaining a separate building permit for each such building or structure from the building official. 
(2)  Mechanical. No person shall install or reconstruct any heating, ventilating, cooling, or refrigeration equipment unless a permit therefor has been obtained from the building official except as otherwise provided in this division. A permit shall be obtained for all heating, ventilating, cooling, or refrigeration equipment, moved with, or installed in, any relocated building. A separate permit shall be obtained for the equipment installed in each separate building or structure. A permit shall not be required for the following: 
a.  Any portable heating appliance. 
b.  Any portable ventilating equipment. 
c.  Any portable cooling unit. 
(3)  Plumbing. No person shall install, alter, reconstruct or repair any plumbing or drainage system or part thereof as defined in the UPC adopted by this division unless a permit therefor has been obtained from the building official. 
(4)  Electrical. No person shall install, alter, reconstruct or repair any electrical conductor or equipment subject to the provisions of the NEC adopted by this division unless a permit therefor has been obtained from the building official. 
(Code 1996, § 132.07) 
Sec. 10-103. - Emergency work. 
    In emergency situations, work may be initiated without first submitting a permit application and receiving a permit therefor. However, a permit application must be submitted within a reasonable time after the passage of the critical period. With this one exception all emergency work must be done in accordance with this division. 
(Code 1996, § 132.08) 
Sec. 10-104. - Permit applications. 
    Application for permit shall be made as follows: 
(1)  Building permit. To obtain a building permit the applicant shall first file an application therefor in writing on a form furnished for that purpose. Every such application shall: 
a.  Identify and describe the work to be covered by the permit for which application is made; 
b.  Describe the land on which the proposed work is to be done, by lot, block, tract, and house and street address, or similar description that will readily identify and definitely locate the proposed building or work; 
c.  Indicate the use or occupancy for which the proposed work is intended; 
d.  Be accompanied by plans and specifications as required in section 10-134; 
e.  State the valuation of the proposed work; 
f.  Be signed by the permittee, or an authorized agent, who may be required to submit evidence to indicate such authority; 
g.  Give such other information as reasonably may be required by the building official. 
(2)  Mechanical permit. To obtain a mechanical permit, the applicant shall file an application on forms furnished for that purpose. The application shall contain all information necessary to the lawful enforcement of the provisions of this division. 
(3)  Plumbing permit. To obtain a plumbing permit, the applicant shall file an application on forms furnished for that purpose. The application shall contain all information necessary to the lawful enforcement of the provisions of this division. 
(4)  Electrical permit. To obtain an electrical permit, the applicant shall first file an application therefor in writing on a form provided for that purpose. The application shall include the name and business address of the person that is to do the work, a description of the property where the work is to be done, the name of the owner of the property, the name of the occupant, and a general description of the materials to be used and shall specify the particular part of the work that must be inspected as required by this division. 
(Code 1996, § 132.09) 
Sec. 10-105. - Issuance of permits. 
    When the building official is satisfied that the work described in an application for a permit and the plans and specifications filed therewith, if required, conform to the requirements of this division and other pertinent laws and ordinances, and that the fees as specified have been paid in full, the building official shall issue a permit therefor to the applicant. 
(Code 1996, § 132.15) 
Sec. 10-106. - Validity. 
    The issuance or granting of a permit or approval of plans and specifications shall not be construed to be a permit for, or an approval of, any violation of any of the provisions of this division. No permit presuming to give authority to violate or cancel the provisions of this division shall be valid, except insofar as the work or use which it authorizes is lawful. The issuance of a permit based upon plans and specifications shall not prevent the building official from thereafter requiring the correction of errors in the plans and specifications or from preventing building operations being carried on thereunder when in violation of this division or of any other division of this Code or of any other ordinance of the city. 
(Code 1996, § 132.16) 
Sec. 10-107. - Expiration of permit. 
    Every permit issued by the building official under the provisions of this division shall expire by limitation and become null and void, if the building or work authorized by such permit is not commenced within 180 days from the date of such permit, or if the building or work authorized by such permit is suspended or abandoned at any time after the work is commenced for a period of 120 days, or if the building or work authorized has not been completed within two years from the date of such permit. Before such work can be recommenced a new permit shall be first obtained so to do, and the fee therefor shall be one-half the amount required for a new permit for such work, provided no changes have been made or will be made in the original plans and specifications for such work. Work under a demolition permit must commence within 30 days of date of issuance. The building official may extend the expiration of the permit once for a period not exceeding 100 days. 
(Code 1996, § 132.17) 
Sec. 10-108. - Suspension or revocation. 
    The building official may, in writing, suspend or revoke a permit issued under provisions of this division whenever the permit is issued in error or on the basis of incorrect information supplied, or in violation of any ordinance or regulation or any of the provisions of this division. 
(Code 1996, § 132.18) 
Sec. 10-109. - Work without a permit. 
(a)  Investigation. Whenever any work for which a permit is required by this Code has been commenced without first obtaining said permit, a special investigation shall be made before a permit may be issued for such work. 
(b)  Fee. An investigation fee, in addition to the permit fee, shall be collected whether or not a permit is then or subsequently issued. The investigation fee shall be equal to the amount of the permit fee required by this Code. The payment of such investigation fee shall not exempt any person from compliance with all other provisions of this code nor from any penalty prescribed by law. 
(Code 1996, § 198.01) 
Sec. 10-110. - Certificate of occupancy. 
    No building or structure shall be used or occupied, and no change in the existing occupancy classification of a building or structure or portion thereof shall be made until the building official has issued a certificate of occupancy therefor as provided herein. 
(1)  Change in use. Changes in the character or use of a building shall not be made except as specified in the International Building Code adopted by this article. 
(2)  Certificate issued. After final inspection when it is found that the building or structure complies with the provisions of this division, the building official shall issue a certificate of occupancy which shall contain the following: 
a.  The building permit number. 
b.  The address of the building. 
c.  The name and address of the owner. 
d.  A description of that portion of the building for which the certificate is issued. 
e.  A statement that the described portion of the building complies with the requirements of this division for group and division of occupancy and the use for which the proposed occupancy is classified. 
f.  The name of the building official. 
(3)  Temporary certificate. A temporary certificate of occupancy may be issued by the building official for the use of a portion or portions of a building or structure prior to the completion of the entire building or structure. 
(Code 1996, § 132.38) 
Secs. 10-111-10-133. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - PLANS AND SPECIFICATIONS 

Sec. 10-134. - Required for enforcement of article; submission, preparation and design of proposed work. 
    When required by the building official for enforcement of any provisions of this article, two sets of plans and specifications shall be submitted. The building official may require such plans and specifications to be prepared and designed by an engineer or architect licensed by the state to practice as such. Plans and specifications when required shall be of sufficient detail and clarity to show that the proposed work will conform to the provisions of this division and of all applicable laws, ordinances, rules, regulations and orders. 
(Code 1996, § 132.10) 
Sec. 10-135. - Plan review. 
    Required plans and specifications may be checked by the building official. Such plans may be reviewed by other city departments or personnel to check compliance with the laws and ordinances under their jurisdiction. 
(Code 1996, § 132.11) 
Sec. 10-136. - Plan approval. 
    If the plans and specifications as filed appear to conform to the requirements of this division and other laws and ordinances, the building official shall endorse in writing or stamp on all sets of plans and specifications "APPROVED." Such approved plans and specifications shall not be changed, modified, or altered without authorization from the building official, and all work shall be done in accordance with the approved plans. 
(Code 1996, § 132.12) 
Sec. 10-137. - Partial plans. 
    The building official may issue a permit for the construction of part of a building or structure before the entire plans and specifications for the whole building or structure have been submitted or approved provided adequate information and detailed statements have been filed complying with all pertinent requirements of this division. The holder of such permit shall proceed at the holder's own risk without assurance that the permit for the entire building or structure will be granted. 
(Code 1996, § 132.13) 
Sec. 10-138. - Retention of plans. 
    One set of approved plans, specifications, and computations shall be retained by the building official for a period of not less than 90 days from date of completion of the work covered therein, and one set of approved plans and specifications shall be returned to the applicant, which set shall be kept on such building or work at all times during which the work authorized thereby is in progress. 
(Code 1996, § 132.14) 
Sec. 10-139. - Expiration of plan check. 
    Applications for which no permit is issued within 120 days following the date of application shall expire by limitation and plans submitted for checking may thereafter be returned to the applicant or destroyed by the building official. The building official may extend the time for action by the applicant for a period not exceeding 120 days upon written request by the applicant showing that circumstances beyond the control of the applicant have prevented action from being taken. In order to renew action on an application after expiration, the applicant shall resubmit plans and pay a new plan-checking fee. 
(Code 1996, § 132.24) 
Sec. 10-140. - Lot survey. 
    A survey of the lot may be required by the building official to verify compliance of the structure with approved plans. 
(Code 1996, § 132.26) 
Secs. 10-141-10-163. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - INSPECTIONS 

Sec. 10-164. - Required. 
(a)  All construction or work for which a permit is required shall be subject to inspection by the building official, and certain types of construction shall have continuous inspection by special inspectors, as specified in section 10-169. 
(b)  The building official, upon notification from the permit holder or agent, shall make the following applicable inspections and shall either approve that portion of the work as completed or shall notify the permit holder or agent wherein the same fails to comply with this division. 
(1)  Reinforcing steel or structural framework. Reinforcing steel or structural framework of any part of any building or structure shall not be covered or concealed without first obtaining the approval of the building official. 
(2)  Foundation inspection. To be made after trenches are excavated and forms erected and when all materials for the foundation are delivered on the job. Where concrete from a central mixing plant (commonly termed "transit mixed") is to be used, materials need not be on the job. 
(3)  Frame inspection. To be made after the roof, all framing, fire blocking, and bracing are in place and all pipes, chimneys, and vents are complete. 
(4)  Mechanical inspection. To be made before concealment or use. 
(5)  Plumbing inspection. To be made before concealment or use. 
(6)  Electrical inspection. To be made before concealment or use. 
(7)  Lath or wallboard inspection. To be made after all lathing or wallboard, interior and exterior, is in place; but before any plastering is applied or before wallboard joints and fasteners are taped and finished. 
(8)  Other inspections. In addition to the called inspections specified above, the building official may make or require any other inspections of any construction or work to ascertain compliance with the provisions of this division and other laws which are enforced by the building official. 
(9)  Final inspection. To be made after work is completed or the building ready for occupancy. 
(Code 1996, §§ 132.30, 132.25) 
Sec. 10-165. - Concealed work. 
    That portion of any work or equipment intended to be concealed by any permanent portion of the building shall not be concealed until inspected and approved. 
(Code 1996, § 132.27) 
Sec. 10-166. - Inspection record card. 
    Work requiring a permit shall not be commenced until the permit holder or agent shall have posted an inspection record card. This inspection record card shall be kept up to date. 
(Code 1996, § 132.28) 
Sec. 10-167. - Approvals required. 
    No work shall be done on any part of the building or structure beyond the point indicated in each successive inspection without first obtaining the written approval of the building official. Such written approval shall be given only after an inspection shall have been made of each successive step in the construction as indicated by each of the inspections required in section 10-164. There shall be a final inspection and approval of all buildings and work when ready for occupancy or completed. 
(Code 1996, § 132.29) 
Sec. 10-168. - Duty to maintain; reinspection. 
    All buildings or structures both existing and new, and all parts thereof, shall be maintained in a safe and sanitary condition. All devices or safeguards which are required by this division in a building or structure when erected, altered, or repaired, shall be maintained in good working order. The owner or designated agent shall be responsible for the maintenance of buildings and structures. For the purpose of determining compliance with this section the building official may cause any structure to be reinspected. 
(Code 1996, § 132.31) 
Sec. 10-169. - Special inspections. 
(a)  Type of work. In addition to the inspections to be made as specified in section 10-164, the owner or agent shall employ a special inspector who shall be present at all times during construction on the following types of work: 
(1)  Concrete. On concrete work when the structural design is based on compressive strength of concrete in excess of 2,000 p.s.i. 
(2)  Masonry. Masonry work shall have special inspection when required in the International Building Code. 
(3)  Welding. On all structural welding. 
(4)  Reinforced gypsum concrete. When cast-in-place Class B reinforced gypsum concrete is being mixed or deposited. 
(5)  Special cases. On special construction or work involving unusual hazards or requiring constant inspection. 
(b)  Exception. The building official may waive the requirement for the employment of a special inspector if the building official finds that the construction or work is such that no unusual hazard exists. 
(Code 1996, § 132.32) 
Sec. 10-170. - Special inspector. 
    The special inspector shall be a qualified person approved by the building official. The special inspector shall furnish continuous inspection on the construction and work requiring the special inspector's employment. The special inspector shall report to the building official in writing, noting all ordinance violations and other information as required. 
(Code 1996, § 132.33) 
Sec. 10-171. - Special inspection for certain approved fabricators. 
    Special inspections required by section 10-169 and elsewhere in this division shall not be required where the work is done on the premises of a fabricator approved by the building official to perform such work without special inspection. The certificate of approval shall be subject to revocation by the building official if it is found that any work done pursuant to the approval is in violation of this division. 
(Code 1996, § 132.34) 
Sec. 10-172. - Request for inspection. 
    The building official may require that every request for inspection be filed at least one day before such inspection is desired. Such request may be in writing or by telephone at the option of the building official. 
(Code 1996, § 132.35) 
Sec. 10-173. - Access. 
    It shall be the duty of the person requesting inspection to provide access to and means for proper inspection. The building official shall not be liable for any expense entailed in the removal or replacement of any material required to allow the inspection. 
(Code 1996, § 132.36) 
Sec. 10-174. - Power, fuel and water supply connections. 
    Systems or equipment regulated by this division shall not be connected to the power, fuel or water supply until authorized by the building official, except that this section shall not be considered to prohibit the operation of any equipment installed to replace existing equipment serving an occupied portion of a building in the event a request for inspection of such equipment has been filed with the building official not more than 48 hours after such replacement work is completed and before any portion of such equipment is concealed by any permanent portion of the building. 
(Code 1996, § 132.37) 
Secs. 10-175-10-201. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT STANDARDS 

Sec. 10-202. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this article is to protect public health, property, welfare and safety by establishing reasonable minimum requirements for the construction and design of public improvements within the city. These design standards and construction specifications, along with the supplemental specifications, will be used to design and construct public improvements within the city. 
(Code 1996, § 109.01) 
Sec. 10-203. - Adoption of standards. 
    Except as hereinafter added to, deleted, modified or amended, the following manuals are adopted as, and constitute, urban design and specifications manuals for public improvements of the city. 
(1)  SUDAS Design Manual. The Iowa Statewide Urban Design Standards for Public Improvements Manual, 2019 edition, as published by the Iowa SUDAS Corporation, is adopted by reference in full except for the following portions that are deleted, modified or amended: 
a.  Chapter 7 Erosion and Sediment Control, Table 7E-23.01: Classification of Vegetation, delete from list: Kudzu; Lespedeza; Crabgrass; Red Top; Centipedegrass; Common Lespedeza. 
b.  Chapter 8 Parking Lots. Delete. 
(2)  SUDAS Specifications Manual. The Iowa Statewide Urban Standard Specifications for Public Improvements Manual, 2019 edition, as published by the Iowa SUDAS Corporation, is adopted by reference in full except for the following portions that are deleted, modified or amended: 
a.  Division 9 Site Work and Landscaping, Table 9010.01 Domestic Grasses, delete from the list: Brome, smooth-Lincoln; Fescue, creeping, red; Wildrye, Russian. 
b.  Division 9 Site Work and Landscaping, Table 9010.02 Legumes, shall not be used near native plantings. 
c.  Division 9 Site Work and Landscaping, Table 9010.02 Legumes, delete from the list: Lespedeza. 
(Code 1996, § 109.02) 
Secs. 10-204-10-229. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - UNSAFE BUILDINGS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Authority to prohibit nuisances, abatement procedure, Code of Iowa § 364.12. 

Sec. 10-230. - Enforcement officer. 
    The building official shall be responsible for the enforcement of this article. 
(Code 1996, § 130.01) 
Sec. 10-231. - Declared public nuisance subject to abatement. 
    All unsafe buildings are declared to be public nuisances and shall be abated by repair, rehabilitation, demolition, or removal in accordance with the procedure specified in this article. 
(Code 1996, § 130.02) 
Sec. 10-232. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Unsafe buildings means buildings or structures which are structurally unsafe or not provided with adequate egress, or which constitute a fire hazard, or are otherwise dangerous to human life, or which in relation to existing use constitute a hazard to safety or health, or public welfare, by reason of inadequate maintenance, dilapidation, obsolescence, or abandonment, as specified in this article or any ordinance, are, for the purpose of this article, unsafe buildings. The term "unsafe buildings" includes any structure or manufactured or mobile home meeting any or all of the following criteria: 
(1)  Collapse of member. Whenever any portion or member or appurtenance thereof is likely to fail, or to become detached or dislodged, or to collapse and thereby injure persons or damage property. 
(2)  Wind resistance. Whenever any portion of a building, or any member, appurtenance or ornamentation on the exterior thereof is not of sufficient strength or stability, or is not so anchored, attached or fastened in place so as to be capable of resisting a wind pressure of 20 pounds per square foot. 
(3)  Material deterioration. Whenever any portion thereof has cracked, warped, buckled, or settled to such an extent that walls or other structural portions have materially less resistance to winds or earthquakes than is required in the case of similar new construction. 
(4)  Various inadequacies. Whenever the building or structure, or any portion thereof, because of: 
a.  Dilapidation, deterioration, or decay; 
b.  Faulty construction; 
c.  The removal, movement or instability of any portion of the ground necessary for the purpose of supporting such building; 
d.  The deterioration, decay or inadequacy of its foundation; or 
e.  Any other cause, is likely to partially or completely collapse. 
(5)  Manifestly unsafe. Whenever, for any reason, the building or structure, or any portion thereof, is manifestly unsafe for the purpose for which it is being used. 
(6)  Exterior walls. Whenever the exterior walls or other vertical structural members list, lean or buckle to such an extent that a plumb line passing through the center of gravity does not fall inside the middle one-third of the base. 
(7)  Deterioration. Whenever the building or structure, exclusive of the foundation, shows 33 percent or more damage or deterioration of its supporting member or members, or 50 percent damage or deterioration of its nonsupporting members, enclosing or outside walls or coverings. 
(8)  Damaged structurally. Whenever the building or structure has been so damaged by fire, wind, earthquake or flood, or has become so dilapidated or deteriorated as to become: 
a.  An attractive nuisance to children; 
b.  A harbor for vagrants, criminals or immoral persons; or as to 
c.  Enable persons to resort thereto for the purpose of committing unlawful or immoral acts. 
(9)  Inadequate maintenance. Whenever a building or structure, used or intended to be used for dwelling purposes, because of inadequate maintenance, dilapidation, decay, damage, faulty construction or arrangement, inadequate light, air or sanitation facilities, or otherwise, is determined by any health officer to be unsanitary, unfit for human habitation or in such condition that it is likely to cause sickness or disease. 
(10)  Fire hazard. Whenever any building or structure, because of obsolescence, dilapidated condition, deterioration, damage, inadequate exits, lack of sufficient fire-resistive construction, faulty electric wiring, gas connections or heating apparatus, or other cause, is determined by the fire marshal or fire chief to be a fire hazard. 
(11)  Public nuisance. Whenever any building or structure is in such a condition as to constitute a public nuisance known to the common law or in equity jurisprudence. 
(12)  Abandoned. Whenever any portion of a building or structure remains on a site after the demolition or destruction of the building or structure or whenever any building or structure is abandoned for a period in excess of six months so as to constitute such building or portion thereof an attractive nuisance or hazard to the public. 
(Code 1996, §§ 130.02, 130.03) 
State Law reference- Similar definitions, Code of Iowa § 657A.1. 
Sec. 10-233. - Notice to owner. 
    The enforcement officer shall examine or cause to be examined every building or structure or portion thereof reported as dangerous or damaged and, if such is found to be an unsafe building as defined in this article, the enforcement officer shall give to the owner of such building or structure written notice stating the defects thereof. This notice may require the owner or person in charge of the building or premises, within 48 hours or such reasonable time as the circumstances require, to commence either the required repairs or improvements or demolition and removal of the building or structure or portions thereof, and all such work shall be completed within 90 days from date of notice, unless otherwise stipulated by the enforcement officer. If necessary, such notice shall also require the building, structure, or portion thereof to be vacated forthwith and not reoccupied until the required repairs and improvements are completed, inspected and approved by the enforcement officer. 
(1)  Notice served. Such notice shall be served by sending by certified mail to owner of record, according to the Code of Iowa § 364.12 if the owner is found within the city limits. If the owner is not found within the city limits such service may be made upon the owner by registered mail or certified mail. The designated period within which the owner or person in charge is required to comply with the order of the enforcement officer shall begin as of the date the owner receives such notice. 
(2)  Hearing. Such notice shall also advise the owner that he may request a hearing before the council on the notice by filing a written request for hearing within the time provided in the notice. 
(Code 1996, § 130.04) 
Sec. 10-234. - Conduct of hearing. 
    If requested, the council shall conduct a hearing in accordance with the following: 
(1)  Notice. The owner shall be served with written notice specifying the date, time and place of hearing. 
(2)  Owner's rights. At the hearing, the owner may appear and show cause why the alleged nuisance shall not be abated. 
(3)  Determination. The council shall make and record findings of fact and may issue such order as it deems appropriate. 
(Code 1996, § 130.05) 
Sec. 10-235. - Posting of signs. 
    The enforcement officer shall cause to be posted at each entrance to such building a notice to read: "DO NOT ENTER. UNSAFE TO OCCUPY. WEBSTER CITY, IOWA." Such notice shall remain posted until the required repairs, demolition, or removal are completed. Such notice shall not be removed without written permission of the enforcement officer and no person shall enter the building except for the purpose of making the required repairs or of demolishing the building. 
(Code 1996, § 130.06) 
Sec. 10-236. - Right to demolish. 
    In case the owner fails, neglects, or refuses to comply with the notice to repair, rehabilitate, or to demolish and remove the building or structure or portion thereof, the council may order the owner of the building prosecuted as a violator of the provisions of this article and may order the enforcement officer to proceed with the work specified in such notice. A statement of the cost of such work shall be transmitted to the council. 
(Code 1996, § 130.07) 
Sec. 10-237. - Costs. 
    Costs incurred under section 10-236 shall be paid out of the city treasury. Such costs shall be charged to the owner of the premises involved and levied as a special assessment against the land on which the building or structure is located, and shall be certified to the county treasurer for collection in the manner provided for other taxes. 
(Code 1996, § 130.08) 
Secs. 10-238-10-267. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - VACANT AND ABANDONED PROPERTY 

Sec. 10-268. - Purpose. 
    The city recognizes that chronic nuisances have a significant impact on the health, safety and welfare of a community. Having directly experienced the negative effects of multiple, chronic nuisances occurring in and on abandoned and vacant commercial and industrial properties, the city is creating an ordinance that establishes a process for addressing predictable nuisance activities prior to the abandonment and vacancy of such properties. This article is therefore enacted to ensure the reasonable care and maintenance of vacant and abandoned facilities and properties, and establish reasonable procedures for mitigating threats to public health, safety and welfare. 
(Code 1996, § 143.01) 
Sec. 10-269. - Applicability. 
    This article shall apply to all of the following: 
(1)  Any parcel, lot or property equal to or greater than one acre and zoned C-2, C-3, M-1 or M-2; 
(2)  Any building or structure greater than 7,500 square feet and located in a C-2, C-3, M-1 or M-2 zone; and 
(3)  Any building or structure greater than 7,500 square feet that is occupied by a commercial or industrial use. 
(Code 1996, § 143.02) 
Sec. 10-270. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Abandoned means the vacancy of a building or property, as defined in section 10-269 and where there is no planned transfer of ownership. 
    Discovery means the point at which the person responsible for the property is made aware of a nuisance through personal experience or by official notice from the city. 
    Maintenance means acts required to be performed to real property, buildings and any appurtenances thereto by any ordinances of the city and other good care and maintenance of real property and buildings, including, but not limited to, repair of broken windows, repairs to structural damage, remediation of hazards that pose a risk to the health, safety and welfare of the general public, and all other similar and reasonable measures. 
    Maintenance and physical security plan means a plan submitted by a person in charge of the property to the city prior to abandonment or vacancy that describes the maintenance and physical security that will be provided for during that time of abandonment or vacancy. 
    Nuisance activity means and includes: 
(1)  Any nuisance as defined by state law or local ordinance occurring on, around or near a property, including but not limited to, violations of the following laws and regulations: 
a.  Chapter 32, article I, In General (nuisances). 
b.  Chapter 32, article IV, Abatement. 
c.  Chapter 32, article II, Specific Nuisances. 
d.  Chapter 38, Signs. 
e.  Chapter 32, article II, division 3, Abandoned vehicles. 
f.  Chapter 32, article II, division 4, Junk and junk vehicles. 
g.  Chapter 42, article X, Trees and shrubbery. 
h.  Chapter 32, article III, Chronic nuisances (Ice, snow, maintenance). 
(2)  For purpose of this article, nuisance activity shall not include where the person responsible is the victim of a crime. 
    Permanent vacancy means the vacancy of a building or property, as defined in section 10-269, that is anticipated to last for a period of longer than 12 months and where there exists a planned transfer of ownership. 
    Person in charge, person responsible for the property or person responsible means, unless otherwise defined, any and all persons who have titled ownership of the property, building or appurtenance which is subject to this article, persons in actual or constructive possession of a property, a landlord, occupants in control of the property or structure which is subject to this article, a person with responsibility for managing the property or building, a developer, building or business operators or owners who are developing, building or operating a business on the property or in a structure which is subject to this article or any person who has responsibility for or control over the care and maintenance of property or buildings. 
    Physical security means those measures taken to secure a property, its buildings or appurtenances thereon, including but not limited to, locking devices, alarm systems, fencing, blocking windows and doors with boards or other materials, etc. 
    Planned transfer of ownership means the planned sale, lease, or other disposition of real property to a person that maintains no current interest in the ownership. 
    Primary vacancy means the departure of a primary business activity from a qualifying property, but where there may remain or be added a secondary business activity or secondary business use. 
    Qualifying property or qualified property means real property in the form of a parcel, lot, building or structure that as defined in section 10-269. 
    Secondary business activity or secondary business use means the use of any qualified property for the direct or indirect transaction of business through renting, leasing, loaning, permitting or contracting of the property or buildings thereon for the storage of materials, vehicles, trash or items of value, or for any other similar business use that supports an underlining business activity where the business involved does not have management responsibility for the maintenance of the property, buildings or appurtenances thereto. 
    Temporary vacancy means the vacancy of a building or property, as defined in section 10-269, for a period of twelve months or less and where there is a planned transfer of ownership. 
(Code 1996, § 143.03) 
Sec. 10-271. - Duty to secure buildings and property. 
    The person responsible for the property has a duty to secure all property, buildings and appurtenances thereto during any period of abandonment or period of vacancy as defined in section 10-270. 
(Code 1996, § 143.04) 
Sec. 10-272. - Duty to prevent nuisances. 
    The person responsible for the property has a duty to prevent nuisances and nuisance activities on all property, buildings and appurtenances thereto during any period of abandonment or vacancy as defined by this article. 
(Code 1996, § 143.05) 
Sec. 10-273. - Duty to maintain condition. 
    The person responsible for the property has a duty to maintain good care and condition of the property, buildings and appurtenances thereto as required by this article. 
(Code 1996, § 143.06) 
Sec. 10-274. - Duty to timely abate nuisances. 
    The person responsible for the property has a duty to abate all nuisances within 72 hours of discovery unless otherwise established by law. The abatement of nuisances shall be in accordance with all city ordinances, the maintenance and physical security plan, and any other applicable laws or agreements in enforce at the time of the nuisance. 
(Code 1996, § 143.07) 
Sec. 10-275. - Notification and meeting. 
    Not later than 90 days prior to the abandonment or vacancy of a qualified property, the person responsible for the property shall provide the building official with notice of the pending abandonment or vacancy and a general description of the property and any buildings or appurtenances thereon. At such time notice is received, the city shall schedule a coordination meeting with the person responsible for the property and representatives from those city departments that may be impacted. 
(Code 1996, § 143.08) 
Sec. 10-276. - Plan and financial security required. 
    Once a coordination meeting has been completed, the person responsible for the property shall be required to develop a maintenance and physical security plan in accordance with the requirements of this article and submit a proposed plan and the following information to the building official not later than 30 days prior to the abandonment or vacancy: 
(1)  A physical description of the property and any buildings or structures that will be vacated or abandoned; 
(2)  A proposed physical maintenance and security plan as described in section 10-277; and 
(3)  A proposed financial security consistent with the requirements in section 10-284. 
(Code 1996, § 143.09) 
Sec. 10-277. - Maintenance and physical security plan requirements. 
    The maintenance and physical security plan shall include the following elements: 
(1)  Identification of the property and each building and appurtenance, and the description of the maintenance (landscaping, snow removal, etc.) that the person responsible for each shall perform or cause to be performed to ensure compliance with all ordinances of the city; 
(2)  Identification of each building or structure and description of the materials and methods that shall be used to physically secure the buildings or appurtenances; 
(3)  Identification of known physical hazards on the property and a description of the materials and methods that shall be used to secure the physical hazards; 
(4)  Identification of the process for abatement of future nuisance activities; 
(5)  Identification of the process for abatement of nuisances caused by third parties and not otherwise addressed in this Code, including, but not limited to, graffiti removal, re-securing the premises after vandalism and repairing damage from natural disasters; 
(6)  If required, an agreed upon schedule for inspections of the property for compliance with this plan; 
(7)  A list of the person that will be responsible for the maintenance and security of the property, including daytime and evening phone numbers and any other relevant emergency and non-emergency contact information including, at a minimum, the person name, title, phone number, email address and mailing address; and 
(8)  Any other elements or conditions that may be required by the city upon review and approval of the plan. 
(Code 1996, § 143.10) 
Sec. 10-278. - Plan review. 
    Upon receiving a completed packet containing the requirements of section 10-276, the building official shall review the plan, description and proposed financial security. Upon finding that this information is complete, meets the requirements of this article and includes those conditions as may have been recommended by the city during the coordination meeting, the building official shall transmit the maintenance and physical security plan and proposed financial security to the city council for their consideration and make a recommendation on any additional conditions or reasonable measures that may be necessary to ensure compliance with the plan and this article. 
(Code 1996, § 143.11) 
Sec. 10-279. - Approval of plan. 
    The city council shall review the proposed maintenance and physical security plan for compliance with the requirements of this article and any conditions recommended by staff. The city council may by resolution approve, approve with conditions or remand the plan. 
(Code 1996, § 143.12) 
Sec. 10-280. - Acceptance of financial security. 
    At the same time council reviews a proposed maintenance and physical security plan, they shall also review the proposed financial security. Once council has approved a maintenance and physical security plan, the council shall approve by resolution the amount and type of financial security that will be required in accordance with the requirements in section 10-284. 
(Code 1996, § 143.13) 
Sec. 10-281. - Notice to proceed. 
    Once the maintenance and physical security plan and proposed financial security have been approved by city council, the building official shall issue a notice to proceed with the abandonment or vacancy upon receipt of: 
(1)  Proof the instrument required in section 10-283 has been recorded against the property; and 
(2)  Proof of a financial security in the amount and form as established by resolution of the city council has been secured. 
(Code 1996, § 143.14) 
Sec. 10-282. - Expiration. 
    Unless otherwise established by the city council, the requirement for a maintenance and physical security plan and financial instrument shall be in full force and effect for the duration of any abandonment or vacancy. The city council shall have the right to establish periodic review of the maintenance and physical security plan to evaluate the effectiveness and applicability of the plan and its financial security, or to evaluate the necessity of the plan to remain in effect. 
(Code 1996, § 143.15) 
Sec. 10-283. - Recording of plan. 
    Once a maintenance and physical security plan has been approved, the person responsible for the property must record an instrument against the property that reads: "This property is required to comply with a maintenance and physical security plan and maintain a financial security approved in accordance with chapter 10, article VI of the Code of Ordinances. The person responsible for this property shall be responsible for the compliance and this plan shall run with the property and be the obligation of any successors, heirs or assigns." 
(Code 1996, § 143.16) 
Sec. 10-284. - Financial security. 
    The person responsible for the property shall provide financial security in the form of a bond or alternative surety that complies with all statutory requirements and shall be satisfactory to the city attorney as to form, sufficiency and manner of execution. 
(1)  Term. The financial security shall be in full force and effect during the entire time of an abandonment or vacancy. Should the financial security proposed by the person responsible for the property include a term limit, the city council shall consider such requirements or conditions as may be necessary to ensure the required security runs uninterrupted for the entire duration of the abandonment or vacancy. 
(2)  Amount. The amount of the financial security shall be equal to: 
a.  Fifteen percent of the assessed value of undeveloped properties; or 
b.  Five percent of the total assessed value of the property and any buildings or structures thereon. 
(3)  Default. The city council may declare a bond or alternative financial security to be in default and act upon the instrument of security at such time the city must intervene because: 
a.  The property is not in compliance with the requirements of the approved maintenance and physical security plan or financial security, and the person responsible for the property has not responded to the city's request for compliance; 
b.  The property is declared a chronic nuisance property under article III of chapter 32; or 
c.  There is an immediate threat to the public health, safety and welfare. 
(Code 1996, § 143.17) 
Sec. 10-285. - Inspections. 
    The maintenance and physical security plan may establish an agreed upon schedule for inspection of the property and any buildings or structures for compliance with the plan. However, nothing herein shall restrict the city's lawful powers to inspect or investigate the property. 
(Code 1996, § 143.18) 
Sec. 10-286. - Review of the plan and financial security. 
    The maintenance and physical security plan or required financial security may be reviewed by the city council upon: 
(1)  Receipt of a request from the person responsible for the property to amend or repeal the plan or financial security; 
(2)  Notification that the property and any buildings or structures covered by the plan and financial security are in violation of this article or any other related chapter; or 
(3)  Transfer of ownership of the property and notification by the new owner that the property has been reoccupied. 
(Code 1996, § 143.19) 
Sec. 10-287. - Duty to keep information current. 
    The person responsible for the property shall be required to keep their contact information and the contact information for other persons identified within the maintenance and physical security plan updated. 
(Code 1996, § 143.20) 
Sec. 10-288. - Violation. 
    Any person responsible for the property who fails to comply with the requirements of this article or permits a violation of the requirements of this article shall be in violation of this article and subject to its remedies and penalties. A violation of this article includes, but is not limited to, a failure to perform the requirements of this article, a failure to follow a plan approved under this article, a failure to keep in place an uninterrupted financial security as required by this article or a violation of articles III or IV of chapter 32. 
(Code 1996, § 143.21) 
Sec. 10-289. - Penalties. 
    A violation of this article shall be a simple misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be subject to a fine of not more than $500.00 or imprisonment not to exceed 30 days. Each violation of this article shall be a separate offense. 
(Code 1996, § 143.22) 
Sec. 10-290. - Limitation of liability. 
    By enforcement of this article, the city shall not bear any responsibility for actions or inactions on private property, or assume, accept, inherit or incur any liability, physical or otherwise, that results from or relates to the ownership, maintenance or management of the private property herein regulated. 
(Code 1996, § 143.23) 
Secs. 10-291-10-313. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - MOVING BUILDINGS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 10-314. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Building means a structure designed, built or occupied as a shelter or roofed enclosure for persons, animals or property and used for residential, business or mercantile storage or commercial, industrial, institutional, assembly, educational or recreational purposes, which when loaded on any carrier of any kind has a loaded width exceeding eight feet. 
    Building mover means any person who engages in the work of moving in any way, or raising, lowering or supporting by shoring, or upon temporary blocking, jacks or wedges, any building or other structure, or any part thereof, upon or across the public streets, alleys, walks or property. 
(Code 1996, § 162.01) 
Sec. 10-315. - Time limit for installation of building on new site; building permit required. 
    No licensee under this article shall move any building to any lot unless he shall have first obtained, in addition to the moving permit required under division 2 of this article, a building permit for the building on the lot from the building official, and no permit for moving a house to a lot in the city shall be granted by the building official if there has not been issued a building permit for the building on the lot. No building shall be moved to a lot in the city for the purpose of storing the building on the lot. A building moved to a lot shall be permanently installed on its new foundation within 60 days of the date moved on the lot. 
(Code 1996, § 162.15) 
Sec. 10-316. - Moving of certain buildings prohibited; safety of route. 
(a)  No building shall be moved upon or through the streets of the city which exceeds 34 feet, including overhang, in width, or which exceeds 30 feet loaded height without prior approval by the city council of the city. 
(b)  No building shall be moved on any route which in the opinion of the police chief, public works director, and building official endangers other buildings, individuals, or property. 
(Code 1996, § 162.05) 
Sec. 10-317. - Responsibility for injuries or damage. 
    Any injury done to any street, highway, boulevard, alley, public ground, sidewalk, curb, crossing or pavement when a building is moved shall be promptly repaired to the satisfaction of the public works director, and the cost of any injury or damage done to any person or to any property, either public or private, shall be promptly paid, and the bond provided for in section 10-362 shall stand as security therefor. 
(Code 1996, § 162.06) 
Sec. 10-318. - Report of damage. 
    The house mover shall report any damage done to any street, highway, boulevard, alley, sidewalk, curb, tree or telephone or light pole or wires, or to any other public or private property, except property owned by the house mover or the structure being moved, to the building official, within 24 hours from and after the occurrence causing the damage. 
(Code 1996, § 162.07) 
Sec. 10-319. - Parking on private property. 
    It is unlawful for any person moving a building to stop, stand or park a house, equipment, material or structure upon privately-owned property without first having obtained the consent of the owner or person in charge of the privately-owned property. Upon complaint of the owner or person in charge of the privately-owned property, failure of the person to obtain the consent is declared to be an offense. 
(Code 1996, § 162.08) 
Sec. 10-320. - Use of streets; hours for movement; emergency storage on street. 
(a)  In no case shall paved streets, alleys, avenues or public grounds be used for the purpose of moving any building unless they are in the most practical direct route from the place of origin to the place of destination. The route chosen shall cause the least damage to electrical wires, telephone wires, trees, and other property or public service corporations or private individuals. The movement, when commenced, shall be continued, day by day, until completed, with the least possible obstruction to the thoroughfares occupied. 
(b)  No building being moved shall be stored on the streets of the city unless authorized by the city manager. No such authorization shall be granted unless application for the occupancy is made to the building official, in writing, setting forth the reasons therefor. The occupancy shall be granted only if the applicant demonstrates that an emergency exists which was not the making of the individual moving the building or to which the mover did not contribute. Before authorization for street occupancy can be granted, the applicant must sign a statement assuming liability for any damage to persons and property, including property of the city, and indemnify the city for any claims against the city arising out of the occupancy. Barricades of a type meeting the public works department specifications as to size and illumination shall be kept in a conspicuous place at each end and side of the building during the night, which shall be between sunset and sunrise. 
(c)  Every house mover shall report to the fire chief, police chief, ambulance, and E911 if stored on public property. 
(d)  When in the judgment of the public works director it is necessary to protect streets or street improvements, the building mover may be required to properly and adequately plank such streets and all rollers, trucks or other devices used in conveying and moving the same shall run upon and rest upon such planks at all times. 
(Code 1996, § 162.09) 
Sec. 10-321. - Temporary no parking zones. 
    Parking shall be prohibited on streets included in the routing for the moving of a building if deemed necessary by the city. At least 48 hours in advance of the time of moving, the person moving the building shall post signs provided by the city designating the streets included in the routing as no parking zones. It is unlawful for any person to park a motor vehicle in such no parking zones when the temporary no parking signs are posted. If any automobile is parked illegally in violation of the provisions of this section, and a summons has been issued by the police department, the person moving the building shall be responsible for the expense of towing the vehicle away. The person moving the building shall assume all risk of damage to any vehicle either towed away or parked in the route. The person moving the building shall remove all temporary no parking signs on the streets included in the routing immediately after the building being moved has passed the street assigned for no parking. The person moving the building shall return the no parking signs to the city after their removal, and shall pay the city for any signs lost, damaged or destroyed. 
(Code 1996, § 162.10) 
Sec. 10-322. - Inspection of streets. 
    The party moving any building shall, within one day after the building reaches its destination, report such fact to the building official, who shall thereupon notify the public works director, who shall immediately inspect the streets and alleys or public grounds over which the building was moved and ascertain the condition of the streets, alleys or public grounds. If the moving of such building has caused any damage to the streets, alleys or public grounds or electric light wires or cables or other property belonging to the city, the city shall repair the damage done at the expense of the party taking out the permit and shall hold the sureties on the bond given by the house mover responsible for the payment of the expense. 
(Code 1996, § 162.11) 
Sec. 10-323. - Removal of utility poles and wires. 
    Whenever, in moving any building, it shall be necessary to cut or move any electric light, telephone, traffic or other wire, pole or fixture, the owner of the wire, pole or fixture shall have the right to cut or move it or supervise the cutting or moving, and a written notice shall be given by the moving permittee to the owner at least 48 hours before the time required for cutting or moving, specifying the place, the person who requests the cutting or removal, and the time when the cutting or removal will be required. The expense of cutting or removing the wires, poles or fixtures or supervising the cutting or removal shall be paid by the moving contractor, if the owner of the wires, poles or fixtures has done the work in accordance with the provisions of this Code or other ordinances of the city relating thereto. If the owners of the wires, poles or fixtures have failed to comply with the provisions of this Code or other ordinances of the city relating thereto, then the owner shall bear all expenses of cutting or removing the wires, poles or fixtures. 
(Code 1996, § 162.12) 
Sec. 10-324. - Clearing and filling of old building site; abandonment of utility connections. 
(a)  After a building is moved, all abandoned water, sewer, electrical and other service connections shall be plugged and filled in. In addition, all abandoned septic tanks and dry wells shall be pumped out and filled with sand. Permission to so abandon utilities, septic tanks and dry wells shall first be obtained from the city, and any other necessary release shall be obtained from the utility companies. The releases and permission must be filed with the application for a permit to move the building. 
(b)  Every permittee under this article shall remove all rubbish and materials and fill all excavations to existing grade at the original building site within 60 days after the building is moved, so that the premises are left in a safe and sanitary condition. Within 90 days after the building is moved, but no less than 30 days after final grading of the site, or at the earliest opportunity during the growing season that is conducive to plant germination, the site shall be seeded with grass or similar acceptable vegetative ground cover. The owner of the property shall make reasonable efforts to ensure proper germination of the planted vegetation, and the property owner shall thereafter maintain the property in compliance with all applicable city ordinances. 
(c)  The city shall proceed to do all work necessary to leave the original premises in a safe and sanitary condition where the permittee does not comply with the requirements of this article, and the cost thereof shall be charged against the general surety bond of the permittee. 
(Code 1996, § 162.13) 
Sec. 10-325. - Compliance with building and zoning regulations. 
(a)  After a change of use has been made in a building, the reestablishment of a prior use that would not have been legal in a new building of the same type of construction is prohibited unless all the provisions of the building code and the city zoning ordinance and all other applicable provisions of this Code or other city ordinances are complied with. A change from one prohibited use to another prohibited use shall be deemed a violation of the building code and of the city zoning ordinance. 
(b)  Each moved building shall be made to comply with all the provisions of the city building codes. 
(c)  All work required to bring the building moved up to the standards required by subsections (a) and (b) of this section shall be completed prior to occupancy. 
(Code 1996, § 162.14) 
Secs. 10-326-10-353. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - MOVING PERMIT 

Sec. 10-354. - Moving permit required. 
    No person shall move any building over, along or across any highway, street or alley in the city without first obtaining a permit from the building official pursuant to this division. 
(Code 1996, § 162.16) 
Sec. 10-355. - Moving permit application. 
(a)  A building mover shall submit his application for a permit to move a building to the office of the building official at least 14 days prior to the proposed time of moving. The building owner or his representative must be present during the move. 
(b)  The application for the permit shall be made in writing on forms provided by the building official and shall be filed in his office. 
(c)  The application shall set forth: 
(1)  Name and address of the building mover and the building owner. 
(2)  A description of the building proposed to be moved including its maximum height and width when loaded. 
(3)  Present and proposed location of the building to be moved. 
(4)  The route over which the building is to be moved. 
(5)  The proposed moving date and hours. 
(6)  Locations of trees abutting the proposed route which would require trimming. 
(7)  Any additional information which the building official shall find necessary to determine whether a permit shall be issued. 
(Code 1996, § 162.17) 
Sec. 10-356. - Filing of consents to route. 
    With the application for a permit to move a building, there shall be filed the consents to the routing by the telephone company, cablevision company, the city utilities, the fire department, the police department, and the public works department, and, where the route crosses railroad property, consent must be obtained from the railroad involved. Final consent of the city manager must be obtained. 
(Code 1996, § 162.18) 
Sec. 10-357. - Filing of consents to trimming of trees. 
    If there are trees which do not have branches that extend into the public right-of-way but need to be trimmed because of the moving of a building, the permit applicant shall secure and file the written consent of the owner of the trees. If the trees extend into the public right-of-way, the additional written consent of the city manager must be obtained. The consent shall be based on the fact of whether or not serious damage or injury will result to the trees. 
(Code 1996, § 162.19) 
Sec. 10-358. - Applicant to show that owner of building is apprised of total cost of move. 
(a)  The building mover, if other than the owner, shall, when applying for a permit to move a building, submit evidence that the owner of the building to be moved is aware of the total of all costs and charges that will be incurred as a result of the moving, either through a signed agreement or a copy of a notification to the owner signed by both the mover and the owner. 
(b)  The applicant shall deposit with the city clerk a check covering 50 percent of the anticipated costs to be incurred by the city relating to the moving procedure. The costs shall be determined by the electric line distribution supervisor and the public works director. When the move has been completed and final costs have been determined, the remaining costs shall be paid within 30 days. 
(Code 1996, § 162.20) 
Sec. 10-359. - Fee. 
    The application for a permit to move a building shall be accompanied by a permit fee in such amount as established by the city council from time to time. 
(Code 1996, § 162.21) 
Sec. 10-360. - Issuance. 
    Upon the filing of the application for a permit to move a building, payment of the fee, proof of insurance, and filing of bond, and upon approval of the proposed move by the city manager, the public works director, and the police chief, the permit sought shall be issued by the building official. The permit shall state the length of time and the extent to which any street, highway or alley may be occupied for moving of the building. 
(Code 1996, § 162.22) 
Sec. 10-361. - Insurance required. 
    Before any permit required by this division shall be issued, the applicant shall obtain and furnish to the city an insurance policy for public liability and property damage in the amount of $100,000.00 per person injured, $300,000.00 for each accident, and $50,000.00 property damage. The insurance policy shall name the city and the applicant as named insured, and shall provide that the policy cannot be revoked, cancelled or modified in any way until the city has been notified by certified mail at least ten days prior to the proposed action. 
(Code 1996, § 162.23) 
Sec. 10-362. - Bond required. 
    The applicant for a permit required by this division shall file with his application a bond with an approved corporate surety in the penal sum of $20,000.00, conditioned that all work done under the license shall be done in a good and workmanlike manner, in accordance with all provisions of this Code and all other ordinances of the city relating to house moving, and that the applicant will pay to the city, to the city utilities or to any person all costs incurred or all damages for injuries to person or property, including, but not limited to, damages to any street, curb or sidewalk or to any other public property caused by negligence, fault or mismanagement of the applicant or person in his employ, or due to any other cause, in doing any work under the permit for such work. 
(Code 1996, § 162.24) 
Sec. 10-363. - Denial. 
(a)  When, in the judgment of the city manager, after recommendation by the police chief and the public works director, the proposed building movement will result in an undue hazard to traffic, or undue damage to streets, avenues, boulevards, thoroughfares, highways, curbs, sidewalks, trees or other public or private property, or where it is determined by the building official that the relocation of the building is not in the best interests of the surrounding property owners due to age of the structure or the structure's architecture not being compatible with the existing buildings, the permit sought shall be denied, and the reasons therefore endorsed upon the application. 
(b)  The permit to move a building shall also be denied if the structure will not comply with the provisions of this Code or other ordinances of the city or state law relating to electrical and plumbing requirements of new structures, unless the owner has obtained a permit to correct the violations, or if the power or telephone company refused to consent to the operations, or if the structure will not comply with the zoning ordinances within the proposed location. 
(Code 1996, § 162.25) 
Sec. 10-364. - Transfer of permit. 
    No permit issued pursuant to this division shall be transferable. 
(Code 1996, § 162.03) 
Sec. 10-365. - Revocation of permit. 
    Any person who shall, in the application for a permit required by this division, make any false or untrue statement, who shall violate the provisions of this division, who shall fail to pay any cost or expense incurred by the city as a result of his operations, or whose bond or insurance as required by this division has been cancelled or otherwise terminated, shall, upon such finding, have his permit revoked. 
(Code 1996, § 162.04) 
Secs. 10-366-10-388. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - FEES 

Sec. 10-389. - Electrical permit fees. 
    A fee for each electrical permit shall be paid to the city as set forth herein. 
Service Size: 7/1/16 7/1/17 7/1/18 Zero to 100 ampere capacity $50.00 $60.00 $70.00 101 to 200 ampere capacity $75.00 $85.00 $95.00 Each additional 100 amp capacity $25.00 $30.00 $35.00 Each branch circuit or feeder $10.00 $12.00 $14.00 Remodel/Additions: $30.00 $35.00 $40.00 Each branch circuit or feeder $10.00 $12.00 $14.00 Temporary Service $100.00 $110.00 $120.00 Detached Garage $50.00 $55.00 $60.00  
(Code 1996, § 198.01) 
Sec. 10-390. - Sign permit fees. 
    All applications for sign permits shall be accompanied by a payment of a fee for each sign according to the following schedule: 
Sign Permit 7/1/16 7/1/17 7/1/18 1. Illuminated $38.00 $39.00 $40.00 2. Non-illuminated $33.00 $34.00 $35.00 3. Structural alterations $27.00 $28.00 $29.00 4. Ordinary repairs, maintenance or replacement of sign face as set forth in section 38-127(b)(1) and (2) No fee 5. Temporary signs No fee 6. A zoning permit fee is not applicable.  
(Code 1996, § 198.02) 
Sec. 10-391. - Mechanical permit fees. 
    A fee for each mechanical permit shall be paid to the city as set forth herein. 
7/1/16 7/1/17 7/1/18 First unit $20.00 $21.00 $22.00 Additional units $7.00 $8.00 $9.00  
(Code 1996, § 198.03) 
Sec. 10-392. - Moving permit fees. 
    A fee for each moving permit shall be paid to the city as set forth herein. 
7/1/16 7/1/17 7/1/18 Moving permit $62.00 $64.00 $66.00  
(Code 1996, § 198.04) 
Sec. 10-393. - Plumbing permit fees. 
    A fee for each plumbing permit shall be paid to the city inspection department as set forth herein. 
7/1/16 7/1/17 7/1/18 House sewer $27.00 $28.00 $29.00 Water service $27.00 $28.00 $29.00 First fixture $20.00 $21.00 $22.00 Additional fixtures $7.00 $8.00 $9.00 Water heater replacement $20.00 $21.00 $22.00 Tap fees Time and materials Time and materials Time and materials  
(Code 1996, § 198.05) 
Sec. 10-394. - Building permit fees. 
    A fee for each building permit shall be paid to the city as follows: 
Valuation 7/1/16 7/1/17 7/1/18 $1.00 to $500.00 $30.00 $31.00 $32.00 $501.00 to $2,000.00  First $500.00 $30.00 $31.00 $32.00  Each additional $1,000 $3.75 $3.85 $3.95 $2,001.00 to $25,000.00  First $2,000.00 $85.00 $87.00 $89.00  Each additional $1,000.00 $17.25 $17.75 $18.25 $25,001 to $50,000.00  First $25,000.00 $481.00 $495.00 $510.00  Each additional $1,000.00 $12.35 $12.70 $13.10 $50,001.00 to $100,000.00  First $50,000.00 $791.00 $815.00 $839.00  Each additional $1,000.00 $8.60 $8.85 $9.10 $100,001.00 to $500,000.00  First $100,000.00 $1,223.00 $1,260.00 $1,298.00  Each additional $1,000.00 $7.20 $7.40 $7.60 $500,001.00 to $1,000,000.00  First $500,000.00 $3,978.00 $4,097.00 $4,220.00  Each additional $1,000.00 $5.85 $6.00 $6.20 $1,000,001.00 and over  First $1,000,000.00 $6,897.00 $7,104.00 $7,317.00  Each additional $1,000.00 $3.85 $3.95 $4.05  
(Code 1996, § 198.06) 
Sec. 10-395. - Plan review fees. 
    When a plan is required to be submitted for new industrial and commercial buildings, model homes, and new multifamily dwellings, fees are as follows: 
7/1/16 7/1/17 7/1/18 Commercial, industrial model homes and multifamily dwellings 30 percent of building permit fee 35 percent of building permit fee 35 percent of building permit fee  
(Code 1996, § 198.07) 
Sec. 10-396. - Utility disconnect and debris disposal permit fees. 
    A fee for each utility disconnect and debris disposal permit and shingle removal only permit shall be paid to the city as set forth herein. 
7/1/16 7/1/17 7/1/18 1. Utility disconnect and debris disposal permit $31.00 $32.00 $33.00 2. Shingle removal $21.00 $22.00 $23.00  
Sec. 10-397. - Entrance/sidewalk permit fees. 
    A fee for each entrance/sidewalk permit shall be paid to the city as set forth herein. 
7/1/16 7/1/17 7/1/18 Entrance/sidewalk permit $26.00 $27.00 $28.00  
(Code 1996, § 198.09) 
Sec. 10-398. - Excavation permit fee. 
    A permit fee as follows shall be payable at the time of filing the application with the city. A separate permit shall be required for each excavation: 
7/1/16 7/1/17 7/1/18 Excavation permit $26.00 $27.00 $28.00  
(Code 1996, § 198.10) 
Chapter 12 - BUSINESSES 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 12-1-12-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CIGARETTE, TOBACCO, ALTERNATIVE NICOTINE AND VAPOR PRODUCT SALES 

Sec. 12-19. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Alternative nicotine product means a product, not consisting of or containing tobacco, that provides for the ingestion into the body of nicotine, whether by chewing, absorbing, dissolving, inhaling, snorting, or sniffing, or by any other means. The term "alternative nicotine product " does not include cigarettes, tobacco products, or vapor products, or a product that is regulated as a drug or device by the federal food and drug administration under chapter V of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act. 
    Carton means a box or container of any kind in which ten or more packages or packs of cigarettes or tobacco products are offered for sale, sold or otherwise distributed to consumers. 
    Cigarette means any roll for smoking made wholly or in part of tobacco, or any substitute for tobacco, irrespective of size or shape and irrespective of tobacco or any substitute for tobacco being flavored, adulterated or mixed with any other ingredient, where such roll has a wrapper or cover made of paper or any other material. However, this definition is not to be construed to include cigars. 
    Package or pack means a container of any kind in which cigarettes or tobacco products are offered for sale, sold, or otherwise distributed to consumers. 
    Place of business means any place where cigarettes are sold, stored or kept for the purpose of sale or consumption by a retailer. 
    Retailer means every person who sells, distributes or offers for sale for consumption, or possesses for the purpose of sale for consumption, cigarettes, irrespective of the quantity or amount or the number of sales. 
    Self-service display means any manner of product display, placement, or storage from which a person purchasing the product may take possession of the product, prior to purchase, without assistance from the retailer or employee of the retailer, in removing the product from a restricted access location. 
    Tobacco products means the following: cigars; little cigars; cheroots; stogies; periques; granulated, plug cut, crimp cut, ready rubbed and other smoking tobacco; snuff; snuff flour; cavendish; plug and twist tobacco; fine-cut and other chewing tobaccos; shorts or refuse scraps, clippings, cuttings and sweepings of tobacco; and other kinds and forms of tobacco prepared in such manner as to be suitable for chewing or smoking in a pipe or otherwise, or for both chewing and smoking, but does not mean cigarettes. 
    Vapor product means any noncombustible product, which may or may not contain nicotine that employs a heating element, power source, electronic circuit, or other electronic, chemical, or mechanical means, regardless of shape or size that can be used to produce vapor from a solution or other substance. The term "vapor product" includes an electronic cigarette, electronic cigar, electronic cigarillo, electronic pipe, or similar product or device, and any cartridge or other container of a solution or other substance, which may or may not contain nicotine that is intended to be used with or in an electronic cigarette, electronic cigar, electronic cigarillo, electronic pipe, or similar product or device. The term "vapor product" does not include a product regulated as a drug or device by the federal food and drug administration under chapter V of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act. 
(Code 1996, § 160.01) 
Sec. 12-20. - Permit required. 
    It is unlawful for any person, other than a holder of a retail permit, to sell cigarettes at retail and no retailer shall distribute, sell or solicit the sale of any cigarettes within the city without a valid permit for each place of business. The permit shall be displayed publicly in the place of business so that it can be seen easily by the public. No permit shall be issued to a minor. 
(Code 1996, § 160.02) 
Sec. 12-21. - Application. 
    A completed application on forms provided by the state department of revenue and finance and accompanied by the required fee shall be filed with the clerk. Renewal applications shall be filed at least five days prior to the last regular meeting of the council in June. If a renewal application is not timely filed, and a special council meeting is called to act on the application, the costs of such special meeting shall be paid by the applicant. 
(Code 1996, § 160.03) 
Sec. 12-22. - Fees. 
    The fee for a retail permit shall be as follows: 
For Permits Granted During: Fee: July, August or September $75.00 October, November or December $56.25 January, February or March $37.50 April, May or June $18.75  
(Code 1996, § 160.04) 
Sec. 12-23. - Issuance and expiration. 
    Upon proper application and payment of the required fee, a permit shall be issued. Each permit issued shall describe clearly the place of business for which it is issued and shall be nonassignable. All permits expire on June 30 of each year. The clerk shall submit a duplicate of any application for a permit, and any permit issued, to the state department of public health within 30 days of issuance. 
(Code 1996, § 160.05) 
Sec. 12-24. - Refunds. 
    A retailer may surrender an unrevoked permit and receive a refund from the city, except during April, May or June, in accordance with the schedule of refunds as provided in the Code of Iowa § 453A.13. 
(Code 1996, § 160.06) 
Sec. 12-25. - Persons under legal age. 
    No person shall sell, give or otherwise supply any tobacco, tobacco products or cigarettes to any person under 18 years of age. The provision of this section includes prohibiting a minor from purchasing cigarettes or tobacco products from a vending machine. If a retailer or employee of a retailer violates the provisions of this section, the council shall, after written notice and hearing, and in addition to the other penalties fixed for such violation, assess the following: 
(1)  For a first violation, the retailer shall be assessed a civil penalty in the amount of $300.00. Failure to pay the civil penalty as ordered under this subsection shall result in automatic suspension of the permit for a period of 14 days. 
(2)  For a second violation within a period of two years, the retailer's permit shall be suspended for a period of 30 days. 
(3)  For a third violation within a period of three years, the retailer's permit shall be suspended for a period of 60 days. 
(4)  For a fourth violation within a period of three years, the retailer's permit shall be revoked. 
The clerk shall give written notice to the retailer by mailing a copy of the notice to the place of business as it appears on the application for a permit. The notice shall state the reason for the contemplated action and the time and place at which the retailer may appear and be heard. 
(Code 1996, § 160.07) 
Sec. 12-26. - Self-service sales prohibited. 
    Except for the sale of cigarettes through a cigarette vending machine as provided in the Code of Iowa § 453A.36(6), a retailer shall not sell or offer for sale cigarettes or tobacco products, in a quantity of less than a carton, through the use of a self-service display. 
(Code 1996, § 160.08) 
Sec. 12-27. - Permit revocation. 
    Following a written notice and an opportunity for a hearing, as provided by state law, the council may also revoke a permit issued pursuant to this article for a violation of the Code of Iowa ch. 453A or any rule adopted thereunder. If a permit is revoked, a new permit shall not be issued to the permit holder for any place of business, or to any other person for the place of business at which the violation occurred, until one year has expired from the date of revocation, unless good cause to the contrary is shown to the council. The clerk shall report the revocation or suspension of a retail permit to the state department of public health within 30 days of the revocation or suspension. 
(Code 1996, § 160.09) 
Secs. 12-28-12-57. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS AND TRANSIENT MERCHANTS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Transient merchants, Code of Iowa ch. 9C. 

Sec. 12-58. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this article is to protect residents of the city against fraud, unfair competition and intrusion into the privacy of their homes by licensing and regulating peddlers, solicitors and transient merchants. 
(Code 1996, § 161.01) 
Sec. 12-59. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Peddler means any person carrying goods or merchandise who sells or offers for sale for immediate delivery such goods or merchandise from house to house or upon the public street. 
    Solicitor means any person who solicits or attempts to solicit from house to house or upon the public street an order for goods, subscriptions or merchandise to be delivered at a future date. 
    Transient merchant means any person who engages in a temporary or itinerant merchandising business and in the course of such business hires, leases or occupies any building or structure whatsoever. Temporary association with a local merchant, dealer, trader or auctioneer, or conduct of such transient business in connection with, as a part of, or in the name of any local merchant, dealer, trader or auctioneer does not exempt any person from being considered a transient merchant. 
(Code 1996, § 161.02) 
Sec. 12-60. - License required. 
    Any person engaging in peddling, soliciting or in the business of a transient merchant in the city without first obtaining a license as herein provided is in violation of this article. 
(Code 1996, § 161.03) 
Sec. 12-61. - License exemptions. 
    The following are excluded from the application of this article: 
(1)  Newspapers. News boys and girls. 
(2)  Club members. Members of local Boy Scout, Girl Scout, Campfire Girls, 4-H Clubs, Future Farmers of America and similar organizations. 
(3)  Farmers. Farmers who offer for sale products of their own raising. 
(4)  Students. Students representing the city community school district conducting projects sponsored by organizations recognized by the school. 
(5)  Milk delivery. Milk delivery men who only incidentally solicit additional business or make special sales. 
(6)  Resale or institutional use. Persons customarily calling on businesses or institutions for the purposes of selling products for resale or institutional use. 
(Code 1996, § 161.04) 
Sec. 12-62. - Religious and charitable organizations. 
    Authorized representatives of religious and charitable organizations desiring to solicit money or to distribute literature shall be exempt from the operation of sections 12-63 and 12-72. All such organizations shall be required to submit in writing to the clerk the name and purpose of the cause for which such activities are sought, names and addresses of the officers and directors of the organization, the period during which such activities are to be carried on, and whether any commissions, fees or wages are to be charged by the solicitor and the amount thereof. If the clerk finds that the organization is a bona fide charity or religious organization the clerk shall issue, free of charge, a license containing the above information to the applicant. In the event the clerk denies the exemption, the authorized representatives of the organization may appeal the decision to the council. 
(Code 1996, § 161.05) 
Sec. 12-63. - Application for license. 
    An application in writing shall be filed with the clerk for a license under this article. Such application shall set forth the applicant's name, permanent and local address if any. The application shall also set forth the applicant's employer, if any, and the employer's address, the nature of the applicant's business, the last three places of such business and the length of time sought to be covered by the license. An application fee shall be paid at the time of filing such application to cover the cost of investigating the facts stated therein. 
(Code 1996, § 161.06) 
Sec. 12-64. - License fees. 
    License fees shall be paid to the clerk prior to the issuance of any license as follows: 
1. One day; for one day or any part thereof $5.00 2. One week; for one week $15.00 3. One month; for one month $20.00 4. Three months; for three months $40.00 5. Six months; for six months $60.00 6. One year; for one year $100.00  
(Code 1996, § 161.07) 
Sec. 12-65. - Bond required. 
    Before a license under this article shall be issued to a transient merchant, an applicant shall provide to the clerk evidence that the applicant has filed a bond with the secretary of state in accordance with the Code of Iowa § 9C.4. 
(Code 1996, § 161.08) 
Sec. 12-66. - License issued. 
    If the clerk finds the application is completed in conformance with the requirements of this article, the facts stated therein are found to be correct and the license fee paid, a license shall be issued immediately. 
(Code 1996, § 161.09) 
Sec. 12-67. - Display of license. 
    Each solicitor or peddler shall at all times while doing business in the city keep in such person's possession the license provided for in section 12-66 and shall, upon the request of prospective customers, exhibit the license as evidence of compliance with all requirements of this article. Each transient merchant shall display publicly such merchant's license in the merchant's place of business. 
(Code 1996, § 161.10) 
Sec. 12-68. - License not transferable. 
    Licenses issued under the provisions of this article are not transferable in any situation and are to be applicable only to the person filing the application. 
(Code 1996, § 161.11) 
Sec. 12-69. - Time restriction. 
    All peddler's and solicitor's licenses shall provide that the licenses shall be in force and effect only between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. 
(Code 1996, § 161.12) 
Sec. 12-70. - Revocation of license. 
    Any license issued under this article may be revoked by the city clerk for the following reasons: 
(1)  Makes fraudulent, false or incorrect statements in the process of conducting his business. 
(2)  Violation of any city ordinance of state law or has conducted the activity for which licensed in an unlawful manner. 
(3)  Demonstrated unacceptable behavior, place residents in fear. 
(Code 1996, § 161.13) 
Sec. 12-71. - Record and determination. 
    Upon either the city clerk or police department determining that probable cause exists to substantiate the complaints against the licensee, the license shall immediately be suspended and physically retrieved from the licensee pending the outcome of a full investigation by the city clerk and police department. 
(Code 1996, § 161.14) 
Sec. 12-72. - Effect of revocation. 
    If after the investigation, the city clerk believes the complaint is substantiated, the city clerk is authorized to revoke the license and bar the licensee from being eligible for any license under this article for a period of one year from the date of revocation. If the city clerk reviews the complaints and determines the licensee has not violated this article or any other state laws or city ordinances, the license may be reinstated. 
(Code 1996, § 161.15) 
Sec. 12-73. - Rebates. 
    Any licensee, except in the case of a revoked license, shall be entitled to a rebate of part of the fee paid if the license is surrendered before it expires. The amount of the rebate shall be determined by dividing the total license fee by the number of days for which the license was issued and then multiplying the result by the number of full days not expired. In all cases, at least $5.00 of the original fee shall be retained by the city to cover administrative costs. 
(Code 1996, § 161.16) 
Secs. 12-74-12-104. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - TAXICAB AND BUS LICENSES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Regulation of taxicabs by local authorities, Code of Iowa § 321.241. 

Sec. 12-105. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Bus means any motor vehicle carrying passengers for hire and designed to carry more than seven persons, provided that the term does not include buses operated by companies engaged in interstate commerce. 
    Taxicab means any motor vehicle carrying passengers for hire, except those designed to carry more than seven persons. 
(Code 1996, § 165.01) 
Sec. 12-106. - Exception for certain ambulances. 
    Ambulances, operated by regularly established funeral houses, or otherwise regularly licensed or authorized, are not subject to this article. 
(Code 1996, § 165.01) 
Sec. 12-107. - License required. 
    No person shall, within the city, accept passengers for hire in any taxicab or bus without first having obtained from the council a license therefor, and without first having complied with all other provisions of this article. 
(Code 1996, § 165.02) 
Sec. 12-108. - Application. 
    Any person desiring a license for a taxicab or bus shall make written application therefor to the council upon blanks to be furnished by the clerk. The application shall contain the full name and address of the owner, the make, model, year of manufacture, the Iowa license number for the current year, and the engine and factory number of the vehicle. 
(Code 1996, § 165.03) 
Sec. 12-109. - License fee. 
    The fee for such license, to be paid to the city annually and in advance, shall be $25.00 for each and every taxicab or bus. 
(Code 1996, § 165.04 
Sec. 12-110. - Condition of vehicle. 
    No vehicle shall be licensed as a taxicab or bus until it has been thoroughly and carefully inspected by the police department and found to be in a safe, satisfactory and sanitary condition for the transportation of passengers. If any licensed vehicle is involved in a collision or accident, notice thereof shall be given to the police department and a complete inspection shall be made thereof before it is again placed in service. 
(Code 1996, § 165.05) 
Sec. 12-111. - Insurance. 
    Upon application for license being granted, but before a license is issued, the applicant shall purchase liability insurance upon each licensed vehicle in a reliable company approved by the council in an amount satisfactory to the council; provided that the amount so required is uniform as to all licensees on the same class of vehicle. The applicant shall file competent evidence with the clerk showing that the policy so purchased covers the period for which the license is to be granted. 
(Code 1996, § 165.06) 
Secs. 12-112-12-135. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - TREE SURGEONS 

Sec. 12-136. - Definition. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Tree surgeon means any person who solicits the work of felling trees, or who cuts or trims any tree or limbs or branches of any tree, or who offers services in the diagnosis and treatment of diseases of any tree for a valuable consideration. 
(Code 1996, § 167.01) 
Sec. 12-137. - Annual license and permit. 
(a)  Every tree surgeon shall annually, before engaging in any service designated in this article, obtain a license from the clerk and shall pay an annual license fee as set by resolution of the city council. The application for the license shall give information testing the applicant's qualifications for the license and the nature of the equipment available. If the information on the application discloses a doubt as to the qualifications or equipment, the clerk shall refer the application to the city manager, who shall, within 15 days, report on the assertions in the application. All licenses shall terminate on December 31 of the year issued. 
(b)  Every tree surgeon shall annually pay a permit fee to the clerk as set by resolution of the city council in order to deposit trees, brush at the city tree disposal site. Failure to have this permit before depositing trees, brush at the site will result in a fine, which shall be set by resolution of the city council. 
(Code 1996, § 167.02) 
Sec. 12-138. - Insurance required. 
    Before any such license shall be issued, the applicant shall obtain and file with the clerk a public liability insurance policy, insuring against any loss that the city or any person may sustain arising out of or in connection with such services performed by such tree surgeon. Such insurance coverage shall include not less than $10,000.00 property damage, $25,000.00 for a single personal injury or death, and with limits of not less than $50,000.00 for multiple injuries or death. This coverage shall be in addition to automobile public liability insurance required for any car or truck operated by the licensee in conducting business. Such policy shall contain a provision that it may not be canceled except after 30 days' notice to the clerk. 
(Code 1996, § 167.03) 
Sec. 12-139. - Exception for municipal utilities. 
    Nothing in this article shall prohibit the municipal utilities from performing tree trimming and cutting of trees for right-of-way and maintenance of electric lines. 
(Code 1996, § 167.04) 
Secs. 12-140-12-161. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - PAWNSHOPS 

Sec. 12-162. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this article is to assist law enforcement officials in the investigation of crime and the identification of stolen property. 
(Code 1996, § 169.01) 
Sec. 12-163. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Dealer means every pawnbroker or itinerant dealer, as well as any prinicipal, employee, agent or servant thereof, engaged in or conducting business for the purchase, sale, barter, exchange or pawn of gold, silver, platinum, including coins and precious and semi-precious gems or stones, is a dealer within the meaning of this article. 
    Engaged in or conducting business means the purchase, sale, barter, pawn or exchange of any item described in this section including the advertising therefor. 
    Itinerant dealer means every dealer who is engaged in any temporary or transient business conducted in a shop, room, hotel room, motel room or other premises rented for a duration less than 30 consecutive days is an itinerant dealer within the meaning of this article. 
    Pawnbroker means every person who makes loans or advancements upon pawn, pledge or deposit of personal property, or who receives actual possession of personal property as security for loans, with or without a mortgage or bill of sale thereon, or who deals in the purchasing of personal property or other valuable things on condition of selling the same back to the seller at a stipulated price, or who, by advertisement, sign or otherwise, holds himself out as a pawnbroker, is a pawnbroker within the meaning of this article. 
(Code 1996, § 169.02) 
Sec. 12-164. - License required. 
    No person shall engage in business as a dealer within the city limits without first having procured a license therefor from the clerk's office and complied with other requirements of this article. Itinerant dealers must register with the city before engaging in or conducting business each time such dealer is within the city limits to conduct business. 
(Code 1996, § 169.03) 
Sec. 12-165. - Application for license. 
    To obtain a dealer's license, a dealer shall file a written, sworn application on a form provided by the clerk signed by the applicant if an individual, by all partners if a partnership, or by the president if a corporation. All license applications shall contain the following information, to-wit: 
(1)  The names of the principals, agents, and employees, of the applicant's business during the time that it is proposed that such business will be carried on in the city; the local address or addresses of such person engaged in such business, the permanent address of such person; the capacity in which such person will act (as proprietor, agent, employee or otherwise); the name and the address of the person, firm or corporation for whose account the business will be carried on, if any; and if a corporation, under the laws of what state it is incorporated. 
(2)  The place in the city where it is proposed to carry on the applicant's business, and the length of time during which it is proposed that the business shall be conducted. 
(3)  The place, other than the permanent place of business of the applicant, where the applicant within the six months next preceding the date of the application conducted an itinerant business, stating the nature thereof and giving the post office and street address of any building or office in which such business was conducted. 
(4)  A brief statement of the nature and character of the advertising done or proposed to be done in order to attract customers. 
(5)  Credentials from the person, firm or corporation for which the applicant proposed to do business, authorizing the applicant to act as such representative. 
(Code 1996, § 169.04) 
Sec. 12-166. - License criteria considered. 
(a)  Upon receipt of an application for a dealer's license, the clerk shall forward a copy of the application to the police chief or designee, who shall review the application. The application shall furnish such evidence as may reasonably be required in support of the statements as set forth in the application. The police chief or designee shall report to the clerk within ten days of receipt of the application considering, but not limited to, the following criteria to-wit: 
(1)  Whether the applicant or his agent or employees charged with receiving or distributing property have been convicted of a felony. However, if the conviction of a felony occurred more than five years before the application for a dealer's license, and if such person's rights of citizenship have been restored by the governor, such conviction shall not be a bar to obtaining the license. 
(2)  Whether the applicant has truthfully reported all relevant facts within the license application. 
(3)  The applicant has such financial standing and good reputation to indicate that he will comply with all state law and the city. 
(b)  Based upon the above criteria, the police chief or designee shall recommend either the issuance or refusal to issue a dealer's license to the applicant. 
(Code 1996, § 169.05) 
Sec. 12-167. - License issuance. 
(a)  Upon receipt of an application together with the recommendation of the police chief or designee, the application shall be brought before the council which shall have the exclusive authority to issue or to refuse issuance of a dealer's license. Reason for refusal of the dealer's license by the council shall include, but not be limited to the following, to-wit: 
(1)  Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement of material or relevant facts contained in the application; or 
(2)  That the applicant has engaged in a fraudulent transaction or enterprise. 
(b)  Decision of the council shall be final, subject to any appeal right of the applicant to the state district court. 
(Code 1996, § 169.06) 
Sec. 12-168. - License fee. 
    Every application for a dealer's annual permit shall be accompanied by the application fee in the amount of $25.00. 
(Code 1996, § 169.07) 
Sec. 12-169. - License expiration. 
    A dealer's license shall expire on December 31 of the year in which it is issued. 
(Code 1996, § 169.08) 
Sec. 12-170. - Separate license for each place of business. 
    Any person engaged in or conducting business as a dealer as defined in this article in several or separate businesses shall pay the license fee and procure a license for each place and any violation of one licensed premises shall be deemed violations in all premises, licensed by that dealer. 
(Code 1996, § 169.09) 
Sec. 12-171. - Display of license. 
    Every licensed dealer shall display his license conspicuously in the business so that it may be readily observed by all persons entering the premises. 
(Code 1996, § 169.10) 
Sec. 12-172. - Sale or transfer of license. 
    No dealer's license shall be sold or transferred. The purchase or purchases of any dealer's business or of the majority of the stock of any corporation operating a dealer's business as defined under this article shall make application for and obtain a new license before operating such business at the location for which the license has been issued. 
(Code 1996, § 169.11) 
Sec. 12-173. - Renewals. 
    Every licensed dealer shall apply for a license annually by application as if for an original license. There shall be no automatic renewal. Such application shall be filed and the fee paid not less than 45 days prior to the expiration of the current license. 
(Code 1996, § 169.12) 
Sec. 12-174. - License suspension and revocation. 
(a)  Grounds for revocation. A dealer's license may be revoked for any violation of this article, including, but not limited to, the failure to comply with new or renewal application procedures, or for falsification of a new or renewal application or for the failure to maintain records in conformity with the requirements enumerated under section 12-175. 
(b)  Revocation proceedings. The clerk shall upon receipt of information alleging that grounds exist to revoke a dealer's license, and other consultation with the city attorney, report the circumstances to the council, which in such case shall cause a notice to be sent by ordinary mail to the license holder, which notice shall state that a revocation hearing has been set before the council, the grounds for the proposed revocation, the date and time of the hearing and the place where the hearing will be conducted. Upon such hearing, if the council shall determine that one or more of such grounds do exist, it may revoke the existing license. 
(c)  Suspension. In lieu of revocation, the council may suspend the license for a period not to exceed 30 calendar days during which period the licensee may not conduct any business except for redemptions and shall conspicuously post a sign stating the terms of suspension at the entrance of the licensed premises. Such a sign shall be supplied by and posted by the police chief or designee. In the event such license is revoked, no dealer's license shall be issued to that licensee for a period of one year. 
(Code 1996, § 169.13) 
Sec. 12-175. - General records. 
(a)  The police department shall furnish pawn log sheets to every licensee who shall accurately and legibly enter in ink in the English language the following information at the time of purchase or receipt of any property: 
(1)  The date and hour of the transaction; 
(2)  An accurate description of the goods, articles or things purchased, bartered, exchanged, pawned or received and when applicable, the model numbers or serial numbers; 
(3)  The estimated value of each article; 
(4)  The amount paid, advanced or loaned for the article; 
(5)  The address of the person from whom the property is purchased or received. 
(b)  When the pawn log sheets are complete, the licensee shall provide the original sheets to the police chief or designee who shall provide a copy to the licensee; the originals shall remain the property of the city. The licensee shall also maintain a record of the name, birth date, driver's license number, state identification number or social security number, sex, and type of photo identification presented at the time of purchase or receipt of any property which shall be presented to the police chief or designee upon showing good cause of a possible theft. 
(Code 1996, § 169.14) 
Sec. 12-176. - Records of itinerant dealers. 
    Every itinerant dealer shall present a record book in which shall be legibly recorded with ink at the time of each transaction each of the following, to-wit: 
(1)  Time, date, place of the transaction, and the type of the transaction; 
(2)  An accurate description of the goods, articles or things purchased, bartered, exchanged, pawned or received; 
(3)  The signature and printed name, residence and description (consisting of the sex, date of birth, and social security number) of the person selling, pawning, bartering or exchanging the goods, articles, or things; 
(4)  The estimated value of each article; 
(5)  The amount paid, advanced or loaned; and 
(6)  The date, name, address and phone number of the person when an item is bought or redeemed; to the police department for inspection and photocopying before the itinerant dealer leaves the city. 
(Code 1996, § 169.15) 
Sec. 12-177. - Retention of property. 
    No dealer shall sell, deliver, melt, change the form of or dispose of any item subject to this article within ten days of the acquisition of such item unless permission to do so is granted in writing by the police chief or designee; however, the person who pawns an item is permitted to redeem the pawned item within the ten-day retention period. 
(Code 1996, § 169.16) 
Sec. 12-178. - Inspection of premises. 
    Every dealer shall admit to its premises during its regular business hours, any police officer to examine the pawn log sheets as provided in section 12-175 as well as all articles purchased or received; and to search for and to take into possession any article known by that officer to have been reported missing or known or believed by the officer to have been stolen. 
(Code 1996, § 169.17) 
Sec. 12-179. - Prohibited acts. 
(a)  No dealer shall conceal, secrete or destroy for the purpose of concealing, any item purchased or acquired by him for the purpose of preventing identification thereof by a police officer or any person claiming to own the same. 
(b)  It is unlawful for any dealer in the course of the dealer's business or occupation to acquire, by purchase, barter, exchange or pawn, any goods from any person under 18 years of age. 
(c)  It is unlawful for any dealer to acquire, by purchase, barter, exchange or pawn, items bearing evidence of a serial number which has been tampered with or scratched or obliterated in any manner unless such person immediately contacts the police department. 
(d)  It is unlawful for any dealer to acquire by purchase, barter, exchange or pawn, any items prior to examining a picture identification with a physical description of the person selling, bartering, exchanging, or pawning the articles. 
(Code 1996, § 169.18) 
Secs. 12-180-12-196. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - ADULT ENTERTAINMENT[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Public indecent exposure in certain establishments, Code of Iowa § 728.5; obscenity, Code of Iowa ch. 728. 

Sec. 12-197. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Adult amusement or entertainment means an amusement or entertainment which is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on acts or material depicting, describing or relating to sex acts or specified anatomical areas, as defined herein, including, but not limited to, topless or bottomless dancers, exotic dancers, strippers, male or female impersonators or similar entertainment. 
    Adult bookstore means an establishment having as a significant portion of its stock in trade books, films, magazines and other periodicals or goods and items held for sale which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting or describing sex acts or specified anatomical areas. 
    Adult hotel or motel means a building with accommodations used for the temporary occupancy of one or more individuals and is an establishment wherein material is presented which is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on depicting or describing sex acts or specified anatomical areas for observation by the individuals therein. 
    Adult motion picture arcade means any place to which the public is permitted or invited wherein coin or slug-operated or electronically, electrically or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors, or other image-producing devices are maintained to show images to five or fewer persons per machine at any one time, and where the images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting or describing sex acts or specified anatomical areas. 
    Adult motion picture theater means an enclosed building used for presenting material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting or describing sex acts or specified anatomical areas. 
    Adult photo studio means an establishment which, upon payment of a fee, provides photographic equipment or models for the purpose of photographing specified anatomical areas or sex acts, as defined herein. 
    Establishment of adult entertainment business includes the opening of such business as a new business, the relocation of such business, or the conversion of an existing business location to any of the uses described as an adult entertainment business. 
    Massage parlor means any building, room, place or establishment, where manipulated massage or manipulated exercise is practiced for pay upon the human body with an emphasis on sex acts or specified anatomical areas, by anyone not a duly licensed physician, osteopath, chiropractor, registered nurse or practical nurse operating under a physician's direction, physical therapist, registered speech pathologist and physical or occupational therapist who treat only patients recommended by a licensed physician and operate only under such physician's direction, whether with or without the use of mechanical, therapeutic or bathing devices. The term "massage parlor" shall not include a regular licensed hospital, medical clinic or nursing home, duly licensed beauty parlors or barber shops. 
    Sex acts means any sexual contact, actual or simulated, either natural or deviate, between two or more persons, or between a person and an animal, by penetration of the penis into the vagina or anus, or by contact between the mouth or tongue and genitalia or anus, or by contact between a finger of one person and the genitalia of another, or by use of artificial sexual organs or substitute therefor in contact with the genitalia or anus. 
    Sexual encounter center means any business, agency or persons who, for any form of consideration or gratuity, provides a place where three or more persons may congregate, assemble or associate for the purpose of engaging in sex acts or exposing specified anatomical areas. 
    Specified anatomical areas include the following: human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, and female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola. 
(Code 1996, §§ 46.06(2), (3)(B)) 
Sec. 12-198. - Location restriction. 
(a)  Any adult entertainment business, which is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on sex acts or specified anatomical areas, shall not be established within 1,000 feet from another business, school, church, public park, public playground, public plaza, day nursery, day care center, nursery school, regularly scheduled school bus stop, or any dwelling (one- and two-family or multiple dwelling). 
(b)  Measurement of the 1,000-foot restriction shall be taken on a direct line from the property line of such adult entertainment business to the point on the property line of another business, school, church, public park, public playground, public plaza, day nurseries, day care center, nursery school, regularly scheduled school bus stop, or any dwelling (one- and two-family or multiple dwelling). 
(Code 1996, §§ 46.06(1), (3)(B)) 
Sec. 12-199. - Public view restrictions. 
    All buildings used for adult entertainment business shall have their openings, entries, windows, etc., constructed, located, covered, or screened in such a manner as to prevent a view into the interior of such building from any pedestrian sidewalk, walkway, street or other public or semi-public area. Advertisements, displays or other promotional materials shall not be shown or exhibited so as to be visible to the public from the pedestrian sidewalks, walkways, or other public or semi-public area. 
(Code 1996, § 46.06(3)(C)) 
Sec. 12-200. - Alcohol and minors prohibited on premises. 
(a)  No alcohol shall be permitted in any adult entertainment business, unless specifically authorized by state law. This prohibition applies equally to the proprietor and the patrons of the adult entertainment business. 
(b)  No minors shall be permitted in any adult entertainment business. 
(Code 1996, § 46.06(3)(D), (3)(E)) 
Sec. 12-201. - Penalty for violation. 
(a)  A violation of this article shall result in those penalties applicable to a municipal infraction. 
(Code 1996, § 46.06(4)) 
Chapter 14 - CEMETERIES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Iowa Cemetery Act, Code of Iowa § 523I.101 et seq. 

Sec. 14-1. - Definition. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Cemetery means the Graceland Cemetery, which is a municipal cemetery under the provisions of the Code of Iowa § 523I.508 . 
(Code 1996, § 110.01) 
Sec. 14-2. - Cemetery superintendent appointed. 
    The city manager shall appoint a cemetery superintendent who shall operate the cemetery in accordance with the rules and regulations therefor and under the direction of the council and city manager. 
(Code 1996, § 110.02) 
Sec. 14-3. - Duties of superintendent. 
    The cemetery superintendent or designee shall supervise the opening of all graves and be present at every interment in the cemetery. He shall also be responsible for the maintenance of the cemetery buildings, grounds and equipment and make a monthly report of the cemetery operation to the city manager. 
(Code 1996, § 110.03) 
Sec. 14-4. - Records. 
    It is the duty of the city manager to make, and for the clerk to keep a permanent record of all interments made in the cemetery, which record shall at all times be open to public inspection. The record shall, among other things, include: 
(1)  Plat. An accurate plat of the cemetery; 
(2)  Lot owners. The names of the owners of all lots that have been sold; 
(3)  Lot descriptions. The correct description of all lots for sale and the price thereof, as shall be fixed by the city council; 
(4)  Grave locations. The exact location of each grave upon each cemetery lot. 
(Code 1996, § 110.04) 
Sec. 14-5. - Sale of lots. 
    The sale of lots in the cemetery shall be evidenced by a deed signed and executed by the mayor and the clerk for and on behalf of the city, and it is the duty of the clerk to collect the purchase price for any lot sold before delivering the deed of conveyance for the same. A portion of the sale price as specified by the rules and regulations established by the council shall be set aside and deposited in the perpetual care endowment fund of the cemetery. 
(Code 1996, § 110.05) 
Sec. 14-6. - Fees, charges and payments. 
    Fees and charges associated with this chapter shall be in the amounts provided by city fee resolution adopted by the city council. Payment shall be made at the office of the clerk where receipts will be issued for all amounts paid. Purchase of grave spaces and perpetual care shall be paid upon applying for the purchase. Interments and disinterments shall be paid prior to the work being started. 
(Code 1996, § 110.06) 
Sec. 14-7. - Perpetual care in general. 
    The term "perpetual care" shall be construed to mean the obligation which the city assumes each year to expend the net annual income of the perpetual care endowment fund set aside for the lot in furnishing such care as mowing grass, raking and cleaning the lot and adjacent alleys, filling of sunken graves and keeping monumental work in a vertical position. Where the income is sufficient it may be used in the perpetual care of avenues, alleys, fences, buildings and grounds in general. Expenditures shall be made at the discretion and under the direction of the council and the city shall not be bound to make any separate investment of the sum of money set aside as perpetual care, but the same shall be added to the perpetual care fund of the city and the proceeds therefrom used by the city in the manner heretofore provided. 
(Code 1996, § 110.07) 
Sec. 14-8. - Perpetual care on lot sales. 
    Future lot sales in the cemetery shall be made with the perpetual care provided for, at the rates specified in the rules and regulations as adopted by the council, under and by virtue of the terms of this chapter. 
(Code 1996, § 110.08) 
Sec. 14-9. - Cemetery lots without perpetual care. 
    Owners of lots or other interested persons may secure perpetual care on lots or parts of lots in the older portions of the cemetery not having perpetual care by the payment to the city of the perpetual care charges at the rates specified in the rules and regulations. 
(Code 1996, § 110.09) 
Sec. 14-10. - Annual care. 
    An annual care charge as specified in the rules and regulations shall be made by the city on those lots in the older portions of the cemetery which are not at present under perpetual or endowed care. The city reserves the right to refuse to furnish maintenance service, or to permit the erection of any monumental work on those lots not under perpetual or endowed care or when the annual care on such lot has not been paid in advance. 
(Code 1996, § 110.10) 
Sec. 14-11. - Rules and regulations. 
    The rules and regulations for the cemetery shall be adopted, and may be amended from time to time, by resolution of the council and shall cover the hours of opening and closing, the use of roads within the cemetery, the hours for burials, the decorating of graves, the fees for services rendered in connection with interments or the placing of markers and the cost of lots or payments for perpetual care as deemed necessary. 
(Code 1996, § 110.11) 
Sec. 14-12. - Trespassing in cemetery. 
    Any person who shall trespass upon any cemetery under the jurisdiction of the city by destroying, injuring or defacing any grave, vault, tombstone, or monument, or any building, fence, tree, shrub, flower, or anything in or belonging to the cemetery shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and liable for all damage. 
(Code 1996, § 110.12) 
Sec. 14-13. - Injury to cemetery property. 
    It is unlawful for a person willfully and maliciously to destroy, mutilate, deface, injure or remove any tomb, vault, monument, gravestone or other structure placed in any public or private cemetery or other fences, railing or other work for the protection or ornamentation of the cemetery, or of any tomb, vault, monument or gravestone, or other structure on any cemetery lot within such cemetery, or to willfully and maliciously throw or leave any rubbish, refuse, garbage, waste, litter or foreign substance within the limits of the cemetery, or to drive at an unusual and forbidden speed over avenues or roads in the cemetery, or to drive outside of the avenues and roads, and over the grass or graves of the cemetery. 
(Code 1996, § 49.09) 
Sec. 14-14. - Monument permits. 
    Permits are required for the installation of monuments. The permits will be issued at the clerk's office. No installations will be allowed without proof of receiving a permit. The fees and charges shall be established by resolutions of the council. 
(Code 1996, § 110.13; Ord. No. 93-1428) 
Sec. 14-15. - Veteran grave spaces. 
    Shall be provided for individual veterans upon receiving payments from the county commission of veterans affairs at rates charged for like care and maintenance of other lots of similar size in the same cemetery. 
(Code 1996, § 110.14; Ord. No. 93-1428) 
Sec. 14-16. - City lots (Potter's field). 
    City burial lots shall be provided for needy individuals upon certification from the county human services department that the individual has no resources to pay for the lot and perpetual care. Interment fee shall be required in advance of the burial. No monument work on the grave shall be allowed until the full price of the grace space and perpetual care is paid in advance. 
(Code 1996, § 110.15; Ord. No. 93-1428) 
Sec. 14-17. - Cremation lots. 
    Cremation lots shall be provided for cremains only, with each individual space being five feet by five feet and shall only be allowed to contain two separate cremains. The fees and charges shall be established by resolution of the council. 
(Code 1996, § 110.16) 
Sec. 14-18. - Operating a perpetual care cemetery. 
(a)  Trusteeship. Pursuant to the Code of Iowa § 523I.502, the city will act as the trustee for the perpetual maintenance of interment spaces in Graceland Cemetery. 
(b)  Establishment of trust fund. A perpetual trust is established for Graceland Cemetery, which shall be a restricted designated as the "perpetual care cemetery fund." The fund shall be funded by the deposit of an amount equal to or greater than 20 percent of the gross selling price, or $50.00, whichever is more, for each sale of interment space within the cemetery. The fund shall be administered in accordance with the purposes and provisions of the Code of Iowa ch. 523I. The perpetual care cemetery fund shall be maintained separate from all operating funds of the cemetery and the principal of the fund shall not be reduced voluntarily except as specifically permitted by state law and applicable administrative regulations. 
(c)  Sale of interment rights. The sale or transfer of interment rights in the cemetery shall be evidenced by a certificate of interment rights or other instrument evidencing the conveyance of exclusive rights of interment upon payment in full of the purchase price. The agreement for interment rights shall disclose all information required by the Iowa Cemetery Act, Code of Iowa § 523I.101 et seq., including the amount or percentage of money to be placed in the perpetual care cemetery fund. 
(d)  Perpetual care registry. The cemetery will maintain a registry of individuals who have purchased interment rights in the cemetery subject to the care fund requirements of the Iowa Cemetery Act, Code of Iowa § 523I.101 et seq., including the amounts deposited in the perpetual care cemetery fund. 
(Code 1996, § 110.17) 
Chapter 16 - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AND SERVICES 
(RESERVED) 
Chapter 18 - ENVIRONMENT 
(RESERVED) 
Chapter 20 - FINANCE, TAXATION AND FUNDING 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 20-1-20-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FISCAL MANAGEMENT 

Sec. 20-19. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this chapter is to establish policies and provide for rules and regulations governing the management of the financial affairs of the city. 
(Code 1996, § 7.01) 
Sec. 20-20. - Finance director. 
    The finance director for the city shall be appointed by the city manager and shall be responsible for the administration of the provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1996, § 7.02) 
Sec. 20-21. - Cash control. 
(a)  Deposit of funds. All moneys or fees collected for any purpose by any city officer shall be allocated to the appropriate funds in the city accounting system through the office of the finance director. If any fees are due to an officer, they shall be paid to the officer by check drawn by the finance director and approved by the council only upon such officer's making adequate reports relating thereto as required by law, ordinance or council directive. 
(b)  Petty cash fund. The finance director shall be custodian of a petty cash fund not to exceed $200.00 for the payment of small claims for minor purchases, collect-on-delivery transportation charges and small fees customarily paid at the time of rendering a service, for which payments the finance director shall obtain some form of receipt or bill acknowledged as paid by the vendor or agent. At such time as the petty cash fund is approaching depletion, the finance director shall draw a check for replenishment in the amount of the accumulated expenditures and the check and supporting detail shall be submitted to the council as a claim in the usual manner for claims and charged to the proper funds and accounts. It shall not be used for salary payments or other personal services or personal expenses. 
(c)  Change fund. The finance director is authorized to draw a check for establishing a change fund in the amount of $800.00 for the purpose of making change without commingling other funds to meet the requirements of the office. The change fund shall be in the custody of the finance director and the finance director shall maintain the integrity of the fund. 
(Code 1996, § 7.03) 
Sec. 20-22. - Fund control. 
    There shall be established and maintained separate and distinct funds in accordance with the following: 
(1)  Revenues. All moneys received by the city shall be credited to the proper fund as required by law, ordinance or resolution. 
(2)  Expenditures. No disbursement shall be made from a fund unless such disbursement is authorized by law, ordinance or resolution, was properly budgeted, and supported by a claim approved by the council. 
(3)  Emergency fund. No transfer may be made from any fund to the emergency fund. 
(4)  Debt service fund. Except where specifically prohibited by state law, moneys may be transferred from any other city fund to the debt service fund to meet payments of principal and interest. Such transfers must be authorized by the original budget or a budget amendment. 
(5)  Capital improvements reserve fund. Except where specifically prohibited by state law, moneys may be transferred from any city fund to the capital improvements reserve fund. Such transfers must be authorized by the original budget or a budget amendment. 
(6)  Utility and enterprise funds. A surplus in a utility or enterprise fund may be transferred to any other city fund, except the emergency fund and road use tax funds, by resolution of the council. A surplus may be defined in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles as promulgated by the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants. No transfer shall be made that is in violation of state law 
(7)  Balancing of funds. Fund accounts shall be reconciled at the close of each month and a report thereof submitted to the council. 
(Code 1996, § 7.04) 
Sec. 20-23. - Operating budget preparation. 
    The annual operating budget of the city shall be prepared in accordance with the following: 
(1)  Proposal prepared. The finance director, under the direction of the city manager, shall be responsible for preparation of the annual budget detail, for review by the mayor and council and adoption by the council in accordance with directives of the mayor and council and pursuant to the Code of Iowa § 384.16. 
(2)  Boards and commissions. All boards, commissions and other administrative agencies of the city that are authorized to prepare and administer budgets must submit their budget proposals to the finance director for inclusion in the proposed city budget in such form as required by the finance director. 
(3)  Submission to council. The city manager shall submit the completed budget proposal to the council no later than January 1 of each year. 
(4)  Council review. The council shall review the proposed budget and may make any adjustments in the budget which it deems appropriate before accepting such proposal for publication, hearing and final adoption. 
(5)  Notice of hearing. Upon adopting a proposed budget the council shall set a date for public hearing thereon to be held before March 15 and cause notice of such hearing and a summary of the proposed budget to be published not less than ten or more than 20 days before the date established for the hearing. Proof of such publication must be filed with the county auditor. 
(Code 1996, § 7.05) 
State Law reference- City budget, Code of Iowa § 384.16. 
Sec. 20-24. - Budget amendments. 
    A city budget finally adopted for the following fiscal year becomes effective July 1 and constitutes the city appropriation for each program and purpose specified therein until amended as provided by this section. 
(1)  Program increase. Any increase in the amount appropriated to a program must be prepared, adopted and subject to protest in the same manner as the original budget. 
(2)  Program transfer. Any transfer of appropriation from one program to another must be prepared, adopted and subject to protest in the same manner as the original budget. 
(3)  Sub-program transfer. Any transfer of appropriation from one sub-program to another must be approved by resolution of the council. 
(4)  Activity transfers. The finance director shall have the authority to adjust, by transfer or otherwise, the appropriation allocated to activities within a program or sub-program provided, however, that when such adjustments in any one activity aggregate $1,000.00 or ten percent of the amount appropriated, whichever is greater, no further adjustments shall be made without approval by resolution of the council. All such transfers shall be reported in writing at the next regular meeting of the council following the transfer and recorded in the minutes for the information of the council and general public. 
(Code 1996, § 7.07) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Iowa § 384.18. 
Sec. 20-25. - Accounting. 
    The accounting records of the city shall consist of not less than the following: 
(1)  Books of original entry. There shall be established and maintained books of original entry to provide a chronological record of cash received and disbursed. 
(2)  General ledger. There shall be established and maintained a general ledger controlling all cash transactions, budgetary accounts and for recording unappropriated surpluses. 
(3)  Budget accounts. There shall be established such individual accounts to record receipts by source and expenditures by program, subprogram and activity as will provide adequate information and control for budgeting purposes as planned and approved by the council. Each individual account shall be maintained within its proper fund and so kept that receipts can be immediately and directly compared with revenue estimates and expenditures can be related to the authorizing appropriation. No expenditure shall be posted except to the appropriation for the function and purpose for which the expense was incurred. 
(4)  Utilities. The finance director shall perform and be responsible for accounting functions of the municipally owned utilities. 
(Code 1996, § 7.08) 
Sec. 20-26. - Financial reports. 
    The finance director shall prepare and file the following financial reports pursuant to the Code of Iowa § 384.22: 
(1)  Monthly reports. The finance director shall submit to the council by the second meeting or tenth day of each month a report showing the activity and status of each fund, program, sub-program and activity for the preceding month. 
(2)  Urban renewal report. Not later than December 1 following the end of the fiscal year, the urban renewal report shall be approved by the city council. The report shall be prepared in the format and submitted electronically pursuant to the instructions by the department of management. The report shall include all of the information requested as stated in the Code of Iowa § 384.22(2)(b). 
(3)  Annual report. Not later than December 1 of each year there shall be published an annual report containing a summary for the preceding fiscal year of all collections and receipts, all accounts due the city, and all expenditures, the current public debt of the city, and the legal debt limit of the city for the current fiscal year. A copy of the annual report must be filed with the state auditor not later than December 1 of each year. 
(Code 1996, § 7.09) 
State Law reference- Annual and financial reports, Code of Iowa § 384.22. 
Sec. 20-27. - Contingency account. 
    Whenever the council shall have budgeted for a contingency account such an account shall be established in the accounting records but no claim shall be paid from such an account. Contingency accounts may be drawn upon only by council resolution directing a transfer to a specific purpose account within its fund and program and then only compelling evidence of an unexpected and unforeseeable need or emergency. 
(Code 1996, § 7.10) 
Sec. 20-28. - Unauthorized expenditure. 
    No city official or employee, or any person acting under color of such office or employment, shall knowingly make any contract or authorize any expenditure known by him to be in excess of that authorized by law. 
(Code 1996, § 7.11) 
State Law reference- Nonfelonious misconduct in office, Code of Iowa § 721.2. 
Secs. 20-29-20-59. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - HOTEL/MOTEL TAX[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Locally imposed hotel and motel tax, Code of Iowa § 423A.4. 

Sec. 20-60. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Lodging means rooms, apartments, or sleeping quarters in a hotel, motel, inn, public lodging house, rooming house, or manufactured or mobile home which is tangible personal property, or in a tourist court, or in any place where sleeping accommodations are furnished to transient guests for rent, whether with or without meals. 
    Renting or rent means a transfer of possession or control of lodging for a fixed or indeterminate term for consideration and includes any kind of direct or indirect charge for such lodging or its use. 
    Sales price means the consideration for renting of lodging and means the same as the term is defined in the Code of Iowa § 423A.2. 
All other words and phrases used in this article and defined in the Code of Iowa § 423.1 have the meaning given them by the Code of Iowa § 423.1 for the purposes of this article. 
(Code 1996, § 171.01) 
State Law reference- Similar definitions, Code of Iowa § 423A.2. 
Sec. 20-61. - Tax imposed. 
    There is imposed a seven percent local hotel and motel tax upon the sales price from the renting of lodging within the city effective January 1, 2018, through December 31, 2027. 
(Code 1996, § 171.02) 
Sec. 20-62. - Tax exemption. 
    There is exempted from the provisions of this article and from the computation of any amount of tax imposed by section 20-61 all of the following: 
(1)  The sales price from the renting of lodging which is rented by the same person for a period of more than 31 consecutive days. 
(2)  The sales price of lodging furnished to the guests of a religious institution if the property is exempt under the Code of Iowa § 423A.5 and the purpose of renting is to provide a place for a religious retreat or function and not a place for transient guests generally. 
(3)  The sales price from the renting of sleeping rooms in dormitories and in memorial unions at all universities and colleges located in the city. 
(Code 1996, § 171.03) 
State Law reference- Similar provision, Code of Iowa § 423A.5. 
Sec. 20-63. - Collection. 
    The tax imposed in this article shall be remitted by the person or company liable for same to the state director of revenue in the manner required by state law. 
(Code 1996, § 171.04) 
State Law reference- Administration by state director, Code of Iowa § 423A.6. 
Sec. 20-64. - Use of revenues. 
    All revenue received by the city from the imposition of the hotel and motel tax shall be deposited in the general fund of the city and shall be used for the promotion and development of recreational, entertainment and cultural attractions, events and facilities in the city. 
(Code 1996, § 171.05) 
Sec. 20-65. - Hotel/motel tax board. 
    The board appointed by the city council shall have five members comprised of one member from city government, one member from the business community, one member from the city motels and two members from the public at-large. The term of office of the members of the board shall be for four years and shall commence on June 1 of their respective term. The board will give the city council a proposal each year showing the anticipated revenues, projected uses and desired outcomes along with a report on the use and results of previous year's investments. 
(Code 1996, §§ 171.06, 171.07) 
Sec. 20-66. - Disbursement of funds. 
    The city council will have the final authority on the disbursement of funds from the recommendations of a board appointed by the city council. 
(Code 1996, § 171.08) 
Secs. 20-67-20-90. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - DOWNTOWN WEBSTER CITY SELF-SUPPORTED MUNICIPAL IMPROVEMENT DISTRICT 

Sec. 20-91. - District established; continued. 
    There shall be and there is hereby continued in the city a self-supported municipal improvement district, as defined in the Code of Iowa ch. 386, the name of which shall continue to be the "Downtown Webster City Self-Supported Municipal Improvement District" (sometimes hereinafter referred to as the "district"), the purposes of which district continue to be the undertaking of actions and the design and construction of any and all improvements, and the performance of administration of the district, as authorized by the Code of Iowa ch. 386. 
(Code 1996, § 8.01; Ord. No. 2019-1818, § 1, 3-4-2019) 
Sec. 20-92. - Boundaries. 
    The district shall continue to include property in the city described as follows: 
(1)  Lots 1 and 2, Block 73, West Newcastle Addition; 
(2)  Lots 1 through 8, Block 80, West Newcastle Addition; 
(3)  Lots 1 through 8, Block 81, West Newcastle Addition; 
(4)  Lots 1 and 8, Block 82, West Newcastle Addition; 
(5)  Lots 1 through 5, Block 88, West Newcastle Addition; 
(6)  Lots 1 through 5, Block 89, West Newcastle Addition; 
(7)  Lots 1 through 5, Block 90, West Newcastle Addition; 
(8)  Lots 1 through 5, Block 91, West Newcastle Addition; 
(9)  Lots 6, Block 88, Dubuque and Pacific Railroad Addition; 
(10)  Lots 7 and 8 except the S 66 feet of Lot 8 and the S 66 feet of the W 31 feet of Lot 7, Block 88, Dubuque and Pacific Railroad Addition; 
(11)  Lots 6 through 8, Block 89, Dubuque and Pacific Railroad Addition; 
(12)  Lots 6 through 8, Block 90, Dubuque and Pacific Railroad Addition; 
(13)  Lots 6 through 8, Block 91, Dubuque and Pacific Railroad Addition; 
(14)  Lots 9 through 16, Block 96, Dubuque and Pacific Railroad Addition; 
(15)  Lots 1 through 9, Block 97, Dubuque and Pacific Railroad Addition, to city. 
(Code 1996, § 8.02; Ord. No. 2019-1818, § 2, 3-4-2019) 
Sec. 20-93. - District benefits. 
    It is found and determined that the owners of all property within the district have a present and potential benefit from the condition, development and maintenance of the district and that all of the property within the district is related by virtue of its location within an area of the city zoned for commercial use. 
(Code 1996, § 8.03; Ord. No. 2019-1818, § 3, 3-4-2019) 
Sec. 20-94. - Capital improvement fund. 
    Pursuant to the provisions of the Code of Iowa ch. 386, there is hereby continued a capital improvement fund for the district, for which fund the city may certify the capital improvement fund tax each year, commencing with the levy of taxes for collection in the fiscal year beginning July 1, 2019, and continuing pursuant to such renewals as may be approved by the city council , at a rate not to exceed $5.00 per $1,000.00 of taxable valuation, to be levied against all of the property in the district, in addition to all other taxes, for the purpose of accumulating moneys for the financing or payment of a part or all of the cost of any "improvements," as defined in the Code of Iowa ch. 386. 
(Code 1996, § 8.04; Ord. No. 2019-1818, § 4, 3-4-2019) 
Sec. 20-95. - Committee established; executive board. 
    The city has established a coordination committee for the district. All owners of real property located within the district shall automatically be members of the committee. The committee shall operate under such rules as may be established by the committee, which shall include the formation of an executive board to govern the committee and its activities. 
(Code 1996, § 8.05; Ord. No. 2019-1818, § 5, 3-4-2019) 
Sec. 20-96. - Annual disbursement. 
    There shall be disbursed annually all amounts collected in the capital improvement fund for one or more of the following purposes, at such times, in such amounts and under such conditions as shall be recommended to the city council by the executive board of the coordination committee: 
(1)  Constructing and maintaining sidewalk and curb and gutter improvements within the district; 
(2)  Constructing other improvements and performing maintenance intended to enhance the district. 
(Code 1996, § 8.06; Ord. No. 2019-1818, § 6, 3-4-2019) 
Sec. 20-97. - Annual levy funds. 
    Notwithstanding the fact that the district is located within the boundaries of the Riverview Urban Renewal/Tax Increment Finance Area, an amount of funds which would be derived from the annual levy of the capital improvement fund tax against property within the district if the district were not located within such tax increment area shall be provided annually by the city, and the city shall take all actions necessary to accomplish this purpose, including, if necessary, allocation of a portion of the incremental property taxes which are attributable to properties within the district, to the extent permitted by law. 
(Code 1996, § 8.07; Ord. No. 2019-1818, § 7, 3-4-2019) 
Secs. 20-98-20-122. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - URBAN RENEWAL AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT AREAS 

Sec. 20-123. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this article is to provide for the division of taxes levied on the taxable property in the urban renewal areas of the city each year by and for the benefit of the state, city, county, school districts or other taxing districts after the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived in order to create a special fund to pay the principal of and interest on loans, advances or indebtedness, including bonds proposed to be issued by the city, to finance projects in such areas. 
(Code 1996, § 11.01) 
Sec. 20-124. - Southeast Industrial Park Urban Renewal Area. 
(a)  The provisions of this section apply to the Southeast Industrial Park Urban Renewal Area, the boundaries of which are set out below, such area having been identified in the Urban Renewal Plan approved by the council by resolution adopted on March 3, 1986: 
Beginning at intersection of the southerly right-of-way line of U.S. Highway 20 and the westerly right-of-way of the Chicago Northwestern Railway, thence south along the westerly right-of-way of the Chicago Northwestern Railway to its intersection with the Boone River, thence southwest along the western bank of the Boone River to the east-west city limits, thence west to the easterly right-of-way of South Edgewood Drive, thence north to the section line between sections 7 and 18, thence west to the easterly right-of-way of Iowa Highway 17, thence north to the southerly right-of-way of U.S. Highway 20, thence east to the point of beginning. 
(b)  The taxes levied on the taxable property in the Southeast Industrial Park Urban Renewal Area each year by and for the benefit of the state, the city, the county and any school district or other taxing district in which the urban renewal area is located, from and after March 3, 1986, shall be divided as follows: 
(1)  That portion of the taxes which would be produced by the rate at which the tax is levied each year by or for each of the taxing districts upon the total sum of the assessed value of the taxable property in the Southeast Industrial Park Urban Renewal Area, as shown on the assessment roll as of January 1 of the calendar year preceding March 3, 1986, shall be allocated to and when collected be paid into the fund for the respective taxing district as taxes by or for the taxing district into which all other property taxes are paid. For the purpose of allocating taxes levied by or for any taxing district which did not include the territory in the urban renewal area on March 3, 1986, but to which the territory has been annexed or otherwise included after the effective date, the assessment roll as of January 1 of the calendar year preceding the effective date of the ordinance shall be used in determining the assessed valuation of the taxable property in the Southeast Industrial Park Urban Renewal Area on the effective date. 
(2)  That portion of the taxes each year in excess of such amounts shall be allocated to and when collected be paid into a special fund of the city to pay the principal of and interest on loans, advances or indebtedness, whether funded, refunded, assumed or otherwise, including bonds issued under the authority of the Code of Iowa § 403.9(1) incurred by the city to finance or refinance, in whole or in part, projects in the Southeast Industrial Park Urban Renewal Area, except that taxes for the payment of bonds and interest of each taxing district shall be collected against all taxable property within the taxing district without limitation by the provisions of this section. Unless and until the total assessed valuation of the taxable property in the urban renewal area exceeds the total assessed value of the taxable property in such area as shown on the assessment roll referred to in subsection (b)(1) of this section, all of the taxes levied and collected upon the taxable property in the urban renewal area shall be paid into the funds for the respective taxing districts as taxes by or for the taxing districts in the same manner as all other property taxes. When such loans, advances, indebtedness, and bonds, if any, and interest thereon, have been paid, all money thereafter received from taxes upon the taxable property in the Southeast Industrial Park Urban Renewal Area shall be paid into the funds for the respective taxing districts in the same manner as taxes on all other property. 
(3)  The portion of taxes mentioned in subsection (b)(2) of this section and the special fund into which that portion shall be paid may be irrevocably pledged by the city for the payment of the principal and interest on loans, advances, bonds issued under the authority of the Code of Iowa § 403.9(1) or indebtedness incurred by the city to finance or refinance in whole or in part projects in the Southeast Industrial Park Urban Renewal Area. 
(c)  As used in this section, the term "taxes" includes, but is not limited to, all levies on an ad valorem basis upon land or real property. 
(Code 1996, § 11.02) 
Sec. 20-125. - West Second Street Urban Renewal Area. 
(a)  The provisions of this section apply to the West Second Street Urban Renewal Area, the boundaries of which are set out below, such area having been identified in the Urban Renewal Plan approved by the council by resolution adopted on August 4, 1997: 
A tract of land in section 2 and 3, Township 88 north, Range 26 west of the 5th P.M., Iowa described as follows: 
Commencing at the centerline of Bank Street and east line of the west one-half of the NW 1/4 NE 1/4 of the section 2; thence north along the east line to the southwest right-of-way line of Overpass Drive; thence northwest along the line to the south right-of-way line of the Union Pacific Railroad; thence west along the line to the west line of the section 2; thence continuing west along the south railroad right-of-way 467.24 feet; thence south 229.7 feet; thence east 212.24 feet; thence south 283 feet; thence east 158.44 feet; thence south 430 feet; thence east to the west line of the section 2; thence south along the west line to the southwest corner of the NW 1/4 NW 1/4 of the section 2; thence east along the south line of the north 1/2 of the NW 1/4 to the southeast corner of the north 1/2; thence east along the south line of the north 1/2 of the NE 1/4 to the point of beginning. 
(b)  The taxes levied on the taxable property in the West Second Street Urban Renewal Area each year by and for the benefit of the state, the city, the county and any school district or other taxing district in which the urban renewal area is located, from and after August 4, 1997, shall be divided as follows: 
(1)  That portion of the taxes which would be produced by the rate at which the tax is levied each year by or for each of the taxing districts upon the total sum of the assessed value of the taxable property in the West Second Street Urban Renewal Area, as shown on the assessment roll as of January 1 of the calendar year preceding the first calendar year in which the city certifies to the county auditor the amount of loans, advances, indebtedness, or bonds payable from the special fund referred to in subsection (b)(2) of this section, shall be allocated to and when collected be paid into the fund for the respective taxing district as taxes by or for the taxing district into which all other property taxes are paid. For the purpose of allocating taxes levied by or for any taxing district which did not include the territory in the West Second Street Urban Renewal Area on August 4, 1997, but to which the territory has been annexed or otherwise included after the effective date, the assessment roll applicable to property in the annexed territory as of January 1 of the calendar year preceding the effective date of the ordinance which amends the plan for the West Second Street Urban Renewal Area to include the annexed area, shall be used in determining the assessed valuation of the taxable property in the annexed area. 
(2)  That portion of the taxes each year in excess of such amounts shall be allocated to and when collected be paid into a special fund of the city to pay the principal of and interest on loans, advanced to or indebtedness, whether funded, refunded, assumed or otherwise, including bonds issued under the authority of the Code of Iowa § 403.9(1), incurred by the city to finance or refinance, in whole or in part, projects in the West Second Street Urban Renewal Area, except that taxes for the payment of bonds and interest of each taxing district shall be collected against all taxable property within the taxing district without limitation by the provisions of this section. Unless and until the total assessed valuation of the taxable property in the West Second Street Urban Renewal Area exceeds the total assessed value of the taxable property in such area as shown by the assessment roll referred to in subsection (b)(1) of this section, all of the taxes levied and collected upon the taxable property in the West Second Street Urban Renewal Area shall be paid into the funds for the respective taxing districts as taxes by or for the taxing districts in the same manner as all other property taxes. When such loans, advances, indebtedness, and bonds, if any, and interest thereon, have been paid, all money thereafter received from taxes upon the taxable property in the West Second Street Urban Renewal Area shall be paid into the funds for the respective taxing districts in the same manner as taxes on all other property. 
(3)  The portion of taxes mentioned in subsection (b)(2) of this section and the special fund into which that portion shall be paid may be irrevocably pledged by the city for the payment of the principal and interest on loans, advances, bonds issued under the authority of the Code of Iowa § 403.9(1), or indebtedness incurred by the city to finance or refinance in whole or in part projects in the West Second Street Urban Renewal Area. 
(c)  As used in this section, the term "taxes" includes, but is not limited to, all levies on an ad valorem basis upon land or real property. 
(Code 1996, § 11.03) 
Sec. 20-126. - Southwest Urban Renewal Area. 
(a)  The provisions of this section apply to the Southwest Urban Renewal Area, the boundaries of which are set out below, such area having been identified in the urban renewal plan approved by the council by resolution adopted on June 4, 2001: 
Beginning at the SW corner of section 12, Township 88 north, Range 26 west of the 5th P.M., within the corporate limits of the city; thence north along the west line of the section 12 to the southerly right-of-way line of US Highway 20; thence easterly along the southerly right-of-way line to a point where the southerly right-of-way line begins a curve for the existing off ramp of the Highway 20; thence continuing along the southerly right-of-way line along the existing curve concave southeasterly to its intersection with the westerly right-of-way line of Highway 17; thence southerly along the westerly right-of-way line of Highway 17 to the south line of the SW 1/4of the SW 1/4 of section 7, Township 88 north, Range 25 west of the 5th P.M.; thence west along the south line of the SW 1/4-SW 1/4 to the SW corner of the SW 1/4-SW 1/4, also being the SE corner of the section 12-88-26; thence continuing west along the south line of the section 12 to the point of beginning. 
(b)  After June 4, 2001, the taxes levied on the taxable property in the urban renewal area each year by and for the benefit of the state, the city, the county and any school district or other taxing district in which the urban renewal area is located, shall be divided as follows: 
(1)  That portion of the taxes which would be produced by the rate at which the tax is levied each year by or for each of the taxing districts upon the total sum of the assessed value of the taxable property in the Urban Renewal Area, as shown on the assessment roll as of January 1 of the calendar year preceding the first calendar year in which the city certifies to the county auditor the amount of loans, advances, indebtedness or bonds payable from the special fund referred to in subsection (b)(2) of this section, shall be allocated to and when collected be paid into the fund for the respective taxing district as taxes by or for the taxing district into which all other property taxes are paid. For the purpose of allocating taxes levied by or for any taxing district which did not include the territory in the urban renewal area on June 4, 2001, but to which the territory has been annexed or otherwise included after the effective date, the assessment roll applicable to property in the annexed territory as of January 1 of the calendar year preceding the effective date of the ordinance which amends the plan for the urban renewal area to include the annexed area, shall be used in determining the assessed valuation of the taxable property in the annexed area. 
(2)  That portion of the taxes each year in excess of such amounts shall be allocated to and when collected be paid into a special fund of the city to pay the principal of and interest on loans, moneys advanced to or indebtedness, whether funded, refunded, assumed or otherwise, including bonds issued under the authority of the Code of Iowa § 403.9(1), incurred by the city to finance or refinance, in whole or in part, projects in the urban renewal area, except that taxes for the payment of bonds and interest of each taxing district shall be collected against all taxable property within the taxing district without limitation by the provisions of this section. Unless and until the total assessed valuation of the taxable property in the urban renewal area exceeds the total assessed value of the taxable property in such area as shown on the assessment roll referred to in subsection (b)(1) of this section, all of the taxes levied and collected upon the taxable property in the urban renewal area shall be paid into the funds for the respective taxing districts as taxes by or for the taxing districts in the same manner as all other property taxes. When such loans, advances, indebtedness, and bonds, if any, and interest thereon, have been paid, all money thereafter received from taxes upon the taxable property in the urban renewal area shall be paid into the funds for the respective taxing districts in the same manner as taxes on all other property. 
(3)  The portion of taxes mentioned in subsection (b)(2) of this section and the special fund into which that portion shall be paid may be irrevocably pledged by the city for the payment of the principal and interest on loans, advances, bonds issued under the authority of the Code of Iowa § 403.9(1), or indebtedness incurred by the city to finance or refinance in whole or in part projects in the urban renewal area. 
(c)  As used in this section, the term "taxes" includes, but is not limited to, all levies on an ad valorem basis upon land or real property. 
(Code 1996, § 11.04) 
Sec. 20-127. - 2002 Addition to the Southwest Urban Renewal Area. 
(a)  The provisions of this section apply to the 2002 Addition to the Southwest Urban Renewal Area, the boundaries of which are set out below, such area having been identified in the Urban Renewal Plan approved by the council by resolution adopted on August 5, 2002: 
Commencing at the center of section 18, Township 88 north, Range 25 west of the 5th P.M., Iowa; thence south along the west line of the SE 1/4 of the section 18 to the easterly right-of-way of Iowa Highway 17; thence southeasterly along the easterly right-of-way to the south line of the NW 1/4 SE 1/4 of the section 18; thence westerly to a point N 59 degrees 58'E 198.21 feet from a point 1239.6 feet north of the S 1/4 corner of the section 18; thence S 59 degrees 58'W 198.2 feet to the west line of the SE 1/4 of the section 18; thence north along the west line of the SE 1/4 of the section 18 to the NW corner of the SW 1/4 SE 1/4 of the section 18; thence westerly along the south line of the NE 1/4 SW 1/4 of the section 18 a distance of 25 feet; thence south along a line parallel with and 25 feet west of the east line of the SW 1/4 of the section 18 to a point 100 feet north of the south line of the section 18; thence west along a line parallel with and 100 feet north of the south line of the SE 1/4 SW 1/4 of the section 18 a distance of 675 feet; thence south to the south line of the SE 1/4 SW 1/4 of the section 18; thence west along the south line to the SW corner of the SE 1/4 SW 1/4 of the section 18; thence west along the south line of the SW 1/4 SW 1/4 of the section 18 to the centerline of the Boone River; thence northeasterly along the centerline of the Boone River to the west right-of-way of Iowa Highway 17; thence northwesterly along the westerly right-of-way of the Highway to a point 140 feet north of the south line of the SE 1/4 NW 1/4 of the section 18; thence west along a line parallel with and 140 feet north of the south line of the SE 1/4 NW 1/4 to the west line of the SE 1/4 NW 1/4; thence south along the west line to the south line of the SE 1/4 NW 1/4; thence west along the south line to the SW corner of the NW 1/4 of the section 18; thence north along the west line of the NW 1/4 of the section 18 to the NW corner of the NW 1/4 of the section 18; thence east along the north line of the NW 1/4 to the NE corner of the NW 1/4; thence south along the east line of the NW 1/4 to the point of beginning. 
(b)  After August 5, 2002, the taxes levied on the taxable property in the urban renewal area amendment each year by and for the benefit of the state, the city, the county and any school district or other taxing district in which the urban renewal area amendment is located, shall be divided as follows: 
(1)  That portion of the taxes which would be produced by the rate at which the tax is levied each year by or for each of the taxing districts upon the total sum of the assessed value of the taxable property in the urban renewal area amendment, as shown on the assessment roll as of January 1 of the calendar year preceding the first calendar year in which the city certifies to the county auditor the amount of loans, advances, indebtedness or bonds payable from the special fund referred to in subsection (b)(2) of this section, shall be allocated to and when collected be paid into the fund for the respective taxing district as taxes by or for the taxing district into which all other property taxes are paid. For the purpose of allocating taxes levied by or for any taxing district which did not include the territory in the urban renewal area amendment on August 5, 2002, but to which the territory has been annexed or otherwise included after the effective date, the assessment roll applicable to property in the annexed territory as of January 1 of the calendar year preceding the effective date of the ordinance which amends the plan for the urban renewal area amendment to include the annexed area, shall be used in determining the assessed valuation of the taxable property in the annexed area. 
(2)  That portion of the taxes each year in excess of such amounts shall be allocated to and when collected be paid into a special fund of the city to pay the principal of and interest on loans, moneys advanced to or indebtedness, whether funded, refunded, assumed or otherwise, including bonds issued under the authority of the Code of Iowa § 403.9(1) incurred by the city to finance or refinance, in whole or in part, projects in the urban renewal area amendment, except that taxes for the payment of bonds and interest of each taxing district shall be collected against all taxable property within the taxing district without limitation by the provisions of this section. Unless and until the total assessed valuation of the taxable property in the urban renewal area amendment exceeds the total assessed value of the taxable property in such area as shown on the assessment roll referred to in subsection (b)(1) of this section, all of the taxes levied and collected upon the taxable property in the urban renewal area amendment shall be paid into the funds for the respective taxing districts as taxes by or for the taxing districts in the same manner as all other property taxes. When such loans, advances, indebtedness, and bonds, if any, and interest thereon, have been paid, all money thereafter received from taxes upon the taxable property in the urban renewal area amendment shall be paid into the funds for the respective taxing districts in the same manner as taxes on all other property. 
(3)  The portion of taxes mentioned in subsection (b)(2) of this section and the special fund into which that portion shall be paid may be irrevocably pledged by the city for the payment of the principal and interest on loans, advances, bonds issued under the authority of the Code of Iowa § 403.9(1), or indebtedness incurred by the city to finance or refinance in whole or in part projects in the urban renewal area amendment. 
(c)  As used in this section, the term "taxes" includes, but is not limited to, all levies on an ad valorem basis upon land or real property. 
(Code 1996, § 11.05) 
Sec. 20-128. - 2011 Commercial Urban Renewal Area. 
(a)  The provisions of this section apply to the 2011 Commercial Urban Renewal Area, the boundaries of which are set out below, such area having been identified in the Urban Renewal Plan approved by the city council by resolution adopted on November 7, 2011: 
Lots 3-11, Block 5, Willson Funk and Co. Addition, city, Hamilton County, Iowa. 
(b)  After November 7, 2011, the taxes levied on the taxable property in the urban renewal area each year by and for the benefit of the state, the city, the county and any school district or other taxing district in which the urban renewal area is located, shall be divided as follows: 
(1)  That portion of the taxes which would be produced by the rate at which the tax is levied each year by or for each of the taxing districts upon the total sum of the assessed value of the taxable property in the urban renewal area, as shown on the assessment roll as of January 1 of the calendar year preceding the first calendar year in which the city certifies to the county auditor the amount of loans, advances, indebtedness, or bonds payable from the special fund referred to in subsection (b)(2) of this section, shall be allocated to and when collected be paid into the fund for the respective taxing district as taxes by or for the taxing district into which all other property taxes are paid. For the purpose of allocating taxes levied by or for any taxing district which did not include the territory in the urban renewal area on the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived, but to which the territory has been annexed or otherwise included after the effective date, the assessment roll applicable to property in the annexed territory as of January 1 of the calendar year preceding November 7, 2011, which amends the plan for the urban renewal area to include the annexed area, shall be used in determining the assessed valuation of the taxable property in the annexed area. 
(2)  That portion of the taxes each year in excess of such amounts shall be allocated to and when collected be paid into a special fund of the city to pay the principal of and interest on loans, moneys advanced to or indebtedness, whether funded, refunded, assumed or otherwise, including bonds issued under the authority of the Code of Iowa § 403.9(1), incurred by the city to finance or refinance, in whole or in part, projects in the urban renewal area, and to provide assistance for low and moderate-income family housing as provided in the Code of Iowa § 403.22, except that taxes for the regular and voter-approved physical plant and equipment levy of a school district imposed pursuant to the Code of Iowa § 298.2, and taxes for the payment of bonds and interest of each taxing district shall be collected against all taxable property within the taxing district without limitation by the provisions of this section. Unless and until the total assessed valuation of the taxable property in the urban renewal area exceeds the total assessed value of the taxable property in such area as shown by the assessment roll referred to in subsection (b)(1) of this section, all of the taxes levied and collected upon the taxable property in the urban renewal area shall be paid into the funds for the respective taxing districts as taxes by or for the taxing districts in the same manner as all other property taxes. When such loans, advances, indebtedness, and bonds, if any, and interest thereon, have been paid, all money thereafter received from taxes upon the taxable property in the urban renewal area shall be paid into the funds for the respective taxing districts in the same manner as taxes on all other property. 
(3)  The portion of taxes mentioned in subsection (b)(2) of this section and the special fund into which that portion shall be paid may be irrevocably pledged by the city for the payment of the principal and interest on loans, advances, bonds issued under the authority of the Code of Iowa § 403.9(1), or indebtedness incurred by the city to finance or refinance in whole or in part projects in the urban renewal area. 
(c)  As used in this section, the term "taxes" includes, but is not limited to, all levies on an ad valorem basis upon land or real property. 
(Code 1996, § 11.06) 
Sec. 20-129. - 2013 Fairmeadow Urban Renewal Area. 
(a)  The provisions of this section apply to the 2013 Fairmeadow Urban Renewal Area, the boundaries of which are set out below, such area having been identified in the urban renewal plan approved by the city council by resolution adopted on July 15, 2013: 
Certain real property situated in the city, more particularly described as follows: 
That portion of the following premises lying north of Fairmeadow Drive in Webster City, Iowa: 
The NE 1/4 of the NE 1/4 and the north 1/2 of the SE 1/4 of the NE 1/4 of section 12, Township 88 north, Range 26 west of the 5th P.M., except Lots 1, 2, 3 and 4 of Alexanders Fifth Addition to Webster City, Iowa, and except a tract commencing at the northwest corner of the NE 1/4 of NE 1/4; thence east 52 rods; thence south 22 rods 13 feet; thence west 36 rods; thence south 19 rods 3 1/2 feet; thence west 16 rods; thence north 42 rods to place of beginning. 
(b)  After the effective date of July 15, 2013, the taxes levied on the taxable property in the urban renewal area each year by and for the benefit of the state, the city, the county and any school district or other taxing district in which the urban renewal area is located, shall be divided as follows: 
(1)  That portion of the taxes which would be produced by the rate at which the tax is levied each year by or for each of the taxing districts upon the total sum of the assessed value of the taxable property in the urban renewal area, as shown on the assessment roll as of January 1 of the calendar year preceding the first calendar year in which the city certifies to the county auditor the amount of loans, advances, indebtedness, or bonds payable from the special fund referred to in subsection (b)(2) of this section, shall be allocated to and when collected be paid into the fund for the respective taxing district as taxes by or for the taxing district into which all other property taxes are paid. For the purpose of allocating taxes levied by or for any taxing district which did not include the territory in the urban renewal area on July 15, 2013, but to which the territory has been annexed or otherwise included after the effective date, the assessment roll applicable to property in the annexed territory as of January 1 of the calendar year preceding July 15, 2013, which amends the plan for the urban renewal area to include the annexed area, shall be used in determining the assessed valuation of the taxable property in the annexed area. 
(2)  That portion of the taxes each year in excess of such amounts shall be allocated to and when collected be paid into a special fund of the city to pay the principal of and interest on loans, moneys advanced to or indebtedness, whether funded, refunded, assumed or otherwise, including bonds issued under the authority of the Code of Iowa § 403.9(1), incurred by the city to finance or refinance, in whole or in part, projects in the urban renewal area, and to provide assistance for low and moderate-income family housing as provided in the Code of Iowa § 403.22, except that taxes for the regular and voter-approved physical plant and equipment levy of a school district imposed pursuant to the Code of Iowa § 298.2, and taxes for the payment of bonds and interest of each taxing district shall be collected against all taxable property within the taxing district without limitation by the provisions of this section. Unless and until the total assessed valuation of the taxable property in the urban renewal area exceeds the total assessed value of the taxable property in such area as shown by the assessment roll referred to in subsection (b)(1) of this section, all of the taxes levied and collected upon the taxable property in the urban renewal area shall be paid into the funds for the respective taxing districts as taxes by or for the taxing districts in the same manner as all other property taxes. When such loans, advances, indebtedness, and bonds, if any, and interest thereon, have been paid, all money thereafter received from taxes upon the taxable property in the urban renewal area shall be paid into the funds for the respective taxing districts in the same manner as taxes on all other property. 
(3)  The portion of taxes mentioned in subsection (b)(2) of this section and the special fund into which that portion shall be paid may be irrevocably pledged by the city for the payment of the principal and interest on loans, advances, bonds issued under the authority of the Code of Iowa § 403.9(1), or indebtedness incurred by the city to finance or refinance in whole or in part projects in the urban renewal area. 
(c)  As used in this section, the term "taxes" includes, but is not limited to, all levies on an ad valorem basis upon land or real property. 
(Code 1996, § 11.07) 
Sec. 20-130. - 2013 Red Bull Division Urban Renewal Area/Webster City Residential Urban Renewal Area B. 
(a)  The provisions of this section apply to the 2013 Webster City Residential Urban Renewal Area B, more particularly described as Lots 1 and 2, Red Bull Subdivision, Webster City, Iowa, , such area having been identified in the Urban Renewal Plan approved by the city council by resolution adopted on September 16, 2013. 
(b)  After September 16, 2013, the taxes levied on the taxable property in the 2013 urban renewal addition each year by and for the benefit of the state, the city, the county and any school district or other taxing district in which the 2013 urban renewal addition is located, shall be divided as follows: 
(1)  That portion of the taxes which would be produced by the rate at which the tax is levied each year by or for each of the taxing districts upon the total sum of the assessed value of the taxable property in the 2013 urban renewal addition, as shown on the assessment roll as of January 1 of the calendar year preceding the first calendar year in which the city certifies to the county auditor the amount of loans, advances, indebtedness, or bonds payable from the special fund referred to in subsection (b)(2) of this section, shall be allocated to and when collected be paid into the fund for the respective taxing district as taxes by or for the taxing district into which all other property taxes are paid. For the purpose of allocating taxes levied by or for any taxing district which did not include the territory in the 2013 urban renewal addition on the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived, but to which the territory has been annexed or otherwise included after the effective date, the assessment roll applicable to property in the annexed territory as of January 1 of the calendar year preceding September 16, 2013, which amends the plan for the 2013 urban renewal addition to include the annexed area, shall be used in determining the assessed valuation of the taxable property in the annexed area. 
(2)  That portion of the taxes each year in excess of such amounts shall be allocated to and when collected be paid into a special fund of the city to pay the principal of and interest on loans, moneys advanced to or indebtedness, whether funded, refunded, assumed or otherwise, including bonds issued under the authority of the Code of Iowa § 403.9(1), incurred by the city to finance or refinance, in whole or in part, projects in the urban renewal area, and to provide assistance for low and moderate-income family housing as provided in the Code of Iowa § 403.22, except that taxes for the regular and voter-approved physical plant and equipment levy of a school district imposed pursuant to the Code of Iowa § 298.2, taxes for the instructional support program of a school district imposed pursuant to the Code of Iowa § 257.19, and taxes for the payment of bonds and interest of each taxing district shall be collected against all taxable property within the taxing district without limitation by the provisions of this ordinance. Unless and until the total assessed valuation of the taxable property in the 2013 urban renewal addition exceeds the total assessed value of the taxable property in such area as shown by the assessment roll referred to in subsection (b)(1) of this section, all of the taxes levied and collected upon the taxable property in the 2013 urban renewal addition shall be paid into the funds for the respective taxing districts as taxes by or for the taxing districts in the same manner as all other property taxes. When such loans, advances, indebtedness, and bonds, if any, and interest thereon, have been paid, all money thereafter received from taxes upon the taxable property in the 2013 urban renewal addition shall be paid into the funds for the respective taxing districts in the same manner as taxes on all other property. 
(3)  The portion of taxes mentioned in subsection (b)(2) of this section and the special fund into which that portion shall be paid may be irrevocably pledged by the city for the payment of the principal and interest on loans, advances, bonds issued under the authority of the Code of Iowa § 403.9(1), or indebtedness incurred by the city to finance or refinance in whole or in part projects in the urban renewal area. 
(c)  As used in this section, the term "taxes" includes, but is not limited to, all levies on an ad valorem basis upon land or real property. 
(Code 1996, § 11.08) 
Sec. 20-131. - 2016 Industrial Urban Renewal Area. 
(a)  The provisions of this section apply to the 2016 Industrial Urban Renewal Area, the boundaries of which are set out below, such area having been identified in the urban renewal plan approved by the city council by resolution adopted on September 6, 2016. 
(1)  Tract B: Tract in south 1/2 of SW 1/4, section 34, Township 89 north, Range 25 west of the 5th P.M., being within the corporate limits of Webster City, Iowa described as: Commencing at the south quarter corner of the section, thence north 00 degrees 00'00" west 467.91 feet along east line of SE 1/4 of SW 1/4 of the section; thence south 89 degrees 43'16" west 1,192.37 feet to point of beginning; thence south 00 degrees 04'06" west 456.71 feet; thence north 89 degrees 57'54" west 825.54 feet; thence north 00 degrees 33'29" west 452.24 feet; thence north 89 degrees 43'16" east 830.58 feet to point of beginning, per Survey Cabinet Slide 91B, page 2; and 
(2)  Tract C: Lot 1, Custom Meats Minor Subdivision Plat in city; and 
(3)  Tract D: Lots 1 and 3, Tasler Subdivision to Webster City, Iowa; and 
(4)  Tract E: Parcel of land in the SE 1/4 SE 1/4 of section 34, Township 89 north, Range 25 west of the 5th P.M., being within the corporate limits of Webster City, Iowa described as: Commencing at the southwest corner of the SE 1/4 of the SE 1/4 of the section 34; thence north 00 degrees 00'00" west along the west line of the SE 1/4 of the SE 1/4, 146.46 feet; thence north 84 degrees 06'00" east along the north right-of-way line of the Illinois Central Gulf Railroad, now known as Chicago Central & Pacific Railroad Company, 435.32 feet to the point of beginning; thence continuing north 84 degrees 06'00" east along the north right-of-way line of the Railroad 887.36 feet to a point on the east line of the SE 1/4 of the SE 1/4 of the section; thence north 00 degrees 06'00" east 237.30 feet; thence north 89 degrees 47'00" west 883.10 feet; thence south 00 degrees 00'00" west 325.17 feet to the point of beginning, containing 5.70 acres, more or less; and 
(5)  Tract F: Parcel of land in the SE 1/4 SE 1/4 of section 34, Township 89 north, Range 25 west of the 5th P.M., being within the corporate limits of Webster City, Iowa described as: 
Commencing at the southwest corner of the SE 1/4 of the SE 1/4 of the section 34; thence north 00 degrees 00'00" west along the west line of the SE 1/4 of the SE 1/4, 146.46 feet; thence north 84 degrees 06'00" east along the north right-of-way line of the Illinois Central Gulf Railroad now known as Chicago Central & Pacific Railroad Company 1,322.68 feet to a point on the east line of the SE 1/4 of the SE 1/4; thence north 00 degrees 06'00" east 237.30 feet to the point of beginning; thence continuing north 00 degrees 06'00" east along the east line of the SE 1/4 of the SE 1/4, 510 feet; thence south 89 degrees 47'00" west 300 feet; thence south 00 degrees 06'00" west 510 feet; thence north 89 degrees 47'00" east 300 feet to point of beginning, containing 3.512 acres, more or less; and 
(6)  Tract G: A tract of land in the SE 1/4 of the SE 1/4 of section 34, Township 89 north, Range 25, west of the 5th P.M., located in Hamilton County, Iowa, more particularly described as follows: Beginning at the northwest corner of the SE 1/4 of the SE 1/4 of the section 34; thence north 89 degrees 53'30" east along the north line of the SE 1/4 of the SE 1/4 of section 34 for 33.00 feet; thence south 00 degrees 00'00" west 660.00 feet; thence south 89 degrees 53'30" west 33.00 feet; thence north 00 degrees 00'00" east 660.00 feet to the point of beginning. The tract contains 0.50 acres, more or less; and 
Tract H: A tract of land in the SE 1/4 of the SE 1/4 of section 34, Township 89 north, Range 25, west of the 5th P.M., located in Hamilton County, Iowa, more particularly described as follows: Commencing at the southwest corner of the SE 1/4 of the SE 1/4 of section 34, Township 89 north, Range 25 west; thence north 00 degrees 00'00" west 146.46 feet to the point of beginning; thence north 84 degrees 06'00" east 33.18 feet; thence north 00 degrees 00'00" west 331.82 feet; thence north 90 degrees 00'00" west 33.00 feet; thence south 00 degrees 00'00" east 335.23 feet to the point of beginning. The tract contains 0.253 acres, more or less; and 
(7)  Tract I: A tract commencing at the northwest corner of the SE 1/4 of the SE 1/4 of section 34, Township 89 north, Range 25 west of the 5th P.M. located in Hamilton County, Iowa; thence south 0 degrees 00'00" west 660.00 feet along the west side of the SE 1/4 of the SE 1/4 of the section 34; thence north 89 degrees 53'30 east 33.00 feet to the point of beginning; thence north 89 degrees 53'30" east 270.00 feet; thence south 0 degrees 00'00" west 78.58 feet; thence south 89 degrees 53'30" west 270.00 feet; thence north 0 degrees 00'00" east 78.58 feet to the point of beginning, containing 0.49 acres; and 
(8)  Tract J: Lot 2, Custom Meats Minor Subdivision to Webster City, Iowa; and 
(9)  Tract K: A tract in the SE 1/4 of SW 1/4, section 34, Township 89 north, Range 25 west of the 5th P.M., being within the corporate limits of Webster City, Iowa described as: Commencing at a point on the EAST line of the SW 1/4 of section 34, and the north line of the right-of-way of the Illinois Central Railroad nka Chicago Central & Pacific Railroad Company, thence north 450 feet; thence west 150 feet; thence south 300 feet; thence west 209.76 feet; thence south to the north line of right-of-way above referred to; thence easterly along the north line of the right-of-way to place of beginning; and 
(10)  Tract L: A tract in the SE 1/4 of SW 1/4, section 34, Township 89 north, Range 25 west of the 5th P.M., being within the corporate limits of Webster City, Iowa described as: Commencing at the southeast corner of the SW 1/4 of the section 34, thence north 00 degrees 19'20" east 467.91 feet along the east line of the SW 1/4; thence north 90 degrees 00'00" west 130.00 feet; thence south 00 degrees 19'20" west 290.00 feet; thence south 19 degrees 45'32" west 60.10 feet to the point of beginning; thence continuing south 19 degrees 45'32" west 20.21 feet; thence north 55 degrees 11'00" east 8.23 feet; thence north 00 degrees 19'20" east 14.32 feet to the point of beginning, containing 48.1 square feet; excepting 
a.  Tract 1: Commencing at the south quarter corner of the section 34, thence north 90 degrees 00' west (assumed) along the south line of the SW 1/4 of the section, 359.76 feet; thence north 0 degrees 19'20" east 62.51 feet to the point of beginning; thence continuing north 0 degrees 19'20" east 105.40 feet; thence north 90 degrees 00' east 209.76 feet; thence south 0 degrees 19'20" west along a new chain link fence, 61 feet; thence south 55 degrees 11' west along the fence, 25.39 feet; thence south 0 degrees 19'20" west along the fence, 29.90 feet; thence south 90 degrees 00' west 189 feet to the point of beginning, containing 0.49 acres; and excepting; 
b.  Tract 2: Commencing at the south quarter corner of the section 34, thence north 00 degrees 00'00" east along the east line of the SW 1/4, 467.91 feet; thence south 89 degrees 39'10" west 130 feet to the point of beginning; thence south 00 degrees 00'00" west 290 feet; thence south 45 degrees 00'00" west 28.28 feet; thence north 00 degrees 00'00" east 310 feet; thence north 89 degrees 39'10" east 20 feet to the point of beginning, containing 0.138 acres; and excepting 
c.  Tract 3: Commencing at the southeast corner of the SW 1/4 of the section 34, thence north 00 degrees 19'20" east 467.91 feet along the east line of the SW 1/4; thence north 90 degrees 00'00" west 130.00 feet; thence south 00 degrees 19'20" west 290.00 feet to the point of beginning; thence south 19 degrees 45'32" west 60.10 feet; thence north 00 degrees 19'20" east 36.68 feet; thence north 45 degrees 19'20" east 28.28 feet to the point of beginning, containing 366.7 square feet; and excepting 
d.  Tract 4: Commencing at the southeast corner of the SW 1/4 of the section 34, thence north 00 degrees 19'20" east 467.91 feet along the east line of the SW 1/4; thence north 90 degrees 00'00" west 130.00 feet; thence south 00 degrees 19'20" west 290.00 feet; thence south 19 degrees 45'32" west 80.31 feet to the point of beginning; thence continuing south 19 degrees 45'32" west 42.18 feet; thence north 00 degrees 19'20" east 29.90 feet; thence north 55 degrees 11'00" east 17.16 feet to the point of beginning, containing 209.7 square feet. 
(b)  After September 6, 2016, the taxes levied on the taxable property in the tax increment district each year by and for the benefit of the state, the city, the county and any school district or other taxing district in which the tax increment district is located, shall be divided as follows: 
(1)  That portion of the taxes which would be produced by the rate at which the tax is levied each year by or for each of the taxing districts upon the total sum of the assessed value of the taxable property in the tax increment district, as shown on the assessment roll as of January 1 of the calendar year preceding the first calendar year in which the city certifies to the county auditor the amount of loans, advances, indebtedness, or bonds payable from the special fund referred to in subsection (b)(2) of this section, shall be allocated to and when collected be paid into the fund for the respective taxing district as taxes by or for the taxing district into which all other property taxes are paid. For the purpose of allocating taxes levied by or for any taxing district which did not include the territory in the Tax Increment district on the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived, but to which the territory has been annexed or otherwise included after the effective date, the assessment roll applicable to property in the annexed territory as of January 1 of the calendar year preceding the effective date of the ordinance which amends the tax increment district to include the annexed area, shall be used in determining the assessed valuation of the taxable property in the annexed area. 
(2)  That portion of the taxes each year in excess of such amounts shall be allocated to and when collected be paid into a special fund of the city to pay the principal of and interest on loans, moneys advanced to or indebtedness, whether funded, refunded, assumed or otherwise, including bonds issued under the authority of the Code of Iowa § 403.9(1), incurred by the city to finance or refinance, in whole or in part, projects in the urban renewal area, and to provide assistance for low and moderate-income family housing as provided in the Code of Iowa § 403.22, except that taxes for the regular and voter-approved physical plant and equipment levy of a school district imposed pursuant to the Code of Iowa § 298.2, taxes for the instructional support levy program of a school district imposed pursuant to the Code of Iowa § 257.19, and taxes for the payment of bonds and interest of each taxing district shall be collected against all taxable property within the taxing district without limitation by the provisions of this ordinance. Unless and until the total assessed valuation of the taxable property in the tax increment district exceeds the total assessed value of the taxable property in such area as shown by the assessment roll referred to in subsection (a) of this section, all of the taxes levied and collected upon the taxable property in the tax increment district shall be paid into the funds for the respective taxing districts as taxes by or for the taxing districts in the same manner as all other property taxes. When such loans, advances, indebtedness, and bonds, if any, and interest thereon, have been paid, all money thereafter received from taxes upon the taxable property in the tax increment district shall be paid into the funds for the respective taxing districts in the same manner as taxes on all other property. 
(3)  The portion of taxes mentioned in subsection (b)(2) of this section and the special fund into which that portion shall be paid may be irrevocably pledged by the city for the payment of the principal and interest on loans, advances, bonds issued under the authority of the Code of Iowa § 403.9(1), or indebtedness incurred by the city to finance or refinance in whole or in part projects in the urban renewal area. 
(c)  As used in this section, the term "taxes" includes, but is not limited to, all levies on an ad valorem basis upon land or real property. 
(Code 1996, § 11.09) 
Sec. 20-132. - Residential Urban Renewal Areas. 
(a)  The purpose of this section is to provide for the division of taxes levied on the taxable property in the urban renewal areas of the city each year by and for the benefit of the state, city, county, school districts or other taxing districts after the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived in order to create a special fund to pay the principal of and interest on loans, advances or indebtedness, including bonds proposed to be issued by the city, to finance projects in such areas. 
(b)  The provisions of this section apply to the city residential urban renewal areas A, B, C, D, and E, the boundaries of which are set out below, such areas having been identified in the urban renewal plan approved by the council by resolution adopted on December 5, 1994: 
Parcel Number Name Valuation Area A - A 500025070260000 Farmers Bank 4920 - A 500025070285000 Farmers Bank 4220 - A 490025072603000 Struchen 23987 Area B - A 500025070425000 Reveiz 10720 - A 500025070440000 Arnold 14860 - A 500025070460000 Arnold 11950 - A 500025070480000 Reveiz 26320 Area C - A 500025120464000 Reveiz 26540 - A 500025120487000 Reveiz 12670 - A 500025120427000 Jaycox 9640 - A 500025120441000 Jaycox 7680 - A 500025120463000 Jaycox 1360 - A 500025120483000 Jaycox 16430 Area D - A 500025020860000 Riley 29030 - A 500025020881000 Riley 2160 - A 500025110241000 Reveiz 10680 - A 500025110260000 Reveiz 31540 Area E - A 500025310827000 Modtland 4404 - A 500025310861000 Modtland 2780 - A 500025310880000 Modtland 6710 - A 500025310881000 Greiner 5270  
The taxes levied on the taxable property in the urban renewal areas each year by and for the benefit of the state, the city, the county and any school district or other taxing district in which such urban renewal area is located, from and after December 5, 1994, shall be divided as follows: 
(1)  That portion of the taxes which would be produced by the rate at which the tax is levied each year by or for each of the taxing districts upon the total sum of the assessed value of the taxable property in the urban renewal areas, as shown on the assessment roll as of January 1, 1993, shall be allocated to and when collected be paid into the fund for the respective taxing district as taxes by or for the taxing district into which all other property taxes are paid. For the purpose of allocating taxes levied by or for any taxing district which did not include the territory in the urban renewal areas on December 5, 1994, but to which the territory has been annexed or otherwise included after the effective date, the assessment roll as of January 1, 1993, shall be used in determining the assessed valuation of the taxable property in the urban renewal areas on the effective date. 
(2)  That portion of the taxes each year in excess of such amounts shall be allocated to and when collected be paid into a special fund of the city to pay the principal of and interest on loans, advances or indebtedness, whether funded, refunded, assumed or otherwise, including bonds issued under the authority of the Code of Iowa § 403.9(1), incurred by the city to finance or refinance, in whole or in part, projects in the urban renewal areas, except that taxes for the payment of bonds and interest of each taxing district shall be collected against all taxable property within the taxing district without limitation by the provisions of this section. Unless and until the total assessed valuation of the taxable property in the urban renewal areas exceeds the total assessed value of the taxable property in such area as shown on the assessment roll referred to in subsection (b)(1) of this section, all of the taxes levied and collected upon the taxable property in the urban renewal areas shall be paid into the funds for the respective taxing districts as taxes by or for the taxing districts in the same manner as all other property taxes. When such loans, advances, indebted-ness, and bonds, if any, and interest thereon, have been paid, all money thereafter received from taxes upon the taxable property in the urban renewal areas shall be paid into the funds for the respective taxing districts in the same manner as taxes on all other property. 
(3)  The portion of taxes mentioned in subsection (b)(2) of this section and the special fund into which that portion shall be paid may be irrevocably pledged by the city for the payment of the principal and interest on loans, advances, bonds issued under the authority of the Code of Iowa § 403.9(1), or indebtedness incurred by the city to finance or refinance in whole or in part projects in the urban renewal areas. 
(c)  As used in this section, the term "taxes" includes, but is not limited to, all levies on an ad valorem basis upon land or real property. 
(Code 1996, § 14.02) 
Sec. 20-133. - 2003 Addition to the Residential Urban Renewal Area A. 
    The purpose of this section is to provide for the division of taxes levied on the taxable property in the 2003 Addition to the Residential Urban Renewal Area A of the city, each year by and for the benefit of the state, city, county, school districts or other taxing districts after December 15, 2003, in order to create a special fund to pay the principal of and interest on loans, moneys advanced to or indebtedness, including bonds proposed to be issued by the city to finance projects in such area. 
(1)  Definition. For use within this section, the term "urban renewal area amendment" shall mean the 2003 addition to the residential urban renewal area a of the city, the boundaries of which are set out below, approved by the city council by resolution adopted on December 15, 2003: 
A parcel of land in the NE 1/4 of section 7 and the NW 1/4 of section 8, Township 88 north, Range 25, west of the 5th P.M., Iowa, bounded on the north by the north line of the NE 1/4, section 7 and NW 1/4 section 8; bounded on the east by the west line of the Boone River; bounded on the south by the north right-of-way line of U.S. Highway 20; and bounded on the west by the west line of the NE 1/4, section 7 and the west right-of-way line of the Union Pacific Railroad. 
(2)  Provisions for division of taxes levied on taxable property in the urban renewal area amendment. after December 15, 2003, the taxes levied on the taxable property in the urban renewal area amendment each year by and for the benefit of the state, the city, the county and any school district or other taxing district in which the urban renewal area amendment is located, shall be divided as follows: 
a.  That portion of the taxes which would be produced by the rate at which the tax is levied each year by or for each of the taxing districts upon the total sum of the assessed value of the taxable property in the urban renewal area amendment, as shown on the assessment roll as of January 1 of the calendar year preceding the first calendar year in which the city certifies to the county auditor the amount of loans, advances, indebtedness, or bonds payable from the special fund referred to in subsection (2)b of this section, shall be allocated to and when collected be paid into the fund for the respective taxing district as taxes by or for the taxing district into which all other property taxes are paid. For the purpose of allocating taxes levied by or for any taxing district which did not include the territory in the urban renewal area amendment on the effective date of such ordinance, but to which the territory has been annexed or otherwise included after the effective date, the assessment roll applicable to property in the annexed territory as of January 1 of the calendar year preceding the effective date of the ordinance which amends the plan for the urban renewal area amendment to include the annexed area, shall be used in determining the assessed valuation of the taxable property in the annexed area. 
b.  That portion of the taxes each year in excess of such amounts shall be allocated to and when collected be paid into a special fund of the city to pay the principal of and interest on loans, moneys advanced to or indebtedness, whether funded, refunded, assumed or otherwise, including bonds issued under the authority of Code of Iowa § 403.9(1), incurred by the city to finance or refinance, in whole or in part, projects in the urban renewal area amendment, except that taxes for the payment of bonds and interest of each taxing district shall be collected against all taxable property within the taxing district without limitation by the provisions of Ordinance No. 1611. Unless and until the total assessed valuation of the taxable property in the urban renewal area amendment exceeds the total assessed value of the taxable property in such area as shown by the assessment roll referred to in subsection (2)a of this section, all of the taxes levied and collected upon the taxable property in the urban renewal area amendment shall be paid into the funds for the respective taxing districts as taxes by or for the taxing districts in the same manner as all other property taxes. When such loans, advances, indebtedness, and bonds, if any, and interest thereon, have been paid, all money thereafter received from taxes upon the taxable property in the urban renewal area amendment shall be paid into the funds for the respective taxing districts in the same manner as taxes on all other property. 
c.  The portion of taxes mentioned in subsection (2)b of this section and the special fund into which that portion shall be paid may be irrevocably pledged by the city for the payment of the principal and interest on loans, advances, bonds issued under the authority of the Code of Iowa § 403.9(1), or indebtedness incurred by the city to finance or refinance in whole or in part projects in the urban renewal area amendment. 
d.  As used in this section, the term "taxes" includes, but is not limited to, all levies on an ad valorem basis upon land or real property. 
(Code 1996, § 14.03) 
Sec. 20-134. - Urban Revitalization Area. 
(a)  The purpose of this section is to implement an urban revitalization district for tax abatement in association with construction of new residential units on currently developed lots within the corporate limits of the city. For use in this chapter, the following area of the city, is declared to be an urban revitalization area: 
All residential property within the corporate limits of the city that is property used according to current zoning practices and according to the future land use plan. To be eligible for abatement a property also: 
a.  Must be fronted by an existing public street; 
b.  Must have municipal water service within 50 feet of the lot boundaries; and 
c.  Must have municipal sewer service within 50 feet of the lot boundaries. 
The plan, adopted by resolution, shall be filed with the city clerk. 
(Code 1996, § 13.03) 
Sec. 20-135. - Riverview-CBD Economic Development Area. 
(a)  For use in this article, the term "economic development area" means Riverview-CBD Economic Development Area of the city, boundaries of which are set out below, such Riverview-CBD Economic Development Area having been identified in the urban renewal plan approved by the council by resolution adopted March 3, 1986. The boundaries of the economic development area are as follows: 
Beginning at the intersection of the northerly right-of-way line of Bank Street and the westerly right-of-way line of Des Moines Street, thence north to the southerly right-of-way line of the alley between First Street and Division Street, thence west to the westerly lot line of Lot 5 of Block 98 of Dubuque Pacific Railroad Company subdivision, thence north to the westerly lot line of Lot 12 of Block 97 in the Dubuque Pacific Railroad Company subdivision to the southerly right-of-way line of the alley between First Street and Second Street, thence west to the easterly right-of-way line of Prospect Street, thence north to the intersection of the northern right-of-way line of Second Street, thence west to the eastern right-of-way line of Broadway Street, thence north to the northerly right-of-way line of the Central Railroad right-of-way, thence east to the easterly right-of-way line of East Street, thence north to the northerly boundary of North Street extended, thence easterly to the eastern right-of-way line of Des Moines Street, thence north to the southern bank of the Boone River, thence following the river bank to the western right-of-way line of White Fox Road, thence south to the northern right-of-way line of the Dubuque and Pacific Railroad Company right-of-way thence east to the eastern right-of-way line of White Fox Road, thence south to the southern right-of-way line of Second Street, thence west to the eastern right-of-way line of River Street, thence south to the northern right-of-way line of Bank Street, then west to the point of beginning. 
(b)  After March 3, 1986, the taxes levied on the taxable property in the economic development area each year by and for the benefit of the state, the city, the county and any school district or other taxing district in which the economic development area is located, shall be divided as follows: 
(1)  That portion of the taxes which would be produced by the rate at which the tax is levied each year by or for each of the taxing districts upon the total sum of the assessed value of the taxable property in the economic development area, as shown on the assessment roll as of January 1 of the calendar year preceding March 3, 1986, shall be allocated to and when collected be paid into the fund for the respective taxing district as taxes by or for the taxing district into which all other property taxes are paid. For the purpose of allocating taxes levied by or for any taxing district which did not include the territory in the economic development area on March 3, 1986, but to which the territory has been annexed or otherwise included after the effective date, the assessment roll as of January 1 of the calendar year preceding the effective date of the ordinance shall be used in determining the assessed valuation of the taxable property in the economic development area on the effective date. 
(2)  That portion of the taxes each year in excess of such amounts shall be allocated to and when collected be paid into a special fund of the city to pay the principal of and interest on loans, advances or indebtedness, whether funded, refunded, assumed or otherwise, including bonds issued under the authority of the Code of Iowa § 403.9(1), incurred by the city to finance or refinance, in whole or in part, projects in the economic development area, except that taxes for the payment of bonds and interest of each taxing district shall be collected against all taxable property within the taxing district without limitation by the provisions of this chapter. Unless and until the total assessed valuation of the taxable property in the economic development area exceeds the total assessed value of the taxable property in such area as shown by the assessment roll referred to in subsection (b)(1) of this section, all of the taxes levied and collected upon the taxable property in the economic development area shall be paid into the funds for the respective taxing districts as taxes by or for the taxing districts in the same manner as all other property taxes. When such loans, advances, indebtedness, and bonds, if any, and interest thereon, have been paid, all money thereafter received from taxes upon the taxable property in such area shall be paid into the funds for the respective taxing districts in the same manner as taxes on all other property. 
(3)  The portion of taxes mentioned in subsection (b)(2) of this section and the special fund into which that portion shall be paid may be irrevocably pledged by the city for the payment of the principal and interest on loans, advances, bonds issued under the authority of the Code of Iowa § 403.9(1), or indebtedness incurred by the city to finance or refinance in whole or in part projects in the economic development area. 
(c)  As used in this section, the term "taxes" includes, but is not limited to, all levies on an ad valorem basis upon land or real property. 
(Code 1996, §§ 12.02, 12.03) 
Chapter 22 - FIRE PREVENTION, PROTECTION AND CONTROL 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal fire protection, Code of Iowa § 364.16. 

Sec. 22-1. - Fire department established; members. 
(a)  A city fire department is established to prevent and extinguish fires and to protect lives and property against fires, to promote fire prevention and fire safety, and to answer all emergency calls for which there is no other established agency. 
(b)  The department shall consist of the fire chief and such other officers and personnel as may be authorized by the council. All members of the department shall attend and actively participate in regular or special training drills or programs as directed by the chief. Members of the department shall be designated by rank and receive such compensation as shall be determined by resolution of the council. 
(Code 1996, §§ 30.01-30.04) 
State Law reference- Municipal fire protection, Code of Iowa § 364.16. 
Sec. 22-2. - Fire chief appointment and duties. 
    Generally. The fire chief shall be appointed by the city manager subject to council approval. The fire chief shall perform all duties required of the fire chief by law or ordinance and shall enforce all ordinances and state law regulating the following: 
(1)  Fire prevention. 
(2)  Maintenance and use of fire escapes. 
(3)  The investigation of the cause, origin and circumstances of fires. 
(4)  The means and adequacy of exit in case of fire from halls, theatres, churches, hospitals, asylums, lodging houses, schools, factories and all other buildings in which the public congregates for any purpose. 
(5)  The installation and maintenance of private fire alarm systems and fire extinguishing equipment. 
a.  Authority at fires. The fire chief or designee shall, when in charge of a fire scene, direct an operation as necessary to extinguish or control a fire, perform a rescue operation, investigate the existence of a suspected or reported fire, gas leak, or other hazardous condition, or take any other action deemed necessary in the reasonable performance of the department's duties. 
b.  Control of scenes. The fire chief or designee shall, prohibit an individual, vehicle or vessel from approaching a fire scene and remove from the scene any object, vehicle, vessel or individual that may impede or interfere with the operation of the fire department. 
c.  Authority to barricade. When in charge of a fire scene, the fire chief or designees may place or erect ropes, guards, barricades or other obstructions across a street, alley, right-of-way, or private property near the location of the fire or emergency so as to prevent accidents or interference with the firefighting efforts of the fire department, to control the scene until any required investigation is complete, or to preserve evidence related to the fire or other emergency. 
d.  Command. The fire chief or designee is charged with the duty of maintaining the efficiency and discipline of the fire department. The members of the fire department shall, at all times, be subject to the direction of the fire chief. 
e.  Property. The fire chief or designee shall exercise and have full control over the disposition of all fire apparatus, tools, equipment and other property used by or belonging to the fire department. 
f.  Notification. Whenever death, serious bodily injury, or property damage in excess of $200,000.00 has occurred as a result of a fire, or if arson is suspected, the fire chief or designee shall notify the state fire marshal's division immediately. For all fires causing an estimated damage of $50.00 or more or emergency responses by the fire department, the fire chief shall file a report with the fire marshal's division within ten days following the end of the month. the report shall indicate all fire incidents occurring and state the name of the owners and occupants of the property at the time of the fire, the value of the property, the estimated total loss to the property, origin of the fire as determined by investigation, and other facts, statistics, and circumstances concerning the fire incidents. 
g.  Right of entry. The fire chief or designee shall have the right, during reasonable hours, to enter any building or premises within the fire chief's jurisdiction for the purpose of making such investigation or inspection which under law or ordinance may be necessary to be made and is reasonably necessary to protect the public health, safety and welfare. 
h.  Recommendation. The fire chief or designee shall make such recommendations to owners, occupants, caretakers or managers of buildings necessary to eliminate fire hazards. 
i.  Assist state fire marshal. At the request of the state fire marshal, and as provided by law, the fire chief or designee shall aid the marshal in the performance of duties by investigating, preventing and reporting data pertaining to fires. 
j.  Records. The fire chief shall cause to be kept records of the fire department personnel, firefighting equipment, depreciation of all equipment and apparatus, the number of responses to alarms, their cause and location, and an analysis of losses by value, type and location of buildings. 
k.  Reports. The fire chief shall compile and submit to the mayor and council an annual report of the status and activities of the department as well as such other reports as may be requested by the mayor or council. 
(Code 1996, §§ 30.05, 30.06) 
Sec. 22-3. - Obedience to fire chief. 
    No person shall willfully fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order or direction of the fire chief. 
(Code 1996, § 30.07) 
Sec. 22-4. - Accidental injury insurance. 
    The council shall contract to insure the city against liability for worker's compensation and against statutory liability for the costs of hospitalization, nursing, and medical attention for firefighters injured in the performance of their duties as firefighters whether within or outside the corporate limits of the city. All firefighters shall be covered by the contract. 
(Code 1996, § 30.08) 
Sec. 22-5. - Liability insurance. 
    The council shall contract to insure against liability of the city or members of the department for injuries, death or property damage arising out of and resulting from the performance of departmental duties within or outside the corporate limits of the city. 
(Code 1996, § 30.09) 
Sec. 22-6. - Fire assistance outside the city. 
    The terms and conditions upon which firefighting equipment of the city shall respond to calls for firefighting or other emergency assistance outside the corporate limits shall be as follows: 
(1)  Township fire protection. The fire department will respond to calls in rural areas that are covered in agreements which the city has entered into with townships under the provisions of the Code of Iowa §§ 28E.12 and 359.42. 
(2)  Other rural response. The fire department may respond to calls involving vehicles or property not covered by a fire protection agreement described in subsection (1) of this section. In these instances, a fee established by the council may be charged. 
(3)  Mutual aid. The fire department is authorized to respond to calls for firefighting or other emergency assistance from other cities when a request is made for such assistance by the mayor or fire chief of such city. No charge shall be made for responding to such calls except to reimburse the city for any damage done to the equipment. 
(4)  Prior agreements. Agreements with associations or individuals for fire protection outside the city existing on the date of the passage of the ordinance from which this section is derived shall be carried out to the date of the expiration of the agreements. 
(Code 1996, § 30.10) 
Sec. 22-7. - Authority to cite violations. 
    Fire officials acting under the authority of the Code of Iowa ch. 100 may issue citations in accordance to the Code of Iowa ch. 805 for violations of state or local fire safety regulations. 
(Code 1996, § 30.11) 
State Law reference- Authority to cite violations, Code of Iowa § 100.41. 
Sec. 22-8. - Emergency ambulance service. 
    The department is authorized to provide emergency ambulance or rescue services and the accidental injury and liability insurance provided for herein shall include such operation. 
(Code 1996, § 30.12) 
Sec. 22-9. - Firefighter's retirement system. 
(a)  Purpose and intent. The purpose of this section is to provide for a fire disability and retirement system based upon actuarial tables and to implement and provide for the disability and retirement of city firefighters under the Code of Iowa ch. 411. 
(b)  State law adopted. The provisions of the Code of Iowa ch. 411, including all benefits provided therein, are adopted by the city and made a part of this chapter by this reference. 
(c)  Applicability. This section shall apply only to members of the fire department who became such on or after September 21, 1961. 
(d)  Board of trustees to administer. The general responsibility for the establishment and proper operation of the retirement system is vested in the board of trustees for state-wide system created by the Code of Iowa § 411.36. The system shall be administered under the direction of the board. 
(e)  Duties of board. The board of trustees shall have and perform all of the duties given unto such board by laws of the state and shall have full power to invest and reinvest the funds of the fire retirement system in the manner provided by law and shall administer the same as required by law. 
(f)  Legal advisor. The system may employ or retain an attorney to serve as the system's legal advisor and to represent the system. The costs of an attorney employed or retained by the system shall be paid from the fire and police retirement fund created in the Code of Iowa § 411.8. 
(g)  Medical board to be designated. The system shall designate a medical board as provided by law. 
(Code 1996, §§ 31.01-31.07) 
Secs. 22-10-22-36. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FIRE REGULATIONS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 22-37. - Injury to fire apparatus. 
    It is unlawful for a person willfully to destroy or injure any engine, hose, hook and ladder truck, or other thing used and kept for extinguishment of fires. 
(Code 1996, § 49.05) 
Sec. 22-38. - Open burning prohibited. 
    No person shall ignite, cause to be ignited, permit to be ignited, allow or maintain any open fire, with the following exceptions: 
(1)  Disaster rubbish. The open burning of rubbish, including landscape waste, for the duration of the community disaster period in cases where an officially declared emergency condition exists. 
(2)  Flare stacks. The open burning or flaring of waste gases, provided such open burning or flaring is conducted in compliance with applicable rules of the state department of natural resources. 
(3)  Recreational fires. Open fires for cooking, heating, recreation and ceremonies, which may include fire rings. All such fires must use only charcoal or untreated wood and must be 25 feet from a residential structure. Any recreational fires must comply with the limits for emission of visible air contaminants established by the state department of natural resources. 
(4)  Prescribed agricultural burns. The open burning of fields may be permitted if necessary for the maintenance of native prairie grass. 
(5)  Training fires. Fires set for the purpose of bona fide instruction and training of public, institutional or industrial employees in the methods of firefighting. 
(6)  Fire places and grills. This section shall not apply to indoor or outdoor fire places or barbecue grills used solely for entertainment purposes or the preparation of food for human consumption. 
(Code 1996, § 105.05) 
Secs. 22-39-22-64. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - FIREWORKS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Fireworks, Code of Iowa § 727.2; use of firearms, explosives, weapons and fireworks prohibited on certain public lands and waters, Code of Iowa § 461A.42. 

Sec. 22-65. - Definitions. 
    The definitions contained in the Code of Iowa § 727.2 are incorporated in this section by reference. 
(Code 1996, § 48.02(1)) 
Sec. 22-66. - Discharge in city restricted. 
(a)  A person may use or explode consumer fireworks only from 10:00 a.m. on July 4 until 12:00 midnight on July 5 of each year. It is unlawful to discharge consumer fireworks without meeting the requirements specified in this division, or to discharge fireworks outside of the dates and times specified. 
(b)  No person under the age of 18 years shall discharge consumer fireworks. 
(c)  A person shall only discharge consumer fireworks and novelties on real property they own or on property where consent has been given. 
(d)  Any person discharging consumer fireworks assumes all responsibility for its operation and the consequences thereof. 
(e)  No person shall discharge consumer fireworks if he is showing visible signs of, or determined to be, intoxicated or under the influence of a drug, narcotic, or alcohol. 
(f)  No person shall discharge consumer fireworks in a reckless manner or manner likely to cause death, injury, fire, or property damage. 
(g)  No person shall alter, remove, or discharge components of consumer fireworks other than in its intended method of discharging. 
(h)  No person shall release a sky lantern or similar open flame device within the city limits. 
(Code 1996, § 48.02(2)) 
Sec. 22-67. - Local permit for fireworks display. 
    The city may, upon application in writing, grant a permit for the display of fireworks by a city agency, fair associations, amusement parks and other organizations or groups of individuals along with any rules and regulations issued by the fire chief and approved by the city council when such fireworks display will be handled by a competent operator. Any applications shall have attached thereto proof of insurance with limits not less than $2,000,000.00 per occurrence and $5,000,000.00 aggregate. 
(Code 1996, § 48.02(2)(I)) 
Sec. 22-68. - Proof of state license and liability insurance required for sale of consumer fireworks. 
    Prior to any person engaging in the sale of consumer fireworks, the following shall be provided to the city manager. 
(1)  License. Proof of valid license issued from the state fire marshal. 
(2)  Liability insurance. Proof of commercial general liability insurance separate from the building property insurance specifically showing coverage of fireworks sales in the amount not less than $1,000,000.00 per occurrence and $2,000,000.00 aggregate. 
(Code 1996, § 48.02(3)(A)(1), (2)) 
Sec. 22-69. - Inspection of buildings where fireworks are offered for sale. 
    Any property, building, or premises whether it be permanent or temporary, intended for the sale of consumer fireworks shall have an initial inspection completed by the fire chief or designee or the building inspector prior to engaging in the sale of consumer fireworks to ensure that all relevant requirements of the most recent edition of the National Fire Protection Association Code 1124, and the city's applicable International Fire, Building and Mechanical Code sections are complied with. This initial inspection shall take place prior to both selling periods provided in this division. The fire chief or building inspector shall then inspect the consumer fireworks sale locations regularly throughout the date of sales to ensure their continued compliance. Inspection costs shall be assessed as follows: 
(1)  Permanent structure where fireworks are sold. Initial inspection fee of $150.00. 
(2)  Temporary or non-brick or mortar building where fireworks are sold initial inspection fee of $250.00. 
(Code 1996, § 48.02(3)(A)(3)) 
Sec. 22-70. - Permitted dates of sale. 
    Consumer fireworks sales shall only be conducted in accordance with dates and times designated by the Code of Iowa § 100.19. It is unlawful to sell consumer fireworks without meeting the requirements specified in this division, or to sell fireworks outside of the dates specified. 
(Code 1996, § 48.02(3)(B)) 
State Law reference- Consumer fireworks seller licensing, Code of Iowa § 100.19. 
Sec. 22-71. - Sales location safety requirements. 
(a)  Any structure used for the purpose of consumer fireworks sales shall not be located on public property. Additionally, any structure used for the purpose of consumer fireworks sales shall be located 50 feet from a property line, public right-of-way, public roadway, alley, or highway; and 300 feet from any structure currently occupied or inhabited as a residence or built to be occupied or inhabited as a residence. 
(b)  Consumer fireworks sales shall only be allowed in areas zoned for commercial or industrial use. 
(c)  Consumer fireworks sales shall only be permitted in a single story at grade building or structure to facilitate easy exiting during an emergency. 
(d)  Consumer fireworks sales housed in a temporary building or structure shall have 24-hour per day on-site, manned security during the dates of sale. 
(e)  Smoking or any open flame sources shall not be located within 50 feet of where consumer fireworks are sold. 
(f)  Consumer fireworks sale locations shall maintain a minimum of two approved exits or more if required by the city's applicable building code. All approved exits shall be clearly marked with proper signage and easily accessible without obstruction in case of emergency. 
(g)  Consumer fireworks shall not be sold to a person under the age of 18 years. 
(h)  No persons under the influence of alcohol, drugs, or narcotics, shall be allowed to remain in the business where consumer fireworks are sold. 
(i)  Consumer fireworks shall not be sold to an intoxicated person or to any person whom a reasonable person would believe may be impaired by other substances. 
(Code 1996, § 48.02(3)(C)) 
Sec. 22-72. - Violations. 
    All violations of any provisions of this division are declared simple misdemeanors or municipal infractions. Violations may be prosecuted as either a misdemeanor criminal offense or a municipal infraction at the sole discretion of any officer authorized by the city to enforce this Code. Fines shall be set by resolution of the city council. Violations of this division shall be reported to the state fire marshal and all fireworks shall be confiscated or destroyed. 
(Code 1996, § 48.02(4)) 
Sec. 22-73. - Exceptions and exemptions. 
    This division does not prohibit the sale by a resident, dealer, manufacturer or jobber of such fireworks as are not prohibited; or the sale of any kind of fireworks if they are to be shipped out of state; or the sale or use of blank cartridges for a show or theater, or for signal purposes in athletic sports or by railroads or trucks for signal purposes, or by a recognized military organization. This section does not apply to any substance or composition prepared and sold for medicinal or fumigation purposes. Unless specifically provided otherwise, this division does not apply to novelties as defined in the Code of Iowa § 727.2. 
(Code 1996, § 48.02(5) 
Chapter 24 - FRANCHISES 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 24-1-24-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CABLE TV FRANCHISE AND REGULATIONS 

Sec. 24-19. - Intent. 
    It is the intent of the city to grant a franchise for the construction and operation of a cable system to Cablevision VI, Inc., to define the relationship between the city and Cablevision VI, Inc., and to provide for the day-to-day regulations of the cable system through the term of the franchise. 
(Code 1996, § 151.01) 
Sec. 24-20. - Franchise granted. 
    The franchising authority grants to the grantee a non-exclusive franchise to construct and operate a cable system in, along, among, upon, across, above, over, under or in any manner connected with public ways within the city and for that purpose to erect, install, construct, repair, replace, reconstruct, maintain or retain in, on, over, under, upon, across or along any public way, and all extensions thereof and additions thereto, such poles, wires, cables, conductors, ducts, conduits, vaults, manholes, pedestals, amplifiers, appliances, attachments and other related property or equipment as may be necessary or appurtenant to the cable system. 
(Code 1996, § 151.02) 
Sec. 24-21. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Basic cable service means the tier of service regularly provided to all subscribers that includes the retransmission of local broadcast television signals. 
    Cable system means a facility, consisting of a set of closed transmission paths and associated signal generation, reception, and control equipment or other communications equipment that is designed to provide cable service and other service to subscribers. 
    Franchise authority means the city, or the lawful successor, transferee or assignee thereof. 
    Grantee means Cablevision VI, Inc., or the lawful successor, transferee or assignee thereof. 
    Gross revenues means the monthly cable service revenues received by the grantee from subscribers of the cable system; provided, however, the term "gross revenues" shall not include: 
(1)  Revenues received from national advertising carried on cable system; 
(2)  Any taxes on cable service which are imposed directly or indirectly on any subscriber thereof by any governmental unit or agency, and which are collected by the grantee on behalf of such governmental unit or agency. 
    Public way means the surface of, and the space above and below, any public street, highway, freeway, bridge, land path, alley, court, boulevard, sidewalk, parkway, way, lane, drive, circle or other public right-of-way, including, but not limited to, public utility easements, dedicated utility strips or rights-of-way dedicated for compatible uses and any temporary or permanent fixtures or improvements located thereon now or hereafter held by the franchising authority in the city which shall entitle the franchising authority and the grantee to the use thereof for the purpose of installing, operating, repairing and maintaining the cable system. 
(Code 1996, § 151.03) 
Sec. 24-22. - Term of franchise. 
    The franchise granted pursuant to this article shall be for an initial term of 15 years from its passage and final adoption. 
(Code 1996, § 151.04) 
Sec. 24-23. - Acceptance; effective date. 
    The grantee shall accept the franchise pursuant hereto by signing this agreement together with the operational agreement, and filing the same with the city clerk or other appropriate official or agency of the franchising authority within 60 days after the passage and final adoption of this agreement. Subject to the acceptance by grantee and publication as required by law, the effective date of this agreement shall be the 60th day after its passage and final adoption. 
(Code 1996, § 151.05) 
Sec. 24-24. - Conditions of street occupancy. 
    All transmission and distribution structures, poles, other lines, and equipment installed or erected by the grantee pursuant to the terms hereof shall be so located so as to cause a minimum of interference with the proper use of public ways and with the rights and reasonable convenience of property owners who own property that adjoins any of the public ways. 
(Code 1996, § 151.06) 
Sec. 24-25. - Repairs. 
    During the term of the franchise, the grantee shall, at its own expense, make all necessary repairs and replacement to the property of the grantee. Such repairs and replacements, interior and exterior, ordinary as well as extraordinary, and structural as well as nonstructural, shall be made promptly, as and when needed. 
(Code 1996, § 151.07) 
Sec. 24-26. - Restoration of public ways. 
    If during the course of grantee's construction, operation or maintenance of the cable system there occurs a disturbance of any public way by grantee, it shall, at its expense, replace and restore such public way to a condition reasonably comparable to the condition of the public way existing immediately prior to such disturbance. 
(Code 1996, § 151.08) 
Sec. 24-27. - Compliance with applicable laws. 
    During the term of the franchise, the grantee shall comply with all federal laws, rules or regulations as may now be hereinafter applicable to the constructions, operation, maintenance, repair, replacement, renewal, reconstruction, and removal of a cable television system, the sale and supply of audio and video communication services, the use of public property and private property and the engagement in such further activities as may now or hereinafter be consistent with generally accepted principles applicable to the operation of a cable system. 
(Code 1996, § 151.09) 
Sec. 24-28. - Installation and maintenance of property of the grantee. 
    During the term of the franchise, the property of the grantee shall be constructed, operated, maintained, repaired, replaced, renewed, reconstructed, and removed in accordance with generally accepted engineering principles so as not to endanger or interfere with the lives of persons or to interfere with improvements which the city may deem proper to make or to unnecessarily hinder or obstruct pedestrian or vehicular traffic or use of public property or private property. 
(Code 1996, § 151.10) 
Sec. 24-29. - Alteration of grade. 
    In the event that, during the term of the franchise, the city shall elect to alter, or change the grade of any street, alley, or public way, the grantee, upon 90 days' notice by the city, shall remove, relay, and relocate its poles, wires, cable, underground conduits, manholes, and other fixtures at its own expense. 
(Code 1996, § 151.11) 
Sec. 24-30. - Temporary removal of cables. 
    The grantee shall, on the request of any person holding a building moving permit issued by the city, temporarily raise or lower its cable to permit the moving of buildings. The expense of such temporary removal, raising or lowering of cables shall be paid by the person requesting the same and the grantee shall have the authority to require such payment in advance. The grantee shall be given not less than ten business days advance notice to arrange for such temporary cable changes. 
(Code 1996, § 151.12) 
Sec. 24-31. - Tree trimming. 
    The grantee shall have the authority to trim trees upon and overhanging streets, alleys, sidewalks and public places of the city so as to prevent the branches of such trees from coming in contact with the cables of the grantee. All trimming shall be done at the expense of the grantee. 
(Code 1996, § 151.13) 
Sec. 24-32. - Line extensions. 
    It shall be the obligation of grantee to serve all residents of the city except to the extent that the density of homes, adverse terrain or other factors render providing service impracticable, technically unfeasible or economically non-compensatory. For purposes of determining compliance with the provisions of the section, and to provide for a reasonable and non-discriminatory policy governing extensions of cable service within the city, the grantee shall extend service to new subscribers, at the normal installation charge and monthly rate for customers of that classification where there are an average of 15 homes per 1,320 cable-bearing strand feet of trunk or distribution cable. 
(Code 1996, § 151.14) 
Sec. 24-33. - Hold harmless. 
    During the term of the franchise, the grantee assumes and agrees to pay the city for, and grantee indemnifies the city against, and agrees to hold and save the city harmless from, any and all damage, injury, costs, expenses, liability, claims, settlements, judgements, decrees and awards of every kind and nature whatsoever, or on account of any actual or alleged loss, damage or injury to any person or property whatsoever, arising from or related to or connected with, directly or indirectly, the performance or non-performance by grantee of its duties and obligations under the franchise, provided, however, grantee shall not be required to hold the city harmless from illegal, negligent, or ultra vires acts of the city. 
(Code 1996, § 151.15) 
Sec. 24-34. - Insolvency of grantee. 
    In the event that the grantee shall become insolvent, or be declared bankrupt, or the property of the grantee shall come into the possession of any receiver, assignee or other officer acting under any order of court, and any such receiver, assignee, or other such officer shall not be discharged within 60 days after taking possession of such property, the city may, at its option, terminate the franchise by giving written notice thereof to the grantee. 
(Code 1996, § 151.16) 
Sec. 24-35. - Governmental and educational use. 
    During the term of the franchise, the grantee shall provide one channel to be used for governmental or educational access. 
(Code 1996, § 151.17) 
Sec. 24-36. - Franchise fee. 
    The grantee shall pay to the franchising authority a franchise fee equal to five percent of gross revenues received by the grantee from the operation of the cable system on an annual basis. The franchise fee payment shall be due and payable 90 days after the close of the preceding calendar year. Each payment shall be accompanied by a brief report from a representative of the grantee showing the basis for the computation. 
(Code 1996, § 151.18) 
Sec. 24-37. - Renewal of franchise. 
    The franchising authority and the grantee agree that any proceedings undertaken by the franchising authority that relate to the renewal of the grantee's franchise shall be governed by and comply with the provisions of the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, as amended. 
(Code 1996, § 151.19) 
Sec. 24-38. - Insurance requirements. 
    The grantee shall maintain in full force and effect, at its own cost and expense, during the term of the franchise, comprehensive general liability insurance in the amount of $1,000,000.00 combined single limit for bodily injury and property damage. The insurance shall designate the franchising authority as an additional insured. Such insurance shall be non-cancelable except upon 30 days' prior written notice to the franchising authority. 
(Code 1996, § 151.20) 
Sec. 24-39. - Notice. 
(a)  Unless expressly otherwise agreed between the parties, every notice or response to be served upon the franchising authority or the grantee shall be in writing and shall be deemed to have been duly given to the required party five business days after having been posted in a properly sealed and correctly addressed envelope by certified or registered mail, postage prepaid, at a post office or branch thereof regularly maintained by the U.S. Postal Service. The notices or responses to the franchising authority shall be addressed as follows: 
City of Webster City, Iowa 
P.O. Box 217 
City, Iowa 50595 
(b)  The notices or responses to the grantee shall be addressed as follows: 
Cablevision VI, Inc. 
3635 Maple Drive 
Fort Dodge, Iowa 50501-6410 
(1)  With a copy to: 
TCI Southeast, Inc. 
Attn: Director of Franchising 
2204 Lakeshore Drive, Suite 325 
Birmingham, AL 35209 
(2)  And a copy to: 
Cablevision VI, Inc. 
Attn: State Manager 
2199 Ingersoll Avenue 
Des Moines, Iowa 50312-5227 
(c)  The franchising authority and the grantee may designate such other address or addresses from time to time by giving notice to the other. 
(Code 1996, § 151.21) 
Sec. 24-40. - Equal protection. 
    In the event the franchising authority enters into a franchise, permit, license, authorization or other agreement of any kind with any other person or entity other than the grantee to enter into the franchising authority's streets and public ways for the purpose of constructing or operating a cable system or providing cable service to any part of the city, the material provision thereof shall be reasonably comparable to those contained herein, in order that one operator not be granted an unfair competitive advantage over another and to provide all parties equal protection under the law. 
(Code 1996, § 151.22) 
Sec. 24-41. - Performance evaluation hearings/periodic reviews. 
    On the third, sixth, and ninth anniversaries of the effective date of the franchise, the cable commission may require review of this franchise, subject to the following: 
(1)  Any such review shall be open to the public and announced in the official city newspaper. The grantee shall reasonably notify its local subscribers of review sessions by announcing same through either public notices or inserts in subscribers' billing statements. 
(2)  Topics to be discussed at any scheduled review session may include, but will not be limited to, franchise fees; free or discounted services; application of new technologies; system performance; services provided; programming offered; customer complaints; privacy; amendments to this article; judicial and FCC rulings; line extension policies; and existing or prospective rules or regulations of the grantee or the city. 
(3)  Members of the general public may add topics by requesting of the city such topics be added to the agenda of its meeting. 
(4)  During a review or evaluation by the cable commission, the grantee shall fully cooperate with the city and shall provide such non-confidential information and documents as the city may need to reasonably perform the review. 
(5)  As a result of the review, the commission or grantee may determine that a change in the terms of the franchise may be required, that the cable system or franchise requirements should be updated, changed, revised, or that additional services should be provided. If the change is consistent with the terms of this franchise and implementation of the change would not unreasonably add to the cost of providing cable services, grantee and the commission will, in good faith, negotiate the terms of the change and any required amendment to this franchise. 
(6)  Should the commission or the grantee allege that the other is not negotiating in good faith, then the matter will be submitted to the council for review. The council will afford adequate notice of a hearing in order that both sides are given an opportunity to be heard. After hearing the facts, the council will recommend appropriate measures in an effort to resolve the dispute and thereby resume discussions. The council shall limit its decision to the issue of good faith. 
(7)  Any determination by the council shall be subject to a de novo review by a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Code 1996, § 151.23) 
Sec. 24-42. - Customer service standards. 
(a)  System office hours and telephone availability. 
(1)  The grantee will maintain a local, toll-free or collect call telephone access line which will be available to subscribers 24 hours a day, seven days a week. 
a.  Trained representatives of the grantee will be available to respond to subscriber telephone inquiries during normal business hours, as defined herein. 
b.  After normal business hours an access line will be available to be answered by a service or an automated response system, including a phone answering system. Inquiries received after normal business hours must be responded to by a trained representative of the grantee on the next business day. 
(2)  Under normal operating conditions, as defined herein, telephone answer time by a customer representative, including wait time, will not exceed 30 seconds when the connection is made. If the call needs to be transferred, transfer time will not exceed 30 seconds. These standards will be met no less than 90 percent of the time under normal operating conditions, as measured by the grantee on a quarterly basis. 
(3)  The grantee shall not be required to acquire equipment or perform surveys to measure compliance with the telephone answering standards set forth above unless an historical record of complaints indicates a clear failure to comply with such standards. 
(4)  Under normal operating conditions, the subscriber will receive a busy signal less than three percent of the time. 
(b)  Installations, outages and service calls. Under normal operating conditions, each of the following four standards will be met no less than 95 percent of the time, as measured by the grantee on a quarterly basis: 
(1)  Standard installations will be performed within seven business days after an order has been placed. Standard installations are those that are located up to 125 feet from the existing distribution system. 
(2)  Excluding conditions beyond its control, the grantee will begin working on service interruptions, as defined herein, promptly and in no event later than 24 hours after the interruption becomes known. The grantee will begin actions to correct other service problems the next business day after notification of the service problem. 
(3)  The grantee will provide "appointment window" alternatives for installations, service calls, and other installation activities, which will be either a specific time or, at maximum, a four-hour time block during normal business hours. 
(4)  The grantee shall not cancel an appointment with a subscriber after the close of business on the business day prior to the scheduled appointment. 
(5)  If a representative of the grantee is running late for an appointment with a subscriber and will not be able to keep the appointment as scheduled, the subscriber will be contacted. The appointment will be rescheduled, as necessary, at a time which is convenient for the subscriber. 
(c)  Billing. 
(1)  Bills will be clear, concise and understandable. Bills will be fully itemized, with itemizations including, but not limited to, basic and premium service charges and equipment charges. Bills will also clearly delineate all activity during the billing period, including optional charges, rebates and credits. 
(2)  In case of a billing dispute, the grantee will respond to a written complaint from a subscriber within 30 days from receipt of the complaint. 
(3)  Refund checks will be issued promptly, but no later than either: 
a.  The subscriber's next billing cycle following resolution of the request or 30 days, whichever is earlier; or 
b.  The return of the equipment supplied by the grantee if service is terminated. 
(4)  Credits for service will be issued no later than the subscriber's next billing cycle following the determination that a credit is warranted. 
(d)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Normal business hours means those hours during which most similar businesses in the community are open to serve subscribers. In all cases, the term "normal business hours" shall include some evening hours at least one night per week or some weekend hours. The grantee will notify its subscribers and the franchising authority of its normal business hours. 
    Normal operating conditions means those service conditions which are within the control of the grantee. Those conditions which are not within the control of the grantee include, but are not limited to, natural disasters, civil disturbances, power outages, telephone network outages, and severe or unusual weather conditions. Those conditions which are ordinarily within the control of the grantee include, but are not limited to, special promotions, pay-per-view events, rate increases, regular peak or seasonal demand periods, and maintenance or upgrade of the system. 
    Service interruption means the loss of picture or sound on one or more channels. 
(Code 1996, § 151.24) 
Sec. 24-43. - Conditions of sale. 
(a)  If a renewal or extension of the grantee's franchise is denied or the franchise is lawfully terminated, and the franchising authority either lawfully acquires ownership of the system or by its actions lawfully effects a transfer of ownership of the system to another party, any such acquisition or transfer shall be at the price determined pursuant to the provisions set forth in section 627 of the Cable Act. 
(b)  The grantee and the franchising authority agree that in the case of a final determination of a lawful revocation of the franchise at the grantee's request, which shall be made in its sole discretion, the grantee shall be given a reasonable opportunity to effectuate a transfer of its system to a qualified third party. The franchising authority further agrees that during such a period of time, it shall authorize the grantee to continue to operate pursuant to the terms of its prior franchise; however, in no event shall such authorization exceed a period of time greater than six months from the effective date of such revocation. If, at the end of that time, the grantee is unsuccessful in procuring a qualified transferee or assignee of its system which is reasonably acceptable to the franchising authority, the grantee and the franchising authority may avail themselves of any rights they may have pursuant to federal or state law; it being further agreed that the grantee's continued operation of its system during the six-month period shall not be deemed to be a waiver, or an extinguishment of, any rights of either the franchising authority or the grantee. 
(Code 1996, § 151.25) 
Sec. 24-44. - Transfer of franchise. 
    The grantee's right, title, or interest in the franchise shall not be sold, transferred, assigned, or otherwise encumbered, other than to an entity controlling, controlled by, or under common control with the grantee, without the prior consent of the franchising authority, such consent not be unreasonably withheld. No such consent shall be required, however, for a transfer in trust, by mortgage, by other hypothecation, or by assignment of any rights, title, or interest of the grantee in the franchise or system in order to secure indebtedness. Within 30 days of receiving the request for transfer, the franchising authority shall, in accordance with FCC rules and regulations, notify the grantee in writing of the information it requires to determine the legal, financial and technical qualifications of the transferee. If the franchising authority has not taken action on the grantee's request for transfer within 120 days after receiving such request, consent by the franchising authority shall be deemed given. 
(Code 1996, § 151.26) 
Sec. 24-45. - Purchase by city upon expiration or revocation. 
(a)  Subject to applicable federal, state, and local law, at the expiration of this franchise, the city may, in lawful manner and upon the payment in readily available fund of fair market value, determined on the basis of the system valued as a going concern, purchase the system. 
(b)  Subject to applicable federal, state, and local law, upon the lawful revocation of this franchise, the city may, in lawful manner and upon the payment in readily available funds of an equitable price, purchase the system. 
(Code 1996, § 151.27) 
Sec. 24-46. - Enforcement and termination of franchise. 
(a)  Notice of violation. In the event that the franchising authority believes that the grantee has not complied with the terms of the franchise, it shall notify grantee in writing of the exact nature of the alleged noncompliance. 
(b)  Grantee's right to cure or respond. The grantee shall have 30 days from receipt of the notice described in section 24-39: 
(1)  To respond to the franchising authority contesting the assertion of noncompliance; 
(2)  To cure such default; or 
(3)  In the event that, by the nature of default, such default cannot be cured within the 30 day period, initiate reasonable steps to remedy such default and notify the franchising authority of the steps being taken and the projected date that they will be completed. 
(c)  Public hearing. In the event that grantee fails to respond to the notice described in section 24-39 pursuant to the procedures set forth in section 24-41 or in the event that the alleged default is not remedied within 60 days after the grantee is notified of the alleged default pursuant to section 24-39, the franchising authority shall schedule a public meeting to investigate the default. Such public meeting shall be held at the next regularly scheduled meeting of the franchising authority which is scheduled at a time which is not less than five business days therefrom. The franchising authority shall notify the grantee of the time and place of such meeting and provide the grantee with an opportunity to be heard. 
(d)  Enforcement. Subject to applicable federal and state law, in the event the franchising authority, after such meeting, determines that grantee is in default of any provision of the franchise, the franchising authority may: 
(1)  Foreclose on all or any part of any security provided under this franchise, if any, including without limitation, any bond or other surety; provided, however, the foreclosure shall only be in such a manner and in such amount as the franchising authority reasonably determines is necessary to remedy the default; 
(2)  Commence an action at law for monetary damages or seek other equitable relief; 
(3)  In the case of a substantial default of a material provision of the franchise, declare the franchise agreement to be revoked; 
(4)  Seek specific performance of any provision, which reasonably lends itself to such remedy, as an alternative to damages; or 
(5)  In the case of a substantial default of a material provision of the ordinance, and after giving the grantee 90 days' notice and opportunity to cure, assess a fine of 100 dollars per day until the substantial default is cured. 
Any final action by the city adverse to grantee's interest and disputed by grantee shall be reviewable by court of competent jurisdiction pursuant to state and federal law. 
(e)  Acts of God. The grantee shall not be held in default or noncompliance with the provisions of the franchise, or suffer any enforcement or penalty relating thereto, where such noncompliance or alleged defaults are caused by strikes, acts of God, power outages, or other events reasonably beyond its ability to control. 
(Code 1996, § 151.28) 
Sec. 24-47. - Regulations of rates. 
    The city shall regulate the rates of TCI of Heartlands for basic cable service and associated equipment in accordance with the procedures set forth in the 1992 Cable Act and the FCC regulations, as amended from time to time, and shall be authorized to take all necessary and appropriate action in connection therewith. In connection with such regulations, the city will ensure a reasonable opportunity for consideration of the view of interested parties. 
(Code 1996, § 151.29) 
Editor's note- Ordinance No. 93-1418, adopting a cable TV franchise for the city, was adopted by the council on October 4, 1993, and approved by Cablevision VI, Inc. on October 22, 1993. 
Secs. 24-48-24-66. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - GAS FRANCHISE 

Sec. 24-67. - Natural gas franchise granted. 
    Aquila, Inc. d/b/a Aquila Networks, its lessees, successors and assigns, hereinafter referred to as the "grantee," are granted a nonexclusive authority for a period of 20 years to erect, construct, maintain and operate a gas distribution system and any and all necessary mains, pipes, services and other appurtenances and equipment thereunto appertaining in, upon, over, across and along the streets, alleys, bridges and public places in the city, for the transmission, distribution and sale of natural or mixed gas for heating, industrial and all other uses and purposes in the city and for the purpose of transmitting, transporting and conveying such gas into, through or beyond the immediate limits of the city to other cities, towns and customers. 
(Code 1996, § 150.01) 
Sec. 24-68. - Use of city-owned gas distribution system for transportation. 
    This franchise shall include the right of the grantee to use, transport, and sell natural or mixed gas over that portion of the gas distribution system owned by the city, for heating, industrial and all other uses and purposes for a period of 20 years under the terms and conditions as set forth by a separate agreement between the grantee and the city. 
(Code 1996, § 150.02) 
Sec. 24-69. - Excavations. 
    Whenever the grantee, in the construction or maintenance of its system or in the installation of any extension thereto, shall cut into or take up any pavement or shall make any excavation in any street, avenue, alley or public place within the corporate limits of the city, the same shall be done in a manner so as not to unreasonably interfere with the use of such thoroughfares by the public. The grantee shall use such safeguards as may be reasonably necessary to prevent injury to persons or property during such construction work, and upon its completion, all pavement shall be replaced in as good condition as it was before taken up. All excavation shall be refilled and all obstructions shall be removed at the expense of the grantee and to the satisfaction of the city. In the event that the grantee shall fail to comply with the provisions of this section after having been given reasonable notice, the city may do such work as may be needed to properly repair the thoroughfare and the cost thereof shall be repaid to the city by the grantee. 
(Code 1996, § 150.03) 
Sec. 24-70. - Improvements. 
    The grantee, in constructing and maintaining its gas distribution system, and in entering and using the streets, highways, avenues, alleys and public places in the city, and in laying and installing its mains, services, piping, and related appurtenances and equipment, shall not in any manner interfere with or injure any improvements which the city now has, or may hereafter have, upon any of its streets, alleys, highways or public places. In the event a natural gas line interferes with an existing or future public project, then that line shall be relocated at the reasonable expense of the grantee. 
(Code 1996, § 150.04) 
Sec. 24-71. - Service. 
    The grantee agrees for and on behalf of itself, its lessees, successors and assigns, that for and during the term and period of this grant it will maintain in the city an adequate, modern, standard and sufficient gas system and equipment and will maintain and operate the same in a modern and adequate fashion. The grantee will provide safe, reliable service in a reasonable and prudent manner in conformance with industry standards. The grantee will, from time to time during the term of this franchise, make such enlargements and extensions of its distribution system as the business of the grantee and the growth of the city justify, in accordance with its rules and regulations relating to customer connections and main and service line extensions currently in effect and on file from time to time with the state utilities board or other competent authority having jurisdiction in the premises; provided, however, that no obligation shall extend to, or be binding upon the grantee to construct or extend its mains or furnish natural gas or natural gas service within the city if the grantee is, for any reason, unable to obtain delivery of natural gas at or near the corporate limits of the city or an adequate supply thereof to warrant the construction or extension of its mains for the furnishing of such natural gas or gas service; provided, further, that when the amount of natural gas supplied to the grantee at or near the limits of the city is insufficient to meet the additional firm requirements of connected or new consumers, the grantee shall have the right to prescribe reasonable rules and regulations for allocating the available supply of natural gas for such additional firm requirements to residential, commercial and industrial consumers, in that order of priority. In addition to other methods of remitting payment, the grantee will provide a location within the city for customers of the grantee to pay monthly natural gas bills to the grantee. 
(Code 1996, § 150.05) 
Sec. 24-72. - Authority of city. 
    The grantee agrees for and on behalf of itself, its lessees, successors, and assigns, that all authority and rights in this article contained shall at all times be subject to all rights, power and authority now and hereafter possessed by the city to regulate the manner in which the grantee shall use the streets, alleys, bridges and public places of the city and concerning the manner in which the grantee shall use and enjoy the franchise herein granted. 
(Code 1996, § 150.06) 
Sec. 24-73. - Supply. 
    The grantee shall, at all times, maintain an adequate supply of clean, standard gas with a British thermal unit heating value of not less than that prescribed in its rules and regulations relating thereto in effect and on file from time to time with the state utilities board or other competent authority having jurisdiction in the premises. 
(Code 1996, § 150.07) 
Sec. 24-74. - Indemnification of city. 
    The grantee shall hold the city harmless from any and all claims and actions, litigation or damage, arising out of the passage of the ordinance from which this article is derived, out of the construction, erection, installation, maintenance and operation of its properties, operated by authority of this article within the corporate limits of the city or the negligence of its employees in the operation thereof, including the court costs and reasonable attorney fees in making defense against such claims; provided, however, that the grantee shall not be liable for the negligence of the city, its employees or agents. A copy of any process served upon the city shall be served by the city upon the grantee. The grantee shall have the right to defend in the name of the city and to employ counsel for such purpose. No provision of this article is intended, or shall be construed, to be a waiver for any purpose of any applicable state limits in liability. 
(Code 1996, § 150.08) 
Sec. 24-75. - Grantee default. 
    In case of failure by the grantee to comply with any of the provisions of this article, or if the grantee should do or cause to be done any act or thing prohibited by or in violation of the terms of this article, the grantee shall forfeit all rights and privileges granted by this article and all rights hereunder shall terminate, provided that the termination shall not take effect until the city shall carry out proceedings in accordance with the following. Before the city proceeds to cancel this franchise, it shall first serve a written notice upon the grantee setting forth in detail in such notice the alleged neglect or failure complained of, and the grantee shall have 30 days thereafter in which to comply with the conditions of this grant and privilege. If at the end of such period the city deems that the conditions have not been complied with and that this franchise is subject to repeal by reasons thereof, the city shall enact a repealing ordinance setting out the grounds upon which the grant and privilege is to be canceled or terminated. If within 30 days after the effective date of the repealing ordinance, the grantee shall not have instituted an action in any court of competent jurisdiction to determine whether the grantee has violated the terms of this article, this franchise shall be canceled. If within such 30-day period the grantee does institute an action as above provided to determine whether or not the grantee has violated the terms of this article and prosecutes such action to final judgment with due diligence, then, in that event, if the court finds that this franchise is subject to cancellation by reason of the violation of its terms, then this franchise shall terminate 30 days after such final judgment is rendered. 
(Code 1996, § 150.09) 
Sec. 24-76. - Term; right to cancel and repeal. 
    The right and authority granted herein shall be nonexclusive and shall continue for a period of 20 years from and after the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived; provided, however, either party may cancel this franchise on the eighth or 16th anniversary of this ordinance by notifying the other party in writing of its desire to do so, the notification to be given not more than 90 days before the eighth or 16th anniversary, respectively, of the ordinance from which this article is derived. If either party is not notified of cancellation on either the eighth or 16th anniversary of the ordinance from which this article is derived, then this franchise shall continue without cancellation or repeal until the 20th year. The anniversary date shall be the date this franchise is accepted by the grantee or otherwise effective by operation of law. 
(Code 1996, § 150.10) 
Sec. 24-77. - User fee. 
    A fee for use of the streets, alleys, bridges, and other public places of the city may be imposed upon the gross receipts, less sales tax, on all gas sales and related services within the city in lieu of local sales and service tax adopted by any governmental authority authorized to do so pursuant to either of the Code of Iowa § 422B.8 or 364.2. Any such fee imposed shall be directly charged to customers. 
(Code 1996, § 150.11) 
Sec. 24-78. - Right-of-first refusal. 
(a)  Except as provided below, all rights, privileges and authority granted to the grantee shall inure to the benefit of its successors and assigns, subject to all the terms, provisions and conditions herein contained, and all obligations imposed upon the grantee shall be binding upon its successors and assigns. No prior notice or consent of such assignment is necessary from city where such assignment or transfer is made: 
(1)  Pursuant to reorganization or merger in which the grantee or entity controlled by Aquila is a successor or surviving corporation; 
(2)  Where grantee is pledging, mortgaging, or otherwise assigning its rights hereunder as security for indebtedness; or 
(3)  To a transferee or assignee of all of Aquila's gas properties located in the state following a sale approved by the state utilities board. 
(b)  Before Aquila sells its rights, privileges and other assets in the city, as the sale of a single city natural gas distribution system, Aquila shall provide the city with notice of such proposed sale. The city shall thereafter have a period of 30 days in which to meet the price, terms and conditions of any bona fide offer which Aquila intends to accept for the sale of the system. If the city meets the offer with the same or better terms, then the grantee shall sell the franchise, and other natural gas facilities and equipment, of its city system to the city. If Aquila sells its rights, privileges and other assets in the city as part of a sale, other than a sale of a single city natural gas distribution system, then Aquila will provide: 
(1)  Notice to the city of the proposed sale, subject to confidential protection of the terms and conditions of such sale; and 
(2)  Notice to any qualified buyer, prior to close of any proposed sale of the city assets, of the city's desire to purchase the natural gas distribution system located in city. 
(Code 1996, § 150.12) 
Editor's note- Ordinance No. 2005-1637 adopting a natural gas franchise for the city was passed and adopted on February 21, 2005. 
Chapter 26 - HEALTH AND PUBLIC WELFARE 
(RESERVED) 
Chapter 28 - HUMAN RELATIONS AND SOCIAL SERVICES 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 28-1. - Civil service commission. 
(a)  Purpose and intent. The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the appointment, powers and duties of a civil service commission in accordance with the requirements of state law. 
(b)  Powers and duties. The commission shall administer the civil service procedure as contained in the Code of Iowa ch. 400, and amendments thereto, and shall have, exercise and perform all powers and duties as provided thereby. 
(c)  Member appointment and term. A civil service commission consisting of three members shall be appointed by the mayor with the approval of the council for staggered terms of four years. Civil service commissioners shall serve without compensation. 
(d)  Member qualifications. Commissioners must be citizens of Iowa, eligible electors and residents of the city preceding their appointment. No person while on the commission, shall hold or be a candidate for any office of public trust. 
(e)  Director to act as ex officio member of human rights commission. Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (d) of this section, when a human rights commission has been established, the director thereof shall ex officio be a member, without vote, of the civil service commission. 
(f)  Chair and clerk. The commission shall elect a chairperson from among its members. The city clerk or a designee of the city clerk shall be clerk of the commission. 
(g)  Records. The civil service commission shall keep a record of all its meetings and also a complete individual service record of each civil service employee which record shall be permanent and kept up to date. 
(h)  Meeting room and supplies. The council shall provide suitable rooms in which the commission may hold its meetings and supply the commission with all necessary equipment and a qualified shorthand reporter to enable it properly to perform its duties. 
State Law reference- Civil service commissions, Code of Iowa ch. 400. 
Secs. 28-2-28-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FAIR HOUSING PRACTICES AND STANDARDS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Unfair or discriminatory housing practices, Code of Iowa § 216.8. 

Sec. 28-21. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this article is to establish standards to ensure that all residents in the city may purchase or rent adequate housing facilities of their choice without regard to their race, color, creed, gender, sexual orientation, gender identity, religion, national origin, disability, or familial status. 
(Code 1996, § 166.01) 
Sec. 28-22. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Commission means the state civil rights commission created by the Code of Iowa ch. 601A. 
    Commissioner means a member of the commission. 
    Disability means the physical or mental condition of a person which constitutes a substantial disability, and the condition of a person with a positive human immunodeficiency virus test result, a diagnosis of acquired immune deficiency syndrome, a diagnosis of acquired immune deficiency syndrome-related complex, or any other condition related to acquired immune deficiency syndrome. The inclusion of a condition related to a positive human immunodeficiency virus test result in the meaning of the term "disability" under the provisions of this article does not preclude the application of the provisions of this article to conditions resulting from other contagious or infectious diseases. 
    Housing means any building, structure, or facility, or portion thereof, that is used or occupied or is intended, arranged, or designed to be used or occupied as the home, residence or sleeping place of one or more individuals, groups or families, and any vacant land offered for sale or lease for the purpose of constructing or locating such building, structure, facility and includes any interest in housing as so defined, fee simple, leasehold or other. 
    Lending institution means any bank, insurance company, savings and loan association or any other person regularly engaged in the business of lending money or guaranteeing loans. 
    Unfair practice or discriminatory practice means any of those practices specified as unfair or discriminatory in section 28-33. 
(Code 1996, § 166.02) 
Sec. 28-23. - Unfair or discriminatory housing practices. 
    It shall be an unfair or discriminatory practice for any owner, or person acting for an owner, of rights to housing or real property, with or without compensation, including, but not limited to, persons licensed as real estate brokers or salespersons, attorneys, auctioneers, agents or representatives by power of attorney or appointment, or any person acting under court order, deed of trust, or will: 
(1)  Refuse to sell, rent or lease. To refuse to sell, rent, or lease, assign or sublease any real property or housing accommodation or part, portion or interest therein, to any person because of the race, color, creed, gender, sexual orientation, gender identity, religion, national origin, disability, or familial status of such person. 
(2)  Discriminate. To discriminate against any person because of his race, color, creed, gender, sexual orientation, gender identity, religion, national origin, disability, or familial status in the terms, conditions or privileges of the sale, rental, lease assignment or sublease of any real property or housing accommodation or any part, portion or interest therein. 
(3)  Advertising. To directly or indirectly advertise, or in any other manner indicate or publicize that the purchase, rental, lease, assignment or sublease of any real property or housing accommodation or any part, portion or interest therein, by persons of a particular race, color, creed, gender, sexual orientation, gender identity, religion, national origin, disability, or familial status is unwelcome, objectionable, not acceptable or not solicited. 
(4)  Terms or conditions. To include in the terms or conditions of any sale, lease, sublease, rental, assignment or other transfer of housing any condition or provision that purports to forbid or discourages or attempts to discourage the ownership, leasing, possession, occupancy or use of such housing by persons because of race, color, creed, gender, sexual orientation, gender identity, religion, national origin, disability, or familial status. 
(5)  Coercion. Directly or indirectly to cause or coerce, or attempt to cause or coerce, any person to do any act declared to be an unlawful housing practice, or to engage in economic reprisal or otherwise retaliate, or to cause or coerce or attempt to cause or coerce another person to engage in economic reprisal or otherwise retaliate, against any person because such person has opposed an unlawful housing practice or has filed a complaint, testified, assisted or participated in any manner in any investigation, proceeding or hearing under this article. 
(Code 1996, § 166.03) 
State Law reference- Similar provision, Code of Iowa § 216.8. 
Sec. 28-24. - Unfair or discriminatory housing practices by lending institutions. 
    It shall be an unlawful housing practice for any lending institution to discriminate in lending money, guaranteeing loans, accepting mortgages or otherwise making available money for the purchase, acquisition, construction, alteration, repair or maintenance of any housing or to discriminate in the extension of service in connection therewith because of race, color, creed, gender, sexual orientation, gender identity, religion, national origin, disability, or familial status. 
(Code 1996, § 166.04) 
State Law reference- Unfair credit practices, Code of Iowa § 216.10. 
Sec. 28-25. - Aiding, abetting or retaliation. 
    It is unfair or discriminatory practice for any person to intentionally aid, abet, compel or coerce another person to engage in any of the practices declared unfair or discriminatory by this article. It is also an unfair or discriminatory practice for any person to discriminate or retaliate against another person in any of the rights protected against discrimination by this article because such person has lawfully opposed any practice forbidden under this article, obeys the provisions of this article, or has filed a complaint, testified, or assisted in any proceeding under this article. 
(Code 1996, § 166.05) 
State Law reference- Similar provision, Code of Iowa § 216.11. 
Sec. 28-26. - Exceptions. 
    The provisions of this article shall not apply to: 
(1)  Religion. Any bona fide religious institution with respect to any qualifications it may impose based on religion, when such qualifications are related to a bona fide religious purpose. 
(2)  Owner occupied duplex. The rental or leasing of a housing accommodation in a building which contains housing accommodations for not more than two families living independently of each other, if the owner or members of the owner's family reside in one of such housing accommodations. 
(3)  Rental of rooms. The rental or leasing of less than six rooms within a single housing accommodation by the occupant or owner of such housing accommodation, if the owner or member of the owner's family resides therein. 
(Code 1996, § 166.06) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Iowa § 216.12. 
Sec. 28-27. - Fair housing board. 
(a)  Established; membership; terms. The city has created a fair housing board which shall consist of the elected council members. The terms for those on the board shall be the same terms that each elected council member holds for the council office. 
(b)  Officers, quorum, expenses, member compensation and rules. The board shall: 
(1)  Officers. Hold one meeting in the month of January to elect a chairperson and vice-chairperson and such other officers as the board may decide. All officers shall be members of the board. 
(2)  Quorum. A quorum shall be three members of the board. 
(3)  Meetings. Hold all other meetings at the call of the chairperson, vice-chairperson or any three members of the board by giving at least 48 hours' notice to every member of the board. The call for a meeting shall include an agenda and only matters included in that agenda may be discussed at the meeting. If all members of the board agree in writing, prior notice of 48 hours to a meeting may be waived. 
(4)  Expenses and compensation. Receive actual and necessary expenses incurred within the limits established in city budget. Members of the board shall receive no compensation. 
(5)  Rules. Adopt, amend or rescind such rules as may be necessary for the conduct of its business. 
(c)  Powers. The board shall have the following powers and duties: 
(1)  Complaints. To receive, investigate, and pass upon charges or complaints alleging unfair or discriminatory practices, as provided in section 28-23. 
(2)  Reduce discrimination. To investigate and study the existence, character, causes, and extent of discrimination in housing in the city and to attempt the elimination of such discrimination by education and conciliation. 
(3)  Reports and publications. To issue such publications and reports of investigations and research as in the judgment of the board shall tend to promote good will among the various racial, religious and ethnic groups of the city and which shall tend to minimize or eliminate discrimination in housing because of race, creed, color, national origin, religion or ancestry. 
(4)  Report to council. To prepare and transmit to the mayor and council from time to time, but not less often than once each six months, reports describing its proceedings, investigations, hearings conducted and the outcome thereof, decisions rendered, and the other work performed by the board. 
(5)  Recommendations. To make recommendations to the mayor and council for such further legislation concerning discrimination because of race, creed, color, national origin, religion, or ancestry as it may deem necessary and desirable. 
(6)  Cooperate with others. To cooperate, within the limits of any appropriations made for its operation, with other agencies or organizations, both public and private, whose purposes are not inconsistent with those of this article, and in the planning and conducting of programs designed to eliminate racial, religious, cultural and inter-group tensions in housing. 
(Code 1996, §§ 166.07-166.09) 
Sec. 28-28. - Charge. 
    Charges may be made as follows: 
(1)  Who may file. Any person claiming to be aggrieved by a discriminatory or unfair practice in housing within the city may, alone or by an attorney, make, sign, and file a verified written charge of discriminatory practice. The board, a member of the board, the city attorney, or the state civil rights commission may in like manner make, sign and file such charge. 
(2)  Filing. Charges may be filed with any member of the board, with the director or secretary of the board or with the clerk. 
(3)  Time of filing. Any charge filed under this article shall be so filed within 60 days after the most recent act constituting the alleged discriminatory or unfair practice in housing. 
(Code 1996, § 166.10) 
Sec. 28-29. - Notice to state civil rights commission. 
    Notice shall be given the state civil rights commission as follows: 
(1)  Manner of notice. The secretary of the board shall immediately notify the state civil rights commission in writing of the filing of a charge under this article by forwarding a copy of the charge and shall provide such other and further information thereon as from time to time the board shall deem proper. 
(2)  Time of notice. Whenever this article requires the board or its secretary to notify the state civil rights commission of any matter, it shall be the duty of the secretary of the board to transmit such notice or information in writing within five days of the event giving rise to the duty to give notice or information. 
(Code 1996, § 166.11) 
Sec. 28-30. - Investigation for probable cause. 
    Investigation for probable cause shall be conducted in accordance with the following: 
(1)  Investigating committee. Within five days after the filing of a charge, the chairperson of the board or, in the absence of or upon failure of the chairperson to act, the vice-chairperson or other member designated by the board shall designate two or more members of the board or one or more members of the staff of the board to investigate the charge. The persons are hereafter designated as the "investigating committee." If two or more persons are members of the investigating committee, the vote of a majority shall determine all questions. If the members of the investigating committee are equally divided on some issue, the chairperson of the investigating committee shall have an additional vote. 
(2)  Procedure. The investigating committee shall first determine whether probable cause exists to believe that the person charged in the charge has committed an unfair or discriminatory practice. The investigating committee shall take the sworn testimony of the complainant and such other evidence as it deems relevant. The proceedings of the investigating committee shall be in executive session. 
(Code 1996, § 166.12) 
Sec. 28-31. - No probable cause. 
    Upon a finding of no probable cause, the following procedures shall be followed: 
(1)  Investigating committee. If the investigating committee shall find no probable cause to believe that the person charged has committed an unfair or discriminatory practice, it shall report the same to the board and shall notify the complainant in writing by registered or certified mail. 
(2)  Failure of complainant to object. If the complainant fails to object to such findings within ten days of delivery of such written notice, the board shall close the case. The secretary of the board shall report such fact to the state civil rights commission. 
(3)  Objection by complainant. If the complainant objects in writing to such findings within ten days of delivery of such written notice, the board shall hear the complainant's evidence in an executive session. If the board finds no probable cause to believe that the person charged has committed an unfair or discriminatory practice, it shall declare the case closed. If the board finds probable cause to exist, it shall take further proceedings as are provided in the following sections of this article. 
(Code 1996, § 166.13) 
Sec. 28-32. - Finding of probable cause. 
    Upon report or finding of probable cause, the following procedures shall be followed: 
(1)  Investigating committee. If the investigating committee shall find probable cause to believe that the person charged has committed an unfair or discriminatory practice, it shall report the same to the board. 
(2)  Conciliation. If the board shall find, on the report of the investigating committee or on its own investigation as provided in section 28-31, probable cause to believe that the person charged has committed an unfair or discriminatory practice as defined by this article, it shall direct the appropriate person to attempt to conciliate the matter, and it shall issue a cause to be served upon such person charged a notice stating the charges against such person and requesting the cooperation of the person charged in conciliation. Service of the notice may be registered or certified mail or by any means provided for the service of original notices in civil actions. 
(3)  Public hearing. If the board shall find that probable cause does exist to believe that the person charged has committed an unfair or discriminatory practice as defined by this article, and the board also has probable cause to believe based on past experience or on the surrounding circumstances of the charge in question that conciliation will not be successful, the board may file a complaint for a public hearing as provided by section 28-35 without conducting conciliation proceedings. 
(Code 1996, § 166.14) 
Sec. 28-33. - Conciliation. 
    The proceedings toward conciliation shall be: 
(1)  Prepared conciliation agreement. If the person directed to conciliate succeeds in conciliation, they shall report to the board and shall submit a proposed written conciliation agreement. The conciliation agreement shall be effective only if approved by the person charged and by the board. The complainant shall have an opportunity to be heard as to the terms of the conciliation agreement shall be effective only if approved by the person charged and by the board. The complainant shall have an opportunity to be heard as to the terms of the conciliation agreement, but the board may act without the complainant's approval. 
(2)  Agreement accepted by board. If the board accepts the conciliation agreement, it shall close the case, subject to whatever continuing supervision of the charged party is provided in the agreement. If the board accepts the conciliation agreement, it shall communicate the terms of the agreement to the state civil rights commission. 
(3)  Agreement rejected by board. If the board rejects the conciliation agreement, it may either direct that further attempts at conciliation be made or it may file its complaint of the discriminatory practice charged and proceed as provided in the following sections of this article. It shall notify the state civil rights commission of the rejection of the proposed agreement and of the action taken. 
(Code 1996, § 166.15) 
Sec. 28-34. - Proceedings upon failure to conciliate. 
    If after attempts to conciliate, the person directed to conciliate shall find that they are unable to conciliate the matter, they shall report the same in writing to the board. If the board determines the charge to be well founded, it may then file its complaint of the discriminatory practice charged. If the board determines the charge not to be well founded, it shall declare the case closed and shall so notify the parties. In either event, the board shall notify the state civil rights commission of the failure of conciliation efforts and of the action taken. 
(Code 1996, § 166.16) 
Sec. 28-35. - Public hearing. 
(a)  Notice and hearing. Upon filing the complaint, the board shall issue and cause to be served on the person charged a notice, containing a copy of the complaint and a notice of the time and place at which the hearing will be held on the complaint. The hearing must be held not less than ten days after the issuance of the notice and must be held in a building open to the public in the city. The board may adjourn the hearing from time to time. 
(b)  Rights of person charged. The person charged shall have the right to file a written answer to the complaint, to appear in person or by attorney at the hearing, to testify, to call witnesses, and to cross-examine any witnesses who appear. 
(c)  Complaint amended. The board shall have the power to amend, reasonably and fairly, the complaint and the party charged shall have the power to amend, reasonably and fairly, the answer to the complaint at any time before a final order is entered in the case. 
(d)  City attorney. The city attorney or any attorney designated by the city attorney shall conduct the case on behalf of the board. If the city attorney is unable to conduct the case by reason of conflict of interest or otherwise, the council may appoint a special attorney to conduct the case on behalf of the board. The complainant may introduce further evidence to support the claims alleged in the charge, either in person or by attorney. No member of the investigating committee shall participate in the deliberations of the board on the case except as a witness. 
(e)  Failure to appear. If the person charged shall fail to file an answer to the complaint or shall fail to appear in person or by attorney at the hearing, the board shall proceed to consider the testimony offered and shall base its decision thereon. 
(f)  Oath; codes of evidence. The evidence shall be taken under oath. The board shall not be bound by the strict rules of evidence prevailing in courts of law or equity, but the right of cross-examination shall be preserved. 
(Code 1996, § 166.17) 
Sec. 28-36. - Remedy. 
    After a public hearing on a complaint is concluded, the board shall within five days issue a written finding of facts which states whether any person charged in the complaint has engaged in or is engaging in the unfair or discriminatory practice complained of. If the board finds a violation of this article, it shall order the person to cease and desist from the unfair or discriminatory practice and to take such affirmative action as necessary to remedy the practice. If the board finds no violation, it shall issue a written finding of facts and dismiss the complaint. 
(Code 1996, § 166.18) 
Sec. 28-37. - Suit to enforce. 
    The board may, within two years after entry of any order under section 28-36, direct the city attorney to bring a suit in the district court of the county for an injunction to compel obedience to its order. 
(Code 1996, § 166.19) 
Chapter 30 - LAW ENFORCEMENT 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 30-1-30-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - POLICE DEPARTMENT 

Sec. 30-19. - Established. 
    The police department of the city is established to provide for the preservation of peace and enforcement of law and ordinances within the corporate limits of the city. 
(Code 1996, § 25.01) 
Sec. 30-20. - Organization. 
    The department shall consist of the police chief and such other law enforcement officers and personnel, whether full- or part-time, as may be authorized by the council. 
(Code 1996, § 25.02) 
Sec. 30-21. - Peace officer qualifications. 
    In no case shall any person be recruited, selected, or appointed as a peace officer unless such person: 
(1)  Resident citizen. Is a citizen of the United States and a resident of Iowa or intends to become a resident upon being employed. 
(2)  Age. Has reached 18th birthday at the time of appointment. 
(3)  Driver's license. Has a valid driver's or chauffeur's license issued by the state. 
(4)  Alcohol and drugs. Is not addicted to drugs or alcohol. 
(5)  Character. Is of good moral character as determined by a thorough investigation including a fingerprint search conducted of local, state and national fingerprint files and has not been convicted of a felony or a crime involving moral turpitude. 
(6)  Physical agility. Has successfully passed the physical agility test developed by the state law enforcement academy. 
(7)  Conscientious objector. Is not by reason of conscience or belief opposed to the use of force, when necessary to fulfill the person's duties. 
(8)  Education. Is a high school graduate with a diploma or possesses an equivalency certificate which meets the minimum score required by the state as determined by the state department of education. 
(9)  Vision. Has an uncorrected vision of not less than 20/100 in both eyes, corrected to 20/20 and normal color vision. Normal color vision, as determined by the American Optical Company, Pseudo-Isochromatic Plates test, requires correct identification of 14 out of the 18 plates. 
(10)  Hearing. Has normal hearing in each ear. Hearing is considered normal when, tested by an audiometer, hearing sensitivity thresholds are within 25db measured at 1000Hz, 2000Hz and 3000Hz averaged together. 
(11)  Physical exam. Is examined by a licensed physician or surgeon and meets the physical requirements necessary to fulfill the responsibilities of a law enforcement officer. 
(12)  Written exam. Has performed satisfactorily in pre-employment cognitive or personality tests, or both. 
(Code 1996, § 25.03) 
Sec. 30-22. - Required training. 
    All peace officers shall have received the minimum training required by law at an approved law enforcement training school within one year of employment. Peace officers shall also meet the minimum in-service training as required by law. 
(Code 1996, § 25.04) 
Sec. 30-23. - Compensation. 
    Members of the department shall be designated by rank and receive such compensation as shall be determined by resolution of the council. 
(Code 1996, § 25.05) 
Sec. 30-24. - Police chief appointed; duties. 
    The police chief shall be appointed by the city manager, subject to council approval, and shall have the following powers and duties, subject to the approval of the council: 
(1)  General. Perform all duties required of the police chief or marshal by law or ordinance. 
(2)  Enforce laws. Enforce all laws, ordinances and regulations and bring all persons committing any offense before the proper court. 
(3)  Writs. Execute and return all writs and other processes directed to him. 
(4)  Accident reports. Report all motor vehicle accidents investigated to the state department of transportation. 
(5)  Prisoners. Be responsible for the custody of prisoners, including conveyance to detention facilities as may be required. 
(6)  Assist officials. When requested, provide aid to other city officers, boards and commissions in the execution of their official duties. 
(7)  Investigations. Provide for such investigation as may be necessary for the prosecution of any person alleged to have violated any law or ordinance. 
(8)  Record of arrests. Keep a record of all arrests made in the city by showing whether the arrests were made under provisions of state law or city ordinance, the offense charged, who made the arrest and the disposition of the charge. 
(9)  Reports. Compile and submit to the mayor and council an annual report as well as such other reports as may be requested by the mayor or council. 
(10)  Command. Be in command of all officers appointed for police work and be responsible for the care, maintenance and use of all vehicles, equipment and materials of the department. 
(Code 1996, §§ 25.06, 25.07) 
State Law reference- Chief of police, Code of Iowa § 400.13. 
Sec. 30-25. - Summoning aid. 
    Any peace officer making a legal arrest may orally summon as many persons as the officer reasonably finds necessary to aid the officer in making the arrest. 
(Code 1996, § 25.08) 
State Law reference- Similar provision, Code of Iowa § 804.17. 
Sec. 30-26. - Taking weapons. 
    Any person who makes an arrest may take from the person arrested all items which are capable of causing bodily harm which the arrested person may have within such person's control to be disposed of according to law. 
(Code 1996, § 25.09) 
State Law reference- Similar provision, Code of Iowa § 804.18. 
Secs. 30-27-30-55. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - RESERVE POLICE FORCE 

Sec. 30-56. - Established. 
    There is created and established the city reserve police force as provided by the Code of Iowa ch. 80D and subject to the regulations therein contained. The reserve police force shall serve until abolished by the council. 
(Code 1996, § 26.01) 
State Law reference- Establishment of a force of reserve peace officers, Code of Iowa § 80D.1. 
Sec. 30-57. - Membership rules. 
    Membership in the reserve police force shall be as prescribed in the reserve's bylaws, rules and regulations and shall be subject to the approval of the mayor, city manager and the police chief. The mayor, city manager and police chief may, from time to time, prescribe such other bylaws, rules and regulations as they, in their sole discretion, may deem to be desirable. 
(Code 1996, § 26.02) 
State Law reference- Personal standards, Code of Iowa § 80D.2. 
Sec. 30-58. - Term of service; removal. 
    The members of the reserve police force shall serve at the discretion of the police chief and shall be removed and discharged from the reserve at any time upon violation of any prescribed bylaw, rule or regulation or upon recommendation of the reserve police executive committee. 
(Code 1996, § 26.03) 
Sec. 30-59. - Supervision. 
    The members of the reserve force shall be subject to lawful orders of a member of the city police department, the mayor and the city manager. 
(Code 1996, § 26.04) 
State Law reference- Similar provision, Code of Iowa § 80D.9. 
Sec. 30-60. - Employment status. 
    Members of the reserve police force shall be considered employees of the city during those periods when they are performing police duties as authorized and directed by the police chief or the assistant chief in the absence of the chief, and they shall receive a salary of one dollar per year. However, the reserve members shall not be entitled to any benefits or obligations of police retirement benefits or civil service except worker's compensation insurance stature. 
(Code 1996, § 26.05) 
Sec. 30-61. - Violation of laws. 
    No member of the reserve shall violate the ordinances of the city or state or federal law, and any such violation may be grounds for summary dismissal. 
(Code 1996, § 26.07) 
Sec. 30-62. - Operation of city vehicles. 
    Members of the reserve may drive or operate a motor vehicle owned, leased or under the control of the city, but such privilege will be granted only after the reserve member has successfully passed the required probationary period. 
(Code 1996, § 26.08) 
Sec. 30-63. - Training. 
    Each person appointed to serve as a reserve peace officer shall satisfactorily complete, within four years from the date of appointment, a minimum training course consisting of 150 hours of training and instruction in accordance with the Code of Iowa § 80D.3. 
(Code 1996, § 26.09) 
State Law reference- Training standards, Code of Iowa § 80D.3; training, Code of Iowa § 80D.4; training and certificate requirements, Code of Iowa § 80D.4a. 
Sec. 30-64. - Carrying weapons. 
    A member of the reserve force may carry a weapon in the line of duty when authorized by the police chief, provided such member has been approved by the city council and has been certified by the state law enforcement academy council to carry weapons. 
(Code 1996, § 26.10) 
State Law reference- Similar provision, Code of Iowa § 80D.7. 
Sec. 30-65. - Retirement system. 
(a)  Purpose and intent. The purpose of this article is to provide for a police disability and retirement system based upon actuarial tables and to implement and provide for the disability and retirement of city peace officers under the provisions of the Code of Iowa ch. 411. 
(b)  System established. All of the provisions of the Code of Iowa ch. 411, to the extent relevant within the city, including all benefits provided therein are adopted by the city and made a part of this article by this reference. 
(c)  Applicability. This section shall apply only to members of the police department who became such on or after September 21, 1961. 
(d)  Board of trustees. The general responsibility for the establishment and proper operation of the retirement system is vested in the board of trustees for state-wide system created by the Code of Iowa § 411.36. The system shall be administered under the direction of the board. The board of trustees shall have and perform all of the duties given unto such board by state law and shall have full power to invest and reinvest the funds of the police retirement system in the manner provided by law, and shall administer the same as required by law. 
(e)  Legal advisor. The system may employ or retain an attorney to serve as the system's legal advisor and to represent the system. The costs of an attorney employed or retained by the system shall be paid from the fire and police retirement fund created in the Code of Iowa § 411.8. 
(f)  Medical board. The system shall designate a medical board as provided by law. 
(Code 1996, §§ 27.01-27.07) 
State Law reference- Retirement system for police officers and firefighters, Code of Iowa ch. 411. 
Secs. 30-66-30-88. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - FALSE ALARMS 

Sec. 30-89. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this article is to assess a reimbursement or a civil penalty for false alarms received by the police department which require a police officer to report to the scene. This article does not apply to fire department alarms or fire department false alarms. False alarms received by the city police department are an increasing problem, in part due to errors by the owners or operators of the system or failure on the part of operations of the system to shut the alarm down before entering the premises. False alarms expose the public to danger as well as additional costs in response by the police to those alarms. Alarms caused by power surges or electrical problems are not included in the false alarm category. 
(Code 1996, § 170.01) 
Sec. 30-90. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Alarm system means an assembly of equipment and devices or a single device such as a solid-state unit which uses an electrical energy to signal the presence of a hazard requiring urgent attention and to which the police department is expected to respond. The term "alarm system" includes, but is not limited to, the terms "automatic holdup alarm system," "burglar alarm system," "holdup alarm system" and "manual holdup alarm system," as those terms are defined in this section. 
    Automatic holdup alarm system means an alarm in which the signal transmission is initiated by the action of the perpetrator. 
    Burglar alarm system means an alarm system signaling a robbery or attempted robbery. 
    False alarm means the activation of an alarm system through mechanical failure, malfunction, improper installation, without an unlawful entry or through the negligence of the owner or lessee of an alarm system or such person's employees or agents of other cause. 
    Holdup alarm system means an alarm system signaling a robbery or attempted robbery. 
    Manual holdup alarm system means an alarm system in which the signal transmission is initiated by the direct action of the person attacked or by the observer of the attack. 
    Police chief means the police chief or his designated representative. 
    Subscriber means a person who buys or leases or otherwise obtains an alarm signaling system and contracts with or hires an alarm business to monitor or service the alarm device. 
(Code 1996, § 170.02) 
Sec. 30-91. - Fees. 
    The city council shall adopt by resolution the fees associated with this article. 
(Code 1996, § 170.03) 
Sec. 30-92. - Regulation of charges. 
    All alarm reporting equipment located inside the police department is privately-owned and, as such, the owner of such equipment shall bear the responsibility of repair and maintenance for the connection to that equipment. Additionally, such charge shall be fully borne by the owner of the reporting equipment. 
(Code 1996, § 170.04) 
Sec. 30-93. - Testing. 
(a)  No alarm system designated to transmit emergency messages directly to the police department shall be tested or demonstrated without first notifying the police department. 
(b)  No alarm system relayed through intermediate services to the police department will be tested to determine police department response without first notifying the police department. 
(c)  Any testing done without proper advance notification shall be classified as a false alarm for the purposes of this article. All notices shall be prior to the testing date unless the police chief gives special permission otherwise. All notices shall include date, time, owner's or subscriber's name, address and the name of the representative responsible for the testing, and such person's employee name, address and telephone number, if applicable. The notification can be given verbally to the on duty police dispatcher via telephone. 
(Code 1996, § 170.05) 
Sec. 30-94. - Evidence of false alarms. 
    The police chief or designee shall determine in each instance whether or not an alarm given to the police department is a false alarm. The police chief shall consider all relevant circumstances including evidence such as the alarm being set off by the perpetrator who fled the scene leaving signs of forced entry and weather conditions. If an alarm system signals a false alarm as a result of a dead alarm system battery during a power outage, that alarm will be considered to be a false alarm. 
(Code 1996, § 170.06) 
Sec. 30-95. - Notification. 
    Upon receipt of a false alarm, the police chief or designee shall notify the owner of the alarm as shown by the records of the department that the owner shall have 30 days in which to remit the required reimbursement/fee. Such fee shall be paid to the city police department and a receipt shall be given. In the event the owner, lessee or subscriber of the alarm system shall fail to pay the civil penalty within 30 days, the city shall file a claim with the state district court, magistrate division, alleging the circumstances and this article as the basis for the civil penalty. 
(Code 1996, § 170.07) 
Sec. 30-96. - Disconnection of alarm system; excessive false alarms. 
    The police chief is authorized to require the owner or lessee of any alarm system directly connected to the police department to disconnect such device until the device is working in a manner as will not cause a high frequency of false alarms. The police chief may require disconnection if ten false alarms are received in any 12-month period. The police chief may, after giving written notice to the subscriber, order disconnection of the alarm system from the police department. 
(Code 1996, § 170.08) 
Sec. 30-97. - Change of location. 
    If the location of the communications facilities of the city police department should be changed or moved, the cost of moving any alarm system or parts thereof shall be borne by the owner, subscriber, or lessee. 
(Code 1996, § 170.09) 
Sec. 30-98. - Liability of the city limited. 
    The city shall take every reasonable precaution to ensure that alarm signals and messages received from central station systems, modified central stations and telephone monitoring services regarding alarm signals received by the city are given appropriate attention and are acted upon with dispatch. The city shall not be liable for any defects in the operation of any alarm devices or signal line systems, for any failure or neglect to respond appropriately upon receipt of an alarm, maintenance, or operation of equipment, the transmission of alarm signals and pre-recorded alarm messages, or the relaying of such signals and messages. In the event that the city finds it necessary to disconnect a defective automatic protection device or signaling device, the city shall incur no liability by such action. 
(Code 1996, § 170.10) 
Sec. 30-99. - Conflict of interest prohibited. 
    No employee of the police department, or a member of such employee's immediately family, shall have any interest, directly or indirectly, in any alarm business within the limits of the city. No such employee or family member shall be employed by an alarm business subject to the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1996, § 170.11) 
Chapter 32 - NUISANCES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Nuisances, Code of Iowa ch. 657. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 32-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Abandoned vehicle means any of the following: 
(1)  A vehicle that has been left parked illegally on public property for more than 48 hours lacking vital component parts; 
(2)  A vehicle that has been unlawfully parked on private property without the consent of the owner or person in control of the property for more than 24 hours; 
(3)  A motor vehicle that has remained for a period of more than 30 days on private property, with or without consent of the owner or person in control of the property, in an inoperable condition, unless it is kept in an enclosed garage or storage building; 
(4)  A vehicle that has been legally impounded by order of a police authority and has not been reclaimed for a period of ten days; or 
(5)  Any vehicle parked on the highway determined by a police authority to create a hazard to other vehicle traffic. 
    All-weather surface means a surface as defined in section 42-173. 
    Front yard area means all the area between the front property line and a line drawn along the front face of the principal structure on the property and extended to the side property lines. 
    Inoperable condition means that the vehicle has not substantial potential use consistent with its usual function, and includes a vehicle that: 
(1)  Has a missing or defective part that is necessary for normal operation of the vehicle; 
(2)  Is stored on blocks, jacks or other supports, or elevated in any other way; 
(3)  Has not had a current vehicle license for at least three months; or 
(4)  Which cannot be immediately started and moved under its own power, as demonstrated by the owner to a police officer or their designee. 
    Junk means old or scrap ferrous or non-ferrous metal, including but not limited to iron, steel, brass and copper, rope, rags, batteries, paper, trash, rubber, including tires, debris, waste or junked, dismantled or wrecked motor vehicles or parts of motor vehicles. 
    Junk vehicle means any vehicle licensed, unlicensed or legally placed in storage with the county treasurer, stored within the corporate limits of the city and which has any of the following characteristics: 
(1)  Broken or loose part. Any vehicle with a broken or loose fender, door, bumper, hood, hood ornament, door handle, window handle, running board, steering wheel, trunk top, trunk handle, radio aerial, tail pipe or decorative piece. 
(2)  Habitat for nuisance animals or insects. Any vehicle which has become the habitat for rats, mice or snakes or other vermin or insects. 
(3)  Flammable fuel. Any vehicle which contains gasoline or any other flammable fuel. 
(4)  Inoperable. Any motor vehicle which is in inoperable condition. 
(5)  Defective or obsolete condition. Any other vehicle which, because of its defective or obsolete condition, in any other way constitutes a threat to the public health and safety. 
(6)  Broken glass. Any vehicle with a broken, cracked or missing windshield, window, headlight or tail light, or any cracked or broken glass. 
(7)  Storage. 
a.  Any vehicle used as storage for items such as rags, old rope, batteries, paper, trash bags, machinery, mechanical parts, scrap housing goods, dead plant material or any similar material. 
b.  For the purpose of this subsection, the term "stored" shall not include vehicles situated on the premises of operating auto body shops, vehicle repair shops, service stations or similar commercial businesses, as long as the vehicle does not stay on the premises for more than 30 days. 
    Motor home means a motor vehicle designed as an integral unit to be used as a conveyance upon the public streets and highways and for use as a temporary recreational dwelling and having at least four, two of which shall be systems specified in subsection (1), (4) or (5) of this definition, of the following permanently installed systems which meet American National Standards Institute and National Fire Protection Association standards in effect on the date of manufacture. 
(1)  Cooking facilities. 
(2)  Ice box or mechanical refrigerator. 
(3)  Portable water supply including plumbing and a sink with faucet either self-contained or with connections for external water disposal, or both. 
(4)  Self-contained toilet or a toilet connected to a plumbing system with connection for external water disposal, or both. 
(5)  Heating or air conditioning system or both, separate from the vehicle engine or the vehicle engine electrical system. 
(6)  A 110-115 volt alternating current electrical system separate from the vehicle engine electrical system. 
    Motor vehicle means any motor vehicle as defined in the Code of Iowa § 321.1, including the following: 
(1)  Motorized bicycle. 
(2)  Motorcycle. 
(3)  All-terrain vehicles. 
    Nuisance means whatever is injurious to health, indecent, or offensive to the senses, or an obstruction to the free use of property so as essentially to interfere with the comfortable enjoyment of life or property. 
    Outside means to be outside of an enclosed storage facility and visible from any other property, including the public right-of-way. 
    Property means either private or public real property within the corporate limits of the city. 
    Side yard corner lots means the yard area adjacent to the street right-of-way on a corner lot extending from the front yard along the side of the structure to the rear property line. 
    Structure means a fully enclosed building that does not allow the contents to be viewed from the outside. A structure does not include a car cover or tarp. 
    Trailer means every vehicle without motive power designed for carrying persons or property and for being drawn by a motor vehicle and so constructed that only tongue weight rests upon the towing vehicle. 
    Travel trailer means a vehicle without motive power used or so manufactured or constructed as to permit its being used as a conveyance upon the public streets and highways and designed to permit the vehicle to be used as a place of human habitation by one or more persons. The vehicle may be up to eight feet six inches in width and its overall length shall not exceed 45 feet unless width and length are in conflict with Code of Iowa ch. 321. Such a vehicle shall be customarily or ordinarily used for vacation or recreational purposes and not used as a place for human habitation. If any such vehicle is used in this State as a place for human habitation for more than 90 consecutive days in one location, it shall be classed as mobile home regardless of the size limitations herein provided. The term "travel trailer" does not include a vehicle that is so designed as to permit it to be towed exclusively by a motorcycle. 
    Unlicensed means any vehicle which is not displaying a valid current license as required by the laws of the State of Iowa. 
    Vehicle means every device in, upon or by which a person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a highway or street, excepting devices moved by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks, and includes without limitation a motor vehicle, automobile, truck, motorcycle, tractor, buggy, wagon, farm machinery, or any combination thereof. 
    Vital component parts means those parts of the motor vehicle that are essential to the mechanical functioning of the vehicle, including, but not limited to, the motor, drive train and wheels. 
    Weeds means noxious or other otherwise, untended vines, brush and scrub bushes, grass and other similar vegetation. 
(Code 1996, § 55.01; Ord. No. 99-1529; Ord. No. 2019-1820, § 1, 4-1-2019) 
Sec. 32-2. - Declaration of general nuisances. 
    The following represent examples of general nuisances: 
(1)  Abandoned vehicles and junk vehicles. Abandoned vehicles and junk vehicles are declared to be a public nuisance creating a hazard to the health and safety of the public because they invite plundering, create fire hazards, attract vermin and present physical dangers to the safety and wellbeing of children and other citizens. The accumulation and outside storage of such vehicles is in the nature of rubbish, litter and unsightly debris and is a blight on the landscape and a detriment to the environment. If any abandoned vehicle or junk vehicle is stored upon private property in violation hereof, the owner or person in control of the property upon which it is stored shall be prima facie liable for said violation. 
(2)  Air pollution. The emission of dense smoke, noxious fumes or fly ash is considered to be a public nuisance which creates a hazard to the health and safety of the public. 
(3)  Airport air space. Any object or structure hereafter erected within 1,000 feet of the limits of any municipal or regularly established airport or landing place, which may endanger or obstruct aerial navigation including take-off and landing, unless such object or structure constitutes a proper use or enjoyment of the land on which the same is located is declared to be a public nuisance. 
(4)  Billboards. Billboards, signboards and advertising signs, whether erected and constructed on public or private property, which so obstruct and impair the view of any portion or part of a public street, avenue, highway, boulevard or alley or of a railroad or street railway track as to render dangerous the use thereof are declared a public nuisance. 
(5)  Blocking public and private ways. Obstructing or encumbering, by fences, buildings or otherwise, the public roads, private ways, streets, alleys, commons, landing places or burying grounds constitutes a public nuisance. 
(6)  Construction materials. Any construction materials, including piles of dirt, rocks, sand and sod, left in the open on property or street right-of-way more than 60 days after construction has been completed or a certificate of occupancy has been issued, constitute a public nuisance. 
(7)  Dutch elm disease. Trees infected with Dutch elm disease represent a public nuisance. 
(8)  Filth or noisome substance. The causing or suffering of any offal, filth or noisome substance to be collected or to remain in any place to the prejudice of others shall constitute a public nuisance. 
(9)  Garbage and trash. The depositing of, maintaining, permitting or failing to remove, garbage, trash, rubbish, bottles, cans and other refuse on any property within the city, including large quantities of organic debris and materials, which accumulated by other than natural means, constitutes a public nuisance. Such declaration does not apply to neatly maintained compost piles. 
(10)  Houses of ill fame. Houses of ill fame, kept for the purpose of prostitution and lewdness; gambling houses; or houses resorted to by persons using controlled substances, as defined in the Code of Iowa § 124.101(5), in violation of law, or houses where drunkenness, quarreling, fighting or breaches of the peace are carried on or permitted to the disturbance of others constitute a public nuisance. 
(11)  Impeding passage of navigable river. The obstructing or impeding, without legal authority, the passage of any navigable river, harbor or collection of water represents a public nuisance. 
(12)  Machinery and junk. The piling, storage or keeping of old machinery, junk, furniture, household furnishings or appliances or component parts thereof, or other debris within the city is a public nuisance. 
(13)  Offensive smells. Erecting, continuing or using any building or other place for the exercise of any trade, employment or manufacture, which, by occasioning noxious exhalations, unreasonably offensive smells, or other annoyances, becomes injurious and dangerous to the health, comfort or property of individuals shall be considered a public nuisance. 
(14)  Parked vehicles. Any vehicle whether occupied or not that is found stopped or parked in violation of any ordinance or state statute, or that is reported stolen, or that is found impeding firefighting, snow removal or plowing or the orderly flow of traffic, is declared to be a public nuisance. Also, any vehicle which is impeding public road or utility repair, construction or maintenance activities after reasonable notice in writing of the proposed activities has been given to the vehicle owner or user at least 12 hours in advance, is declared to be a public nuisance. 
(15)  Parking and storage. The following represent examples of public nuisances related to the parking of vehicles and storage of various items: 
a.  The outside parking and storage on property used for residential purposes or residentially zoned property of large numbers of vehicles, watercraft, trailers, materials, supplies or equipment not customarily used for residential purposes in violation of the requirements set forth below is declared to be a nuisance because it: 
1.  Obstructs views on streets and private property; 
2.  Creates cluttered and otherwise unsightly areas; 
3.  Prevents the full use of residential streets for residential parking; 
4.  Decreases adjoining landowners' and occupants' enjoyment of their property and neighborhood; and 
5.  Otherwise adversely affects property values and neighborhood patterns. 
b.  Unlawful parking and storage: 
1.  No person may place, store or allow the placement or storage of ice fish houses, skateboard ramps or other similar non-permanent structures outside continuously for longer than 24 hours in the front yard area or side yard corner lots on property used for residential purposes or residentially zoned property. 
2.  No person may place, store or allow the placement or storage of pipe, lumber, forms, steel, machinery or similar materials, including all materials used in connection with a business, outside on property used for residential purposes or residentially zoned property. 
3.  No person shall cause, undertake, permit or allow the outside parking and storage of vehicles on property used for residential purposes or residentially zoned property unless it complies with the following requirements: 
(i)  Vehicles which are parked or stored outside in the front yard or side yard of corner lot areas must be on all-weather surface driveway which shall not exceed 30 percent of the front yard or side yard corner lot. 
(ii)  Driveways exceeding 30 percent of the front yard or side yard corner lot prior to adoption of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, are exempt, providing no additional surface area is added. Exceptions: The prohibitions of this subsection shall not apply to the following: 
A.  Any motor truck, pickup truck or similar vehicle being used by a public utility, moving company or similar company, which is actually bring used to serve a residence not belonging to or occupied by the operator of the vehicle. 
B.  Any vehicle which is actually making a pickup or delivery at the location where it is parked. Parking for any period of time beyond the period of time reasonably necessary to make such pickup or delivery. 
C.  Lawful nonconforming and permitted uses. 
(16)  Storing of inflammable junk. Depositing or storing of inflammable junk, such as old rags, rope, cordage, rubber, bones and paper, by dealers in such articles within the fire limits of the city, unless in a building of fireproof construction represents a hazard to persons and/or property and, as such, is considered to be a public nuisance. 
(17)  Water pollution. Corrupting or rendering unwholesome or impure the water of any river, stream or pond, or unlawfully diverting the same from its natural course or state, to the injury or prejudice of others is a public nuisance. 
(18)  Weeds. Any weeds or grass that is allowed to grow in excess of the height stated below for the respective area shall constitute a public nuisance. 
a.  Eight inches: Developed residential, commercial and industrial zoned areas. 
b.  12 inches: Undeveloped residential, commercial and industrial zoned areas. 
c.  18 inches: Unplatted property and agricultural zoned property unless planted for farm cropping purposes. 
(Code 1996, §§ 55.02, 55.03; Ord. No. 2019-1820, § 1, 4-1-2019) 
Sec. 32-3. - Exceptions to declaration of certain stored junk. 
    The provisions of this chapter do not apply to any junk or junk vehicle stored within a: 
(1)  Structure. A garage or other enclosed structure; or 
(2)  Salvage yard. An auto salvage yard or junk yard lawfully operating within the city, in accordance with the Code of Iowa and this Code. 
(Code 1996, § 55.02A; Ord. No. 2019-1820, § 1, 4-1-2019) 
Sec. 32-4. - Nuisances prohibited. 
    The creation or maintenance of a nuisance is prohibited, and a nuisance, public or private, may be abated in the manner provided in this chapter and may be subject to penalties under section 1-15. 
(Code 1996, § 55.03; Ord. No. 2019-1820, § 1, 4-1-2019) 
State Law reference- Nuisances and abatement generally, Code of Iowa § 657.1; nuisances enumerated, Code of Iowa § 657.2. 
Secs. 32-5-32-22. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SPECIFIC NUISANCES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 32-23-32-47. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - WEEDS AND GRASS 

Sec. 32-48. - Duty of owner or occupant to control. 
    All noxious weeds, as defined by state law, prohibited on any lot or parcel of land, and the parking adjacent thereto, shall be destroyed by the owner or party in possession of the property before the same shall have gone to seed. All grass growing on any such lot or parcel of land, or parking adjacent thereto, shall be mowed and kept mowed by the owners or persons in possession of such property to a height not in excess of the stated heights as provided by this Code. 
(Code 1996, § 57.01) 
State Law reference- Similar provision, Code of Iowa § 317.10. 
Sec. 32-49. - Right of entry to destroy noxious weeds or mow grass. 
    Upon the failure of the owner or party in possession of any lot or parcel of land to destroy the noxious weeds or mow the grass thereon and on the parking adjacent thereto, as specified herein, the city, acting through its staff and employees, shall have full power and authority to enter upon any such lot or parcel of land within the corporate limits of the city upon which noxious weeds or grass are growing for the purpose of destroying the noxious weeds or mowing the grass to a height not in excess of stated heights as provided by this Code. 
(Code 1996, § 57.02) 
State Law reference- Authority of county weed commissioners to enter, Code of Iowa § 317.6. 
Sec. 32-50. - Notice of intention to enter property; continuing right of entry. 
(a)  Before entering upon the property of another, the city shall give a five-day written notice to the owner of the lot or parcel of land by registered mail addressed to the owner, at the owner's last-known address, of the city's intention to enter upon the property for the purpose of destroying noxious weeds or mowing grass to a height not in excess of stated heights as provided by this Code. 
(b)  A copy of the notice shall be sent by regular mail to the party in possession of the property. The copy shall be sent to the party in possession at the property address or such other known address of the party in possession, at least five days prior to the city's entry upon the lot or parcel of land to destroy noxious weeds or mow grass on the property and parking adjacent thereto. 
(c)  In the event there is no one in possession of the property, or it is abandoned, and in addition, the address of the owner is unknown, the owner is deceased, delivery of registered mail is refused by the owner, or for such other reason deemed appropriate by the city staff when there is otherwise no known current address available for delivery of registered mail to the owner, the city may publish in the City Freeman-Journal notice of its intent to enter upon the property for the purpose of destroying noxious weeds or mowing grass not less than ten days prior to the actual entry upon the property for such purposes. A copy of the notice to be published shall be sent to the owner of the property at the owner's last-known address, by regular mail, deposited in a U. S. mail depository at least ten days prior to the city's entry upon the property to destroy noxious weeds or mow grass. 
(d)  Once the city has entered a lot or parcel of land to destroy noxious weeds or to mow grass after giving notice as provided in subsection (a) of this section, the city's right of entry to destroy noxious weeds or to mow grass existing on the property or adjacent parking shall continue for the duration of the growing season, and until November 1 of each year, without the necessity of the city giving any further or additional notice to the owner or party in possession. 
(Code 1996, §§ 57.03, 57.04) 
Sec. 32-51. - Assessment and collection of costs. 
    When the city, acting through its staff or employees, shall have cause to destroy any noxious weeds or mow grass of a height in excess of the stated heights as provided by this Code, after failure of the land owner or party in possession pursuant to an order of the city, acting through its staff responsible for issuing such order or orders, the cost of such destruction of noxious weeds or mowing of grass by the city, acting through its staff and employees, shall be assessed against and collected from the land owner in the following manner: 
(1)  The city clerk shall notify the owner of the property by registered mail that the work related to the destruction of noxious weeds or mowing of grass has been completed and state therein the amount due for the work. The owner shall have 30 days in which to pay the amount specified at the office of the city clerk. 
(2)  If at the end of the above the 30-day period, the owner has not paid the cost of such work related to destruction of noxious weeds or mowing of grass, the city shall thereupon take whatever action it deems necessary to recover the amount expended for such work related to the destruction of noxious weeds or mowing of grass. 
(Code 1996, § 57.05) 
Secs. 32-52-32-75. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - ABANDONED VEHICLES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Abandoned vehicles, Code of Iowa § 321.89. 

Sec. 32-76. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Abandoned vehicle means any of the following: 
(1)  A vehicle that has been left unattended on public property for more than 24 hours and lacks current registration plates or two or more wheels or other parts which renders the vehicle totally inoperable; 
(2)  A vehicle that has remained illegally on public property for more than 24 hours; 
(3)  A vehicle that has been unlawfully parked on private property without the consent of the owner or person in control of the property for more than 24 hours; 
(4)  A vehicle that has been legally impounded by order of a police authority and has not been reclaimed for a period of ten days. However, a police authority may declare the vehicle abandoned within the ten-day period by commencing the notification process in section 32-78; 
(5)  Any vehicle parked on the highway determined by a police authority to create a hazard to other vehicle traffic; or 
(6)  A vehicle that has been impounded by order of the court and whose owner has not paid the impoundment fees after notification by the person or agency responsible for carrying out the impoundment order. 
    Demolisher means any city or public agency organized for the disposal of solid waste, or any person whose business it is to convert a vehicle to junk, processed scrap or scrap metal, or otherwise to wreck, or dismantle vehicles. 
    Police authority means the Iowa state patrol, any law enforcement agency of a county or city, or any special security officer employed by the state board of regents. 
(Code 1996, § 140.01) 
Sec. 32-77. - Authority to possess, store or remove. 
(a)  A police authority, upon the authority's own initiative or upon the request of any other authority having the duties of control of highways or traffic, shall take into custody an abandoned vehicle on public property and may take into custody an abandoned vehicle on private property. A police authority, taking into custody an abandoned vehicle which has been determined to create a traffic hazard, shall report the reasons constituting the hazard in writing to the appropriate authority having duties of control of the highway. 
(b)  The police authority may employ its own personnel, equipment, and facilities or hire a private entity, equipment, and facilities for the purpose of removing, preserving, storing, or disposing of abandoned vehicles. If a police authority employs a private entity to dispose of abandoned vehicles, the police authority shall provide the private entity with the names and addresses of the registered owners, all lienholders of record, and any other known claimant to the vehicle or the personal property found in the vehicle. The owners, lienholders, or other claimants of the abandoned vehicle shall not have a cause of action against a private entity for action taken under this section, if the private entity provides notice as required by section 32-78 to those persons whose names were provided by the police authority. 
(Code 1996, § 140.02) 
Sec. 32-78. - Notice by mail. 
(a)  Notification of owner, lienholders, and other claimants. A police authority or private entity which takes into custody an abandoned vehicle shall notify, within 20 days, by certified mail, the last-known registered owner of the vehicle, all lienholders of record, and any other known claimant to the vehicle or to personal property found in the vehicle, addressed to their last-known addresses of record, that the abandoned vehicle has been taken into custody. Notice shall be deemed given when mailed. 
(b)  The notice shall describe the year, make, model, and serial number of the vehicle, describe the personal property found in the vehicle, set forth the location of the facility where the vehicle is being held, and inform the persons receiving the notice of their right to reclaim the vehicle and personal property within ten days after the effective date of the notice upon payment of all towing, preservation, and storage charges resulting from placing the vehicle in custody and upon payment of the costs of notice required pursuant to this section. 
(c)  The notice shall also state that the failure of the owner, lienholders, or claimants to exercise their right to reclaim the vehicle or personal property within the time provided shall be deemed a waiver by the owner, lienholders, and claimants of all right, title, claim, and interest in the vehicle or personal property and that failure to reclaim the vehicle or personal property is deemed consent to the sale of the vehicle at a public auction or disposal of the vehicle to a demolisher and to disposal of the personal property by sale or destruction. 
(d)  The notice shall state that any person claiming rightful possession of the vehicle or personal property who disputes the planned disposition of the vehicle or property by the police authority or private entity or of the assessment of fees and charges provided by this section may ask for an evidentiary hearing before the police authority to contest those matters. 
(e)  If the persons receiving the notice do not ask for a hearing or exercise their right to reclaim the vehicle or personal property within the ten-day reclaiming period, the owner, lienholders, or claimants shall no longer have any right, title, claim, or interest in or to the vehicle or the personal property. A court in any case in law or equity shall not recognize any right, title, claim, or interest of the owner, lienholders, or claimants, after the expiration of the ten-day reclaiming period. 
(Code 1996, § 140.03) 
Sec. 32-79. - Notification in newspaper. 
    If the identity of the last registered owner cannot be determined, or if the registration contains no address for the owner, or if it is impossible to determine with reasonable certainty the identity and addresses of all lienholders, notice by one publication in one newspaper of general circulation in the area where the vehicle was abandoned shall be sufficient to meet all requirements of notice under section 32-78. The published notice may contain multiple listings of abandoned vehicles and personal property but shall be published within the same time requirements and contain the same information as prescribed for mailed notice in section 32-78. 
(Code 1996, § 140.04) 
Sec. 32-80. - Extension of time. 
    The owner, lienholders, or claimants may, by written request delivered to the police authority or private entity prior to the expiration of the ten-day reclaiming period, obtain an additional five days within which the vehicle or personal property may be reclaimed. 
(Code 1996, § 140.05) 
Sec. 32-81. - Fees for impoundment. 
    The owner or lienholder shall pay the following fees to the police department upon claiming the vehicle: 
(1)  Impound processing fee: $15.00. 
(2)  Storage and towing fees charged by the authorized tow company according to current agreement (if such agreement exists) or established fee schedule of the tow company. 
(3)  In situations where the vehicle is stored on city-owned property, the additional daily storage rate is set at $10.00 per day. 
(Code 1996, § 140.06) 
Sec. 32-82. - Disposal of vehicles. 
(a)  If an abandoned vehicle has not been reclaimed as provided herein, the police authority or private entity shall make a determination as to whether the vehicle shall be sold for use upon the highways. If the vehicle is not sold for use upon the highways, it shall be sold for junk, or demolished and sold as scrap. The police authority or private entity shall sell the vehicle at public auction. 
(b)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, a police authority or private entity, which has taken into possession any abandoned vehicle which lacks an engine, two or more wheels, another part which renders the vehicle totally inoperable, or which has a fair market value of less than $500.00 as determined by the police authority or private entity, may dispose of the vehicle to a demolisher for junk without public auction after complying with the notification procedures in section 32-78. The purchaser of the vehicles takes title free and clear of all liens and claims of ownership, shall receive a sales receipt from the police authority or private entity, and is entitled to register the vehicle and receive a certificate of title if sold for use upon the highways. 
(c)  If the vehicle is sold or disposed of to a demolisher for junk, the demolisher shall make application for a junking certificate to the county treasurer within 30 days of purchase and shall surrender the sales receipt in lieu of the certificate of title. 
(Code 1996, § 140.07) 
Sec. 32-83. - Proceeds from sales. 
(a)  From the proceeds of the sale of an abandoned vehicle the police authority, if the police authority did not hire a private entity, shall reimburse itself for the expenses of the auction, the costs of towing, preserving, and storing which resulted from placing the abandoned vehicle in custody, all notice and publication costs incurred pursuant to sections 32-78 and 32-79, the cost of inspection, and any other costs incurred except costs of bookkeeping and other administrative costs. Any remainder from the proceeds of a sale shall be held for the owner of the vehicle or entitled lienholder for 90 days, and then shall be deposited in the road use tax fund. 
(b)  The costs to police authorities of auction, towing, preserving, storage, and all notice and publication costs, and all other costs which result from placing abandoned vehicle in custody, whenever the proceeds from a sale of the abandoned vehicles are insufficient to meet these expenses and costs, shall be paid from the road use tax fund and are the obligation of the last owner or owners, jointly and severally. If a private entity has been hired, the police authority may file a claim with the department for reimbursement of towing fees which shall be paid from the road use tax fund. 
(Code 1996, § 140.08) 
Secs. 32-84-32-141. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - CHRONIC NUISANCES 

Sec. 32-142. - Purpose. 
    Chronic nuisance properties present grave health, safety and welfare concerns, where the persons responsible for such properties have failed to take corrective action to abate the nuisance condition. Chronic nuisance properties have a tremendous negative impact upon the quality of life, safety and health of the neighborhoods where they are located and the city as a whole. Specifically, this article is enacted to remedy nuisance activities that are particularly disruptive to the quality of life and repeatedly occur or exist at properties, by holding those persons responsible for such property accountable for the conditions of their property and these chronic nuisance activities. 
(Code 1996, § 58.01) 
Sec. 32-143. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Abate means to repair, replace, remove, destroy or otherwise remedy a condition, which constitutes a violation of this article by such means and in such a manner and to such an extent as is deemed necessary in the interest of the general health, safety and welfare of the community. 
    Business purpose means the use of any residential, commercial or industrial zone property for the direct or indirect transaction of business, which includes but is not limited to physical occupancy of the property by the business, renting the property or buildings thereon for the storage of materials, vehicles, trash or items of value, or any other use that supports an underlining business activity. 
    Chronic nuisance property means property on which a combination of three of more cited nuisance activities occur during any 90-day period that are found to be nuisance violations. 
    Chronic nuisance warning means a notice issued by the city to the legal owner of a property, the person responsible for a property and any occupants of a property advising them of their designation as a chronic nuisance property, stating their responsibilities to act and providing notification of the penalties that may be imposed. 
    Cited nuisance activity means any nuisance activity, as defined in this section, which has been subject to an action by the city under chapter 1 or this article. 
    Control means the ability to regulate, restrain, dominate, counteract or govern property or conduct that occurs on a property. 
    Landlord means the owner, lessor, or subleasor of the dwelling unit or the property of which it is a part, and in addition, means any person designated as a representative of the landlord. 
    Nuisance activity means and includes: 
(1)  Any nuisance as defined by state law or local ordinance occurring on, around or near a property, including, but not limited to, violations of this chapter or the following provisions: 
a.  Chapter 10, article VI, Vacant and abandoned property. 
b.  Chapter 38, Signs. 
c.  Chapter 42, article X, Trees and shrubbery. 
(2)  For purpose of this article, the term "nuisance activity" shall not apply when the person responsible for a condition that would otherwise constitute a nuisance is the victim of a crime that directly causes, maintains or augments the nuisance condition. 
    Nuisance violation means the legal finding of guilt through admission to or conviction by a court of law for a cited nuisance activity. 
    Person in charge, person responsible for the property or person responsible means, unless otherwise defined, any and all persons who have titled ownership of the property or structure which is subject to this article , persons in actual or constructive possession of a property, a landlord, occupants in control of the property or structure which is subject to this article, a developer, building or business operators or owners who are developing, building or operating a business on the property or in a structure which is subject to this article or any person who has control over the property and allows a violation of this article to continue. 
    Premises and property may be used interchangeably and mean a public or private building, lot, parcel, dwelling, rental unit, rental property, real estate or portion thereof, including property used as a residential, commercial or industrial property. 
    Rental property means any building, structure, lot, parcel or property or portion thereof that is rented to another person and used for a business purpose. 
    Rental unit means any structure or that part of a structure, including, but not limited to, a single-family home, room or apartment, which is rented to another person and used as a home residence or sleeping place by one or more persons. 
(Code 1996, § 58.02) 
Sec. 32-144. - Enforcement procedure. 
(a)  Upon finding that a property has had three or more cited nuisance activities within a 90-day period that were found to be nuisance violations, a designated officer of the city shall prepare a report outlining the nature of the nuisance activities, violations and any other relevant information and forward such report to the city attorney and police chief. 
(b)  Upon receiving a report on the existence of a chronic nuisance property, the city attorney and police chief shall review the report and make a determination that the property does meet the definition of a chronic nuisance as enumerated in section 32-143. 
(c)  Upon finding that a property meets the definition of a chronic nuisance property, the city attorney and police chief shall cause to be served a chronic nuisance warning, which shall contain: 
(1)  The street address and legal description or other such information that sufficiently identifies the location of the property; 
(2)  A concise description of the nuisance activities and resulting violations; 
(3)  A statement that the property has been designated as a chronic nuisance property in accordance with this article and a description of the process for appeal of the designation; 
(4)  A demand that the owner or person in charge of the property respond to the police chief or designee within five business days of service by: 
a.  Submitting a letter requesting review of the designation under section 32-145; or 
b.  Submitting a letter indicating the intent to propose a maintenance and abatement plan in accordance with the provisions of section 32-148 within 20 days of the date of service. 
(5)  A concise description of the penalties that may be enforced for a violation of this article; and 
(6)  A copy of the ordinance from which this article is derived. 
(Code 1996, § 58.03) 
Sec. 32-145. - Appeal of designation. 
    The person responsible for a property shall be permitted to appeal the designation of the property as a chronic nuisance property. Such appeals shall be heard by the city council. In reviewing the designation of the property as a chronic nuisance property, the city council shall be limited to reviewing only those facts relevant to determining if the property meets the definition of a chronic nuisance property under section 32-143. An appeal of the designation shall stay the designation and the requirements of this article, but shall not stay the requirement to abate nuisances under any other ordinance of the city or action of the court. 
(Code 1996, § 58.04) 
Sec. 32-146. - Duration of designation. 
    Once a property has been notified by a chronic nuisance warning that it has been designated a chronic nuisance property, the designation shall be in effect for a period of up to 18 months after the designation has been made, abatement of the nuisances has been completed and no new nuisance activities have been cited. 
(Code 1996, § 58.05) 
Sec. 32-147. - Duty to abate. 
    The person responsible for a chronic nuisance property shall be required to abate all nuisance violations. This duty shall extend beyond actual abatement and include such reasonable period as to ensure the abated condition is maintained and does not return to its status as a nuisance. 
(Code 1996, § 58.06) 
Sec. 32-148. - Maintenance and abatement plan. 
    The person responsible for a chronic nuisance property shall be required to develop a maintenance and abatement plan, which shall describe the remedies necessary for the person responsible to satisfactorily abate each nuisance violation, if not already abated; maintain the abatement; and employ measures to prevent future nuisance activities. Additionally, this plan shall include: 
(1)  A general description of the property including the physical address, parcel or tax identification numbers, the owners of record and identification of the landlord or person responsible if other than the owners of record; 
(2)  A description of the abatement and resulting maintenance that the person responsible shall perform or cause to be performed to ensure compliance with all ordinances of the city and any orders of the court; and 
(3)  A list of the person that are responsible for maintenance of the property, buildings, structures or appurtenances, including daytime and evening phone numbers and any other relevant emergency and non-emergency contact information including, at a minimum, the person name, title, phone number and addresses. 
(Code 1996, § 58.07) 
Sec. 32-149. - Approval of plan. 
    Once the person responsible for the plan has submitted the plan to the designated city officer, that officer shall forward the plan to the city council for review and approval. The city council may approve the plan, approve the plan with conditions or remand the plan for addition information. 
(Code 1996, § 58.08) 
Sec. 32-150. - Financial security. 
    In addition to approval of the plan, the city council may require the person responsible for a chronic nuisance property to post a bond or other acceptable form of financial security to ensure the required abatement and maintenance is completed in the manner and time described in the plan. Such financial security shall: 
(1)  Be in a form, amount and manner as prescribed by the city attorney; 
(2)  Be in effect until such time as any required abatement is performed and a reasonable period of time has elapsed where the abatement has been maintained in accordance with the plan; and 
(3)  Be released only upon an affirmative determination by the city that person responsible for the property has satisfactorily completed the abatement and the required maintenance period as required by the plan. 
(Code 1996, § 58.09) 
Sec. 32-151. - Failure to maintain abatement and property. 
    The failure to maintain abatement of a nuisance violation or otherwise perform the duties as required in the maintenance plan shall be a violation of the duty of the person responsible for the property. 
(Code 1996, § 58.10) 
Sec. 32-152. - Duty to prevent new nuisances. 
    It shall be a duty of the person responsible for a chronic nuisance property to prevent any new nuisance violations during such time that the property is designated a chronic nuisance property and a maintenance and abatement plan or financial security are in effect. 
(Code 1996, § 58.11) 
Sec. 32-153. - Violation. 
    Failure to perform the duties as required of this article, including, but not limited to, the failure to act or respond, shall be a violation of this article and subject to its remedies and penalties. 
(Code 1996, § 58.12) 
Sec. 32-154. - Penalties. 
    A violation of this article shall be a simple misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be subject to a fine of not more than $500.00 or imprisonment not to exceed 30 days. Each violation of this article shall be a separate offense. 
(Code 1996, § 58.13) 
Sec. 32-155. - All rights reserved. 
    Nothing in this article shall limit the rights of the city to pursue other alternative remedies or civil or criminal penalties relating to or resulting from the violations themselves or the actions of those persons responsible. 
(Code 1996, § 58.14) 
Secs. 32-156-32-178. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - ABATEMENT[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- General process for alleviating nuisances, Code of Iowa § 657.4. 

Sec. 32-179. - Applicability. 
    The requirements of this article shall apply to the administration of any nuisance as defined in this Code (unless an abatement procedure is otherwise specifically provided in this article or elsewhere in this Code for a particular nuisance), including, but not limited to, those described in: 
(1)  Chapter 10, article VI, Vacant and abandoned property. 
(2)  Chapter 38, Signs. 
(3)  Chapter 42, article III, Chronic nuisances (ice, snow, maintenance). 
(Code 1996, § 55.06; Ord. No. 2019-1820, § 1, 4-1-2019) 
Sec. 32-180. - Notice to abate; method of service. 
(a)  Whenever the city manager or other authorized municipal officer finds that a nuisance exists, such officer shall cause to be served upon the property owner a written notice to abate the nuisance within a reasonable time after notice. The notice to abate shall contain: 
(1)  Description of nuisance. A description of what constitutes the nuisance or other condition. 
(2)  Location of nuisance. The location of the nuisance or condition. 
(3)  Acts necessary to abate. A statement of the act or acts necessary to abate the nuisance or condition. 
(4)  Reasonable time. A reasonable time within which to complete the abatement. 
(5)  Assessment of city costs. A statement that if the nuisance or condition is not abated as directed and no request for hearing is made within the time prescribed, the city will abate it and assess the costs against such person. 
(b)  The notice may be in the form of an ordinance or sent by certified mail to the property owner. 
(Code 1996, §§ 56.01, 56.02, 56.03) 
Sec. 32-181. - Request for hearing. 
    Any person ordered to abate a nuisance may have a hearing with the council as to whether a nuisance exists. A request for a hearing must be made in writing and delivered to the clerk within the time stated in the notice, or it will be conclusively presumed that a nuisance exists and it must be abated as ordered. The hearing will be before the council at a time and place fixed by the council. The findings of the council shall be conclusive and, if a nuisance is found to exist, it shall be ordered abated within a reasonable time under the circumstances. 
(Code 1996, § 56.04) 
Sec. 32-182. - Abatement in emergency. 
    If it is determined that an emergency exists by reason of the continuing maintenance of the nuisance or condition, the city may perform any action which may be required under this article without prior notice. The city shall assess the costs as provided in section 32-186 after notice to the property owner under the applicable provisions of section 32-180 and hearing as provided in section 32-181. 
(Code 1996, § 56.05) 
Sec. 32-183. - Abatement by city. 
    If the person notified to abate a nuisance or condition neglects or fails to abate as directed, the city may perform the required action to abate, keeping an accurate account of the expense incurred. The itemized expense account shall be filed with the clerk who shall pay such expenses on behalf of the city. 
(Code 1996, § 56.06) 
Sec. 32-184. - Cost recovery. 
    The administrative costs associated with investigating, abating and inspecting nuisances and nuisance property is a cost that should be borne by the person responsible and not the public at-large. Therefore, the city shall be authorized to recover the following costs: 
(1)  The costs of any abatement, including emergency abatement, performed directly by the city or indirectly through the employment of a third party. 
(2)  Reasonable attorney fees and court costs associated with the adjudication nuisance violations and any citations or criminal charges arising from the violations. 
(3)  Any reinspection fees as defined in section 32-185. 
(Code 1996, § 55.04) 
Sec. 32-185. - Reinspection fees. 
    Reinspection fees are an appropriate method to recover costs disproportionately attributable to recalcitrant persons responsible and are intended to recover the cost of staff time when excessive time and effort become necessary to obtain code compliance for one or more a nuisance violations. Reinspection fees shall be authorized as follows: 
(1)  The first inspection following the issuance of a notice of violation, citation, infraction or order involving a nuisance shall be considered part of the normal cost of enforcement and will not be charged if the nuisance condition is abated. 
(2)  After the first inspection, the staff time associated with subsequent inspections, monitoring, and administrative actions relating to that nuisance violation shall be billed at an hourly rate plus administrative costs as established from time to time by resolution of the city council. 
(3)  The city planning department responsible for the inspections, reinspections, monitoring and other administrative action shall keep an accurate bill of the fees, which shall be billed to the person responsible. 
(4)  The hourly rate shall be limited to the actual hourly rate of the employee, plus a 50 percent administrative fee. 
(Code 1996, § 55.05) 
Sec. 32-186. - Collection of costs. 
    The clerk shall send a statement of the total expense incurred by certified mail to the property owner who has failed to abide by the notice to abate, and if the amount shown by the statement has not been paid within one month, the clerk shall certify the costs to the county treasurer and such costs shall then be collected with, and in the same manner, as general property taxes. 
(Code 1996, § 56.07) 
State Law reference- Collection of expenses of nuisance abatement, Code of Iowa § 657.7. 
Sec. 32-187. - Installment payment of cost of abatement. 
    If the amount expended to abate the nuisance or condition exceeds $100.00, the city may permit the assessment to be paid in up to ten annual installments, to be paid in the same manner and with the same interest rates provided for assessments against benefited property under state law. 
(Code 1996, § 56.08) 
Sec. 32-188. - Failure to abate. 
    Any person causing or maintaining a nuisance who shall fail or refuse to abate or remove the same within the reasonable time required and specified in the notice to abate is in violation of this Code. 
(Code 1996, § 56.09) 
Chapter 34 - OFFENSES 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 34-1-34-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC PEACE AND ORDER 

Sec. 34-19. - Assault. 
(a)  Acts. No person shall, without justification, commit any of the following: 
(1)  Pain or injury. Any act which is intended to cause pain or injury to, or which is intended to result in physical contact which will be insulting or offensive to another, coupled with the apparent ability to execute the act. 
(2)  Threat of pain or injury. Any act which is intended to place another in fear of immediate physical contact which will be painful, injurious, insulting, or offensive, coupled with the apparent ability to execute the act. 
(3)  Dangerous weapon. Intentionally point any firearm toward another or display in a threatening manner any dangerous weapon toward another. 
(b)  Exceptions. Where the person doing any of the above enumerated acts, and such other person, are voluntary participants in a sport, social or other activity, not in itself criminal, and such act is a reasonably foreseeable incident of such sport or activity and does not create an unreasonable risk or serious injury or breach of the peace, the act shall not be an assault. 
(Code 1996, § 45.01) 
State Law reference- Similar provision, Code of Iowa § 708.1. 
Sec. 34-20. - Willful injury. 
    No person shall do any act that is not justified and is intended to cause and does cause serious injury to another. 
(Code 1996, § 45.02) 
State Law reference- Similar provision, Code of Iowa § 708.4. 
Sec. 34-21. - Harassment. 
(a)  Prohibited. No person shall commit harassment. 
(b)  Acts. A person commits harassment when, with intent to intimidate, annoy or alarm another person, the person does any of the following: 
(1)  Communications. Communicate with another by telephone, telegraph, writing or via electronic communication without legitimate purpose and in a manner likely to cause the other person annoyance or harm. 
(2)  Simulated explosive. Place any simulated explosive or simulated incendiary device in or near any building, vehicle, airplane, railroad engine or railroad car, or boat occupied by the other person. 
(3)  Merchandise or services. Order merchandise or services in the name of another, or to be delivered to another, without such other person's knowledge or consent. 
(4)  False reports. Report or cause to be reported false information to a law enforcement authority implicating another in some criminal activity, knowing that the information is false, or report the alleged occurrence of a criminal act, knowing the same did not occur. 
(c)  Personal contact. A person commits harassment when the person, purposefully and without legitimate purpose, has personal contact with another person with the intent to threaten, intimidate or alarm that other person. As used in this section, unless the context otherwise requires, the term "personal contact" means an encounter in which two or more people are in visual or physical proximity to each other. The term "personal contact" does not require a physical touching or oral communication, although it may include these types of contacts. 
(Code 1996, § 45.03) 
State Law reference- Similar provision, Code of Iowa § 708.7. 
Sec. 34-22. - Willful disturbance. 
    No person shall willfully disturb any deliberative body or agency of the state, or subdivision thereof, with the purpose of disrupting the functioning of such body or agency by tumultuous behavior or coercing by force or the threat of force any official conduct or proceeding. 
(Code 1996, § 45.04) 
State Law reference- Similar provision, Code of Iowa § 718.3. 
Sec. 34-23. - Disorderly conduct. 
(a)  Acts. No person shall do any of the following: 
(1)  Fighting. Engage in fighting or violent behavior in any public place or in or near any lawful assembly of persons, provided that participants in athletic contests may engage in such conduct which is reasonably related to that sport. 
(2)  Noise. Make loud and raucous noise in the vicinity of any residence or public building which causes unreasonable distress to the occupants thereof. 
(3)  Abusive language. Direct abusive epithets or make any threatening gesture which the person knows or reasonably should know is likely to provoke a violent reaction by another. 
(4)  Disrupt lawful assembly. Without lawful authority or color of authority, disturb any lawful assembly or meeting of persons by conduct intended to disrupt the meeting or assembly. 
(5)  False report of catastrophe. By words or action, initiate or circulate a report or warning of fire, epidemic, or other catastrophe, knowing such report to be false or such warning to be baseless. 
(6)  Disrespect of flag. Knowingly and publicly use the flag of the United States in such a manner as to show disrespect for the flag as a symbol of the United States, with the intent or reasonable expectation that such use will provoke or encourage another to commit a public offense. 
(7)  Obstruct use of street. Without authority or justification, obstruct any street, sidewalk, highway, or other public way, with the intent to prevent or hinder its lawful use by others. 
(8)  Sound system noise. Operate a motor vehicle in a public place or any public street, highway or alley in which a stereo (stereo, tape player, compact disc player, radio or any other sound amplification device) can be heard a distance of 100 feet or more from the vehicle. 
(b)  Personal observation by officer or written complaint by person. The provisions of subsection (a)(8) of this section may be enforced following personal observation or hearing by any police officer or upon receipt of a written complaint made or filed with the police department by the person disturbed by such noise. The police chief or the council may grant a temporary variance to this subsection to facilitate special events, subject to such terms and conditions as may be established. Any violation of any of the terms and conditions of the variance shall be considered a violation of this subsection. Violations of subsection (a)(8) of this section shall be deemed simple misdemeanors. 
(Code 1996, § 45.05) 
State Law reference- Similar provision, Code of Iowa § 723.4. 
Sec. 34-24. - Riot. 
    It is unlawful for three or more persons to assemble together in a violent manner, to the disturbance of others, and with any use of unlawful force or violence by them or any of them against another person or causing property damage. No person shall willingly join in or remain part of a riot, knowing or having reasonable grounds to believe that it is such. 
(Code 1996, § 45.06) 
State Law reference- Similar provision, Code of Iowa § 723.1. 
Sec. 34-25. - Unlawful assembly. 
    It is unlawful for three or more persons to assemble together, with them or any of them acting in a violent manner, and with intent that they or any of them will commit a public offense. No person shall willingly join in or remain part of an unlawful assembly, knowing or having reasonable grounds to believe it is such. 
(Code 1996, § 45.07) 
State Law reference- Similar provision, Code of Iowa § 723.2. 
Sec. 34-26. - Failure to disperse. 
    A peace officer may order the participants in a riot or unlawful assembly or persons in the immediate vicinity of a riot or unlawful assembly to disperse. No person within hearing distance of such command shall refuse to obey. 
(Code 1996, § 45.08) 
State Law reference- Similar provision, Code of Iowa § 723.3. 
Sec. 34-27. - Terrorism. 
    No person shall shoot, throw, launch or discharge a dangerous weapon at or into any building, vehicle, airplane, railroad engine or railroad car, or boat occupied by another person, and thereby place the occupants thereof in reasonable apprehension of serious injury. 
(Code 1996, § 45.09) 
State Law reference- Similar provision, Code of Iowa § 708.6 
Secs. 34-28-34-57. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC MORALS 

Sec. 34-58. - Prostitution. 
    No person shall sell or offer for sale his services as a partner in a sex act, or purchase or offer to purchase such services. 
(Code 1996, § 46.01) 
State Law reference- Similar provision, Code of Iowa § 725.1. 
Sec. 34-59. - Leasing premises for prostitution. 
    No person shall rent or let any building, structure or part thereof, boat, trailer or other place offering shelter or seclusion, when such person knows, or has reason to know, that the lessee or tenant is using such for the purposes of prostitution, and who does not, immediately upon acquiring such knowledge, terminate the tenancy or effectively put an end to such practice of prostitution in such place. 
(Code 1996, § 46.04) 
State Law reference- Similar provision, Code of Iowa § 725.4. 
Sec. 34-60. - Pimping. 
    No person shall solicit a patron for a prostitute, or knowingly take or share in the earnings of a prostitute, or knowingly furnish a room or other place to be used for the purpose of prostitution, whether for compensation or not. 
(Code 1996, § 46.02) 
State Law reference- Similar provision, Code of Iowa § 725.2. 
Sec. 34-61. - Pandering. 
    No person shall persuade or arrange for another to become an inmate of a brothel, or to become a prostitute, such person not having previously engaged in prostitution, or to return to the practice of prostitution after having abandoned it or keep or maintain a brothel or knowingly take a share in the income from a brothel. 
(Code 1996, § 46.03) 
State Law reference- Similar provision, Code of Iowa § 725.3. 
Sec. 34-62. - Indecent exposure. 
    No person shall expose his genitals or pubes to another not his spouse, or commit a sex act in the presence of or view of a third person, if: 
(1)  Sexual desire. The person does so to arouse or satisfy the sexual desires of either party; and 
(2)  Offensive. The person knows or reasonably should know that his act is offensive to the viewer. 
(Code 1996, § 46.05) 
State Law reference- Similar provision, Code of Iowa § 709.9. 
Secs. 34-63-34-82. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - OFFENSES RELATING TO MINORS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Parental responsibility for actions of children, Code of Iowa § 613.16; minor's liability for own acts, Code of Iowa § 624.38; contributing to delinquency, Code of Iowa § 709A.1. 

Sec. 34-83. - Curfew. 
    A curfew applicable to minors is established and shall be enforced as follows: 
(1)  Definition. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Minor means any person below the age of 16 years. 
(2)  Time limits. It is unlawful for any minor to be or remain upon any of the alleys, streets or public places or to be in places of business and amusement in the city between the hours of: 
a.  10:30 p.m. on Sunday, Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday and Thursday evenings to 5:00 a.m. of the following morning; and 
b.  11:30 p.m. on Friday and Saturday evenings to 5:00 a.m. of the following morning. 
(3)  Exceptions. The restriction provided by subsection (2) of this section shall not apply to any minor who is accompanied by a guardian, parent or other person charged with the care and custody of such minor, or other responsible person over 18 years of age, or shall the restriction apply to any minor who is traveling between his home or place of residence and the place where any approved employment, church, municipal or school function is being held. 
(4)  Responsibility of adults. It is unlawful for any parent, guardian or other person charged with the care and custody of any minor to allow or permit such minor to be in or upon any of the streets, alleys, places of business, or amusement or other public places within the curfew hours set by subsection (2) of this section, except as otherwise provided in subsection (3) of this section. 
(5)  Responsibility of business establishments. It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation operating a place of business or amusement to allow or permit any minor to be in or upon any place of business or amusement operated by them within the curfew hours set by subsection (2) of this section except as otherwise provided in subsection (3) of this section. 
(6)  Enforcement. Any peace officer of the city while on duty is empowered to arrest any minor who violates any of the provisions of subsections (2) and (3) of this section. Upon arrest, the minor shall be returned to the custody of the parent, guardian or other person charged with the care and custody of the minor. 
(Code 1996, § 47.01) 
Sec. 34-84. - Minors in billiard rooms. 
    It is unlawful for any person who keeps a billiard hall where beer, liquor or wine is sold, or the agent, clerk or employee of any such person, or any person having charge or control of any such hall, to permit any minor to remain in such hall or to take part in any of the games known as billiards or pool. 
(Code 1996, § 47.02) 
Sec. 34-85. - Cigarettes and tobacco. 
    It is unlawful for any person under 18 years of age to smoke, use, possess, purchase or attempt to purchase any tobacco, tobacco products or cigarettes. Possession of cigarettes or tobacco products by a person under 18 years of age shall not constitute a violation of this section if the person possesses the cigarettes or tobacco products as part of the person's employment and the person is employed by a person who holds a valid permit under the Code of Iowa ch. 453A and lawfully offers for sale or sells cigarettes or tobacco products. 
(Code 1996, § 47.03) 
State Law reference- Minors and cigarettes, alternative nicotine products and vapor products, Code of Iowa § 453A.2. 
Secs. 34-86-34-113. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC HEALTH AND SAFETY 

Sec. 34-114. - Distributing dangerous substances. 
    No person shall distribute samples of any drugs or medicine, or any corrosive, caustic, poisonous or other injurious substance unless the person delivers such into the hands of a competent person, or otherwise takes reasonable precautions that the substance will not be taken by children or animals from the place where the substance is deposited. 
(Code 1996, § 48.01) 
State Law reference- Similar provision, Code of Iowa § 727.1. 
Sec. 34-115. - False reports to law enforcement authorities. 
    No person shall report or cause to be reported false information to a fire department or a law enforcement authority, knowing that the information is false, or shall report the alleged occurrence of a criminal act knowing the same did not occur. 
(Code 1996, § 48.03) 
State Law reference- Similar provision, Code of Iowa § 718.6. 
Sec. 34-116. - False reports of destructive substance. 
    No person shall, knowing the information to be false, convey or cause to be conveyed to any person any false information concerning the placement of any incendiary or explosive device or material or other destructive substance or device in any place where persons or property would be endangered. 
(Code 1996, § 48.04) 
State Law reference- Similar provision, Code of Iowa § 712.7. 
Sec. 34-117. - Impersonating a public official. 
    No person shall falsely hold himself out or assume to act as an elected or appointed officer, magistrate, peace officer, or person authorized to act on behalf of the state or any subdivision thereof, having no authority to do so. 
(Code 1996, § 48.05) 
State Law reference- Similar provision, Code of Iowa § 718.2. 
Sec. 34-118. - Interference with official acts. 
    No person shall knowingly resist or obstruct anyone known by the person to be a peace officer or firefighter, whether paid or volunteer, in the performance of any act which is within the scope of the lawful duty or authority of that officer or firefighter or shall knowingly resist or obstruct the service or execution by any authorized person of any civil or criminal process or order of any court. 
(Code 1996, § 48.06) 
State Law reference- Similar provision, Code of Iowa § 719.1. 
Sec. 34-119. - Refusing to assist officer. 
    Any person who is requested or ordered by any magistrate or peace officer to render the magistrate or officer assistance in making or attempting to make an arrest, or to prevent the commission of any criminal act, shall render assistance as required. No person shall unreasonably and without lawful cause, refuse or neglect to render assistance when so requested. 
(Code 1996, § 48.07) 
State Law reference- Similar provision, Code of Iowa § 719.2. 
Sec. 34-120. - Abandoned or unattended refrigerators and similar devices. 
    No person shall abandon or otherwise leave unattended any refrigerator, ice box, or similar container, with doors that may become locked, outside of buildings and accessible to children, or shall any person allow any such refrigerator, ice box, or similar container, to remain outside of buildings on-premises in the person's possession or control, abandoned or unattended and so accessible to children. 
(Code 1996, § 48.09) 
State Law reference- Similar provision, Code of Iowa § 727.3. 
Sec. 34-121. - Use of fire or explosives. 
(a)  Reckless use of fire or explosives. No person shall so use fire or any incendiary or explosive device or material as to endanger recklessly the property or safety of another. 
(b)  Storage and use of explosives. No person shall purchase, possess, transport, store, or detonate explosive materials without first obtaining a use permit from the county sheriff except when the explosives are possessed for the sole purpose of transporting them through the city. 
(Code 1996, §§ 48.10, 48.19) 
State Law reference- Similar provision, Code of Iowa § 712.5. 
Sec. 34-122. - Bomb threats. 
    No person shall threaten to place or attempt to place any incendiary or explosive device or material, or any destructive substance or device in any place where it will endanger persons or property. 
(Code 1996, § 48.11) 
State Law reference- Similar provision, Code of Iowa § 712.8. 
Sec. 34-123. - Discharging weapons. 
    It is unlawful for a person to discharge rifles, shotguns, revolvers, pistols, guns or firearms of any kind within the city limits except by authorization of the police chief. 
(Code 1996, § 48.15) 
Sec. 34-124. - BB guns, air rifles or similar devices. 
    No person shall possess, carry, or in any manner use any BB gun, air rifle, air pistol, sling shot, bean shooter, or any other similar device, within the city without first having obtained the written permission of the police chief. No permit shall be issued by the police chief except for good cause shown. 
(Code 1996, § 48.16) 
Sec. 34-125. - Carrying weapons. 
    No person shall go armed with a dangerous weapon concealed on or about his person, or shall, within the limits of the city, go armed with a pistol or revolver, or any loaded firearm of any kind, whether concealed or not, or shall knowingly carry or transport in a vehicle a pistol or revolver, provided that this section shall not apply to any of the following: 
(1)  Own premises. A person who goes armed with a dangerous weapon in his own dwelling or place of business, or on land owned or possessed by the person. 
(2)  Peace officer. Any peace officer, when his duties require the person to carry such weapons. 
(3)  Armed forces. Any member of the armed forces of the United States or of the National Guard or person in the service of the United States, when the weapons are carried in connection with his duties as such. 
(4)  Within container. Any person who for any lawful purpose carries an unloaded pistol, revolver, or other dangerous weapon inside a closed and fastened container or securely wrapped package which is too large to be concealed on the person. 
(5)  Within vehicle. Any person who for any lawful purpose carries or transports an unloaded pistol or revolver in any vehicle inside a closed and fastened container or securely wrapped package which is too large to be concealed on the person or inside cargo or luggage compartment where the pistol or revolver will not be readily accessible to any person riding in the vehicle or common carrier. 
(6)  Target practice. Any person while he is lawfully engaged in target practice on a range designed for that purpose or while engaged in lawful hunting for game in any place designated by local law as a hunting area. 
(7)  Valid permit. Any person who has in his possession and who displays to any peace officer on demand a valid permit to carry weapons which has been issued to the person, and whose conduct is within the limits of that permit. No person shall be convicted of a violation of this section if the person produces at his trial a permit to carry weapons which was valid at the time of the alleged offense and which would have brought the person's conduct within this exception if the permit had been produced at the time of the alleged offense. 
(8)  Correctional officer. Any correctional officer, when such officer's duties require, serving under the authority of the state department of corrections. 
(Code 1996, § 48.18) 
State Law reference- Similar provision, Code of Iowa § 724.4. 
Sec. 34-126. - Throwing and shooting. 
    It is unlawful for a person to throw stones or missiles of any kind or to shoot arrows, rubber guns, slingshots, air rifles or other dangerous instruments or toys on or into any street, highway, alley, sidewalk or public place, except when under proper supervision of persons authorized by the council. 
(Code 1996, § 48.17) 
Sec. 34-127. - Urinating in public. 
    It is unlawful for any person to urinate or defecate onto any sidewalk, street, alley, or other public way, or onto any public or private building, including, but not limited to, the wall, floor, hallway, steps, stairway, doorway or window thereof, or onto any public or private land. 
(Code 1996, § 48.20) 
State Law reference- Indecent exposure, Code of Iowa § 709.9. 
Secs. 34-128-34-152. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC PROPERTY 

Sec. 34-153. - Criminal mischief. 
    Any damage, defacing, alteration, or destruction of tangible property is criminal mischief when done intentionally by one who has no right to so act and is unlawful. 
(Code 1996, § 49.10) 
State Law reference- Criminal mischief, Code of Iowa § 716.1. 
Sec. 34-154. - Damaging or removing public vegetation. 
    It is unlawful for a person to cut, break or deface any tree or shrub on public property or on any public way by willfully defacing, cutting, breaking or injuring. 
(Code 1996, § 49.01) 
Sec. 34-155. - Injuring new pavement. 
    It is unlawful for a person to injure new pavement in any street, alley or sidewalk by willfully driving, walking or making marks on such pavement before it is ready for use. 
(Code 1996, § 49.02) 
Sec. 34-156. - Destroying park equipment. 
    It is unlawful for a person to destroy or injure any property or equipment in public swimming pools, playgrounds or parks by willfully defacing, breaking, damaging, mutilating or cutting. 
(Code 1996, § 49.03) 
Sec. 34-157. - Defacing proclamations or notices. 
    It is unlawful for a person intentionally to deface, obliterate, tear down, or destroy in whole or in part, any transcript or extract from or of any law of the United States or the state, or any proclamation, advertisement or notification, set up at any place within the city by authority of the law or by order of any court, during the time for which the same is to remain set up. 
(Code 1996, § 49.04) 
Sec. 34-158. - Damage to public property. 
    It is unlawful for a person maliciously to injure, remove, or destroy any bridge; or place, or cause to be placed, any obstruction on any such bridge; or willfully obstruct or injure any public road or highway; or maliciously cut, burn or in any way break down, injure, or destroy any post or pole used in connection with any system of electric lighting or telephone system; or break down and destroy or injure and deface any electric light, or telephone instrument; or in any way cut, break, or injure the wires of any apparatus belonging thereto; or to willfully tap, cut, injure, break, disconnect, connect, make connection with, or destroy any of the wires, mains, pipes, conduits, meters, or other apparatus belonging to, or attached to, the power plant or distributing or collecting systems of any electric light plant, electric motor, gas plant, sewer plant, or water plant; or to aid or abet any other person in so doing. 
(Code 1996, § 49.06) 
Sec. 34-159. - Graffiti on or other defacement of public property. 
    It is unlawful willfully to write, make marks, or draw characters on the walls or any other part of any church, college, academy, schoolhouse, court house, or other public building, or on any furniture, apparatus, or fixture therein; or willfully to injure or deface the same, or any wall or fence enclosing the same. 
(Code 1996, § 49.07) 
Sec. 34-160. - Obstructing drainage. 
    It is unlawful to divert, obstruct, impede, or fill up, without legal authority, any ditch, drain, or watercourse, or to break down any levee lawfully established, constructed or maintained. 
(Code 1996, § 49.08) 
State Law reference- Criminal mischief, Code of Iowa § 716.1. 
Sec. 34-161. - Unauthorized entry. 
    No person shall enter any public building or public enclosure unless authorized to do so. Any entry into public buildings and enclosures shall be considered to be unauthorized when the buildings or enclosures are closed and secured against entry and not open to the public. When open to the public, a failure to pay a required admission fee, if any, shall also constitute an unauthorized entry. 
(Code 1996, § 49.11) 
Secs. 34-162-34-190. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - OFFENSES AGAINST PRIVATE PROPERTY 

Sec. 34-191. - Trespassing prohibited. 
(a)  Unlawful acts. It is unlawful for a person to commit one or more of the following acts: 
(1)  Enter property without permission. Enter upon or in property without the express permission of the owner, lessee, or person in lawful possession with the intent to commit a public offense or to use, remove therefrom, alter, damage, harass, or place thereon or therein anything animate or inanimate. 
(2)  Vacate property when requested. Enter or remain upon or in property without justification after being notified or requested to abstain from entering or to remove or vacate therefrom by the owner, lessee, or person in lawful possession, or by any peace officer, magistrate, or public employee whose duty it is to supervise the use or maintenance of the property. 
(3)  Interfere with lawful use of property. Enter upon or in private property for the purpose or with the effect of unduly interfering with the lawful use of the property by others. 
(4)  Use of property without permission. Be upon or in property and wrongfully use, remove therefrom, alter, damage, harass, or place thereon or therein anything animate or inanimate, without the implied or actual permission of the owner, lessee, or person in lawful possession. 
(b)  Retrieving property. None of the above shall be construed to prohibit entering upon the property of another for the sole purpose of retrieving personal property which has accidentally or inadvertently been thrown, fallen, strayed, or blown onto the property of another, provided that the person retrieving the property takes the most direct and accessible route to and from the property to be retrieved, quits the property as quickly as is possible, and does not unduly interfere with the lawful use of the property. 
(Code 1996, § 50.01) 
State Law reference- Trespass defined, Code of Iowa § 716.7. 
Sec. 34-192. - Electronic and mechanical eavesdropping. 
    No person, having no right or authority to do so, shall tap into or connect a listening or recording device to any telephone or other communication wire, or shall by any electronic or mechanical means listen to, record, or otherwise intercept a conversation or communication of any kind, provided that the sender or recipient of a message or one who is openly present and participating in or listening to a communication shall not be prohibited from recording such message or communication, and further provided that nothing herein shall restrict the use of any radio or television receiver to receive any communication transmitted by radio or wireless signal. 
(Code 1996, § 50.02) 
State Law reference- Similar provision, Code of Iowa § 727.8. 
Sec. 34-193. - Property damage. 
    It is unlawful to cut, hack, break, deface or otherwise injure any ornamental or shade tree, fence, private building, railing or other property. 
(Code 1996, § 50.03) 
Sec. 34-194. - Theft. 
    No person shall take possession or control of the property of another, or property in the possession of another, with the intent to deprive the other thereof. 
(Code 1996, § 50.04) 
State Law reference- Similar provision, Code of Iowa § 714.1. 
Sec. 34-195. - Theft of utility services. 
    No person shall obtain gas, electricity or water from a public utility or obtain cable television or telephone service from an unauthorized connection to the supply or service line or by intentionally altering, adjusting, removing or tampering with the metering or service device so as to cause inaccurate readings. 
(Code 1996, § 50.05) 
State Law reference- Similar provision, Code of Iowa § 714.1. 
Secs. 34-196-34-213. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES AND DRUG PARAPHERNALIA 

Sec. 34-214. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this article is to assist law enforcement officials in their effort to combat the illegal use of controlled substances as defined in the Code of Iowa ch. 124. 
(Code 1996, § 52.01) 
Sec. 34-215. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Controlled substance shall have the meaning provided in the Code of Iowa § 124.101. 
    Drug paraphernalia shall have the meaning provided in the Code of Iowa § 124.414. 
(Code 1996, § 52.02) 
Sec. 34-216. - Factors used to determine drug paraphernalia. 
    In determining whether an object is drug paraphernalia for the purpose of enforcing this article, the following factors should be considered in addition to all other logically relevant factors: 
(1)  Statements by an owner or by anyone in control of the object concerning the object's use. 
(2)  Prior convictions, if any, of an owner or anyone in control of the object under any state or federal law relating to any controlled substance. 
(3)  The proximity of the object in time and space to a direct violation of the Code of Iowa ch. 124. 
(4)  The proximity of the object to controlled substances. 
(5)  The existence of any residue of controlled substances on the object. 
(6)  Direct or circumstantial evidence of the intent of any owner or of anyone in control of the object, to deliver to persons whom he knows, or should reasonably know, intend to use the object to facilitate a violation of the Code of Iowa ch. 124. 
(7)  The innocence of an owner or of anyone in control of the object, as to a direct violation of the Code of Iowa ch. 124, shall not prevent a finding that the object is intended for use, or designed for use as drug paraphernalia. 
(8)  Instructions, oral or written, provided with the object concerning its use. 
(9)  Descriptive materials accompanying the object which explain or depict its use. 
(10)  The manner in which the object is displayed for sale. 
(11)  Whether the owner or anyone in control of the object is a legitimate supplier of like or related items to the community, such as a licensed distributor or dealer of tobacco products. 
(12)  Direct or circumstantial evidence of the ratio of sales of the objects to the total sales of the business enterprise. 
(13)  The existence and scope of legitimate uses for the object in the community. 
(14)  Expert testimony concerning its use. 
(Code 1996, § 52.03) 
Sec. 34-217. - Unlawful possession of a controlled substance. 
    It is unlawful for any person knowingly or intentionally to possess a controlled substance, unless such substance was obtained directly from, or pursuant to, a valid prescription or order of a practitioner while acting in the course of the practitioner's professional practice or except as otherwise authorized by the Code of Iowa ch. 124. Any person who violates this section is guilty of a simple misdemeanor. 
(Code 1996, § 52.04) 
Sec. 34-218. - Unlawful possession of drug paraphernalia. 
    It is unlawful for any person to use, or to possess with intent to use, drug paraphernalia to plant, propagate, cultivate, grow, harvest, manufacture, compound, convert, produce, process, prepare, test, analyze, pack, repack, store, contain, conceal, inject, ingest, inhale, or otherwise introduce into the human body a controlled substance in violation of the Code of Iowa ch. 124. Any person who violates this section is guilty of a simple misdemeanor. 
(Code 1996, § 52.05) 
Sec. 34-219. - Unlawful manufacture or delivery of drug paraphernalia. 
    It is unlawful for any person to deliver, possess with intent to deliver, or manufacture with intent to deliver, drug paraphernalia, intending that the drug paraphernalia will be used, or knowing, or under circumstances where one reasonably should know that it will be used, or knowing that it is designed for use to plant, propagate, cultivate, grow, harvest, manufacture, compound, convert, produce, process, prepare, test, analyze, pack, repack, store, contain, conceal, inject, ingest, inhale, or otherwise introduce into the human body a controlled substance in violation of the Code of Iowa ch. 124. Any person who violates this section is guilty of a simple misdemeanor. 
(Code 1996, § 52.06) 
Chapter 36 - PARKS, RECREATION AND COMMUNITY FACILITIES 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 36-1. - Public library. 
    The public library for the city is known as the Kendall Young Library, established in accordance with the last will and testament of Mr. Kendall Young. As provided in the will, management of the library is by a board of trustees consisting of five members elected for terms of five years. The board of trustees shall manage and care for the library in accordance with the provisions of Mr. Young's will. 
(Code 1996, §§ 115.01-115.03) 
Sec. 36-2. - City community building. 
    The community building for the city is known as Fuller Hall, established in accordance with the last will and testament of Mr. Fred Fuller. As provided in the will, management of the Fuller Trust is by a board of trustees consisting of five members elected for terms of five years. The board of trustees shall manage and control the Fuller Trust in accordance with the provisions of Mr. Fuller's will. 
(Code 1996, §§ 116.01-116.03) 
Secs. 36-3-36-22. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PARK REGULATIONS 

Sec. 36-23. - Parking. 
    The following regulations shall apply in all city parks unless otherwise provided in this article: 
(1)  Parking. No person shall park a vehicle in any portion of a park other than in designated parking areas. 
(2)  Use of drives required. No person shall drive any car, cycle or other vehicle, or ride or drive any horse, in any portion of a park except upon the established drives or roadways therein or such other places as may be officially designated by the city. 
(3)  Fires. No fires shall be built, except in a place provided therefor, and such fire shall be extinguished before leaving the area unless it is to be immediately used by some other party. 
(4)  Littering. No person shall place, deposit, or throw any waste, refuse, litter or foreign substance in any area or receptacle except those provided for that purpose. 
(5)  Camping. No person shall camp in any portion of a park except in prescribed or designated portions. Any person who camps in any park shall register his name and address with the park officer. The city may refuse camping privileges or rescind any and all camping permits for cause. 
(6)  Facility rental. Rules, regulations and procedures for the rental of park facilities shall be approved by resolution of the council and any violation of such rules, regulations or procedures shall be deemed a violation of this article. 
(7)  Swimming pool. Rules, regulations and fees for the use of swimming facilities shall be approved by resolution of the council and any violation of such rules and regulations shall be deemed a violation of this article. 
(8)  Other rules and regulations. The council may, by resolution, adopt additional rules and regulations governing the use of parks or park facilities. All rules adopted by council resolution shall be posted on the facility or otherwise publicized in a manner to provide adequate notice to the public and any violations of such rules and regulations shall be deemed a violations of this article. 
(Code 1996, § 117.12) 
Sec. 36-24. - Use of recreational trails. 
(a)  Recreational trails shall be used and classified as trails for foot traffic, bicycling, cross-country skiing, rollerblading and other special usage as may be designated by permit from the director of public grounds or designee. 
(b)  The use of motorized vehicles including ATVs, as defined in section 46-275, and snowmobiles is prohibited on recreational trails within the city except authorized emergency and maintenance vehicles. 
(c)  When the recreational trail utilizes an existing road for its traffic, the normal use of such road, street or highway will not be restricted by the existence of the trail. 
(d)  Motorized wheelchairs and other similar devices used by individuals physically challenged are permitted to be operated on recreational trails. 
(e)  No person shall permit or allow a horse under control to be on any recreational trail within the city. No person shall permit a dog on the recreational trail unless the dog is under control and on a leash of six feet or less in length. Any person having control of the dog shall be responsible for pickup and disposal of any feces from the dog. For purposes of this section, the term "horse" means as any equine animal including horses, mules, burros, donkeys and llamas and alpaca-like animals. The term "dog" means all members of the canine species, male or female, whether altered or not. 
(f)  Special permits may be issued by the director of public grounds or designee for special events on specific dates utilizing golf carts or similar motorized transportation upon a recreational trail. 
(Code 1996, § 117.13) 
Secs. 36-25-36-51. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - ADMINISTRATION 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 36-52-36-75. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PARK AND RECREATION ADVISORY COMMISSION 

Sec. 36-76. - Established. 
    There is created and established a park and recreation advisory commission consisting of five members, being one Fuller Hall board of trustees representative and four other persons who shall be appointed by the city council. 
(Code 1996, § 118.01) 
Sec. 36-77. - Term of office. 
    The term of office of the Fuller Hall board of trustees member of the commission shall coincide with the member's elected term. All others shall be appointed for four years with all terms to commence on June 1. All commission members currently appointed by city council shall serve out their current terms in accordance with their original appointment. Any vacancy occurring in the interim shall be filled by appointment in a like manner for the balance of the unexpired term of the member for whom such vacancy exists without pay. 
(Code 1996, § 118.02) 
Sec. 36-78. - Reappointments. 
    Any member so appointed to a term on a commission may be reappointed in the same manner as originally appointed. 
(Code 1996, § 118.03) 
Sec. 36-79. - Election of officers. 
    The commission shall elect from its own membership a chairperson, a vice-chairperson and a secretary, each to serve for one year, and may provide for such other subcommittees as may be deemed necessary to fully exercise its functions, subject to final control of the entire membership of the commission. 
(Code 1996, § 118.04) 
Sec. 36-80. - Regular meetings. 
    The commission shall hold regular monthly meetings at a time and place fixed by its rules and may hold special meetings upon call of the chairperson or by three members joining in such call upon at least one day's written notice to members prior thereto and upon notification of the news media as required by law. Three members shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of any matter of business corning before it and the decision on a matter recommending the expenditures of funds must be approved by at least a quorum of the entire membership. 
(Code 1996, § 118.05) 
Sec. 36-81. - Duties and functions. 
    The commission shall work in harmony in an advisory position to the council to develop a master plan of activities and shall assist when necessary in the preparation of the budget and make recommendations for expenditures; shall report to the council from time to time regarding developments, shall review, and make recommendations for operations of the city's park system, recreation activities and other related functions. 
(Code 1996, § 118.06) 
Sec. 36-82. - Budget requests and tax levy. 
    The commission shall prepare timely budget requests for proposed expenditures and expense items for the ensuing year and file the same with the city manager for the purpose of review by the council to determine the necessary taxes to be certified for levy for use of the park and recreation department in performing the functions under its responsibility. The council shall finally determine the budget for the department and certify the tax levy for same as provided by law. Bookkeeping functions is under the direction and control of the clerk. 
(Code 1996, § 118.07) 
Sec. 36-83. - Property and equipment. 
    All real estate constituting the park properties and all machinery, equipment, and other property shall be held in the name of the city but shall be allocated for use in the city park and recreation system and its allied facilities. 
(Code 1996, § 118.08) 
Sec. 36-84. - Rental of facilities. 
    The park and recreation department may rent for occasional use such buildings or ground or portions thereof to private persons or organizations under such terms as it may determine, but for no longer period of time than 15 days unless the same is first approved by the council. 
(Code 1996, § 118.09) 
Sec. 36-85. - Payment of bills. 
    Bills incurred by the park and recreation department shall be filed with the city manager and charged to the budget appropriation for this department of the city administration and approved by the council in the same manner as all other city departments. 
(Code 1996, § 118.10) 
Sec. 36-86. - Rules and regulations. 
    The park and recreation commission shall recommend its rules and regulations and it shall have the assistance of such other city departments as may be available and needed in carrying out its functions under such mutual arrangements as will promote the city's interest as a whole. 
(Code 1996, § 118.11) 
Secs. 36-87-36-115. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - SENIOR CITIZENS CENTER ADMINISTRATIVE BOARD 

Sec. 36-116. - Board established. 
    There is created a senior citizens center advisory board consisting of four members, three members shall be appointed by the city council for three-year terms commencing on June 1. Initial appointments will consist of one-, two- and three-year terms. The fourth member of the board shall be the director or designee of the city parks and recreation department. 
(Code 1996, § 119.01) 
Sec. 36-117. - Officers. 
    The board shall elect the following officers: president, vice-president and secretary. 
(Code 1996, § 119.02) 
Sec. 36-118. - Jurisdiction. 
    The board shall advise the city council regarding the senior citizens center and its activities. 
(Code 1996, § 119.03) 
Sec. 36-119. - Meetings. 
    The board shall have regular meetings and such special meetings as may be called by the president, any two officers of the board, or at the request of the mayor. 
(Code 1996, § 119.04) 
Sec. 36-120. - Budget. 
    The board shall advise and assist the users of the senior citizens center in developing and implementing plans which will contribute at least 33 percent of the city's annual budget for the operation and maintenance of the center. 
(Code 1996, § 119.05) 
Secs. 36-121-36-138. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - WILSON BREWER HISTORIC PARK COMMITTEE 

Sec. 36-139. - Established. 
    There shall be an historic advisory administrative agency, known as the Wilson Brewer Historic Park Committee, consisting of five members. Four members shall reside in city and one member shall reside outside of city but in the county. All members shall be appointed by the city council. 
(Code 1996, § 119A.01) 
Sec. 36-140. - Vacancies. 
    Vacancies shall be filled by appointment of the city council to fill out new or the unexpired terms for which the appointment was made, the method of which shall be determined by the city council. All terms shall be for a period of four years ending on May 31. 
(Code 1996, § 119A.02) 
Sec. 36-141. - Duties and responsibilities. 
    Duties of this commission include, but are not limited to: 
(1)  Care and maintenance of all assets held at the Wilson Brewer Historic Complex; 
(2)  Develop policies that ensure that the mission and goals of the complex are carried out and implemented; 
(3)  Develop support groups and volunteers to assist in the care of the facilities; 
(4)  Develop fundraising initiatives to assist in the care and maintenance of the facility; 
(5)  Provide sound financial management for the facility; 
(6)  Provide for good stewardship of the facility and its assets; and 
(7)  Advise city council as appropriate on matters related to the facility. 
(Code 1996, § 119A.03) 
Sec. 36-142. - Committee subject to city and state regulations. 
    This committee is subject to all other requirements of all boards and commissions as set for by state law and city code. 
(Code 1996, § 119A.04) 
Secs. 36-143-36-167. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - YOUTH ADVISORY COMMISSION 

Sec. 36-168. - Established. 
    There is created a youth advisory commission consisting of seven members comprised of three members who shall be students who are actively enrolled in grades six through eight at the time of their appointment, three members who shall be students who are actively enrolled in grades nine through 12 at the time of their appointment, and one member who shall be a current city council member, all appointed by the city council, the method of which shall be determined by the city council. The one member made up of a current city council member shall be a nonvoting member and shall act solely as a liaison to the city council. 
(Code 1996, § 119B.01) 
Sec. 36-169. - Term of office. 
    The term of office for all members shall be for two years, with all terms to expire on June 1 of even-numbered years or when a current member moves from grade eight to grade nine or graduates from grade 12 during the course of the term. Any vacancies shall be filled by appointment of the city council to fill out new or the unexpired term for which the appointment was made, the method of which shall be determined by the city council. 
(Code 1996, § 119B.02) 
Sec. 36-170. - Reappointment. 
    Any member so appointed to a term on this commission may be reappointed in the same manner as originally appointed. 
(Code 1996, § 119B.03) 
Sec. 36-171. - Election of officers. 
    The commission shall elect from its own members a chairperson, a vice-chairperson and a secretary, each to serve for one year, and may provide for such other subcommittees as may be deemed necessary to fully exercise its functions, subject to final control of the entire membership of the commission. 
(Code 1996, § 119B.04) 
Sec. 36-172. - Regular meetings. 
    The commission shall hold regular monthly meetings at a time and place fixed by its rules and may hold special meetings upon call of the chairperson, any four members of the commission, or at the request of the mayor. 
(Code 1996, § 119B.05) 
Sec. 36-173. - Duties and responsibilities. 
    The specific duties and responsibilities of the commission shall include, but are not limited to the following: 
(1)  Evaluate and review problems facing the youth in the community. 
(2)  Collect information from youth to discuss problems, needs and suggested improvements for our community. 
(3)  Meet at least yearly with the mayor and city manager to share ideas and discuss issues, concerns, and needed improvements relating to youth in the community. 
(4)  Attend city council meetings when requested by city council and to participate in vision and goal setting planning relating to youth in the community. 
(5)  Present or recommend improvements to the city council and city manager of public projects and programs relating to the youth in the community. 
(6)  Assist when necessary in the preparation of the city's annual budget and make recommendations for expenditures to the city council. 
(7)  Assist in planning youth/recreation activities. 
(8)  Advise the city council or city manager on issues forwarded to the commission for evaluation and advice. 
(Code 1996, § 119B.06) 
Sec. 36-174. - Commission subject to city and state law. 
    This commission shall be subject to all requirements of all other commissions as set forth by state law and this Code. 
(Code 1996, § 119B.07) 
Chapter 38 - SIGNS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 38-1. - Purpose. 
    This chapter is intended to promote, preserve, and protect the health, safety, and general welfare of the public by providing regulations and standards relating to signs. 
(Code 1996, § 128.01) 
Sec. 38-2. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Advertising means the action of calling something to the attention of the public. 
    Height means the vertical distance between finished grade of the ground nearest the structure and the upper most point of the structure. 
    Illuminated means utilizing any artificial light source to make a message readable. 
    Permanent sign means any sign that is not a temporary sign. 
    Right-of-way (ROW) means the reserved portion of a lot that is used by a public utility. 
    Sign means any device, surface, or medium using graphics, symbols, designs, or written copy for the purpose of identifying any activity, establishment, product or service. 
    Temporary sign means any sign intended to be displayed for a limited period of time, not to exceed 120 days or, for real estate signs, not to exceed the time during which the property is actively offered for sale. 
(Code 1996, § 128.02) 
Sec. 38-3. - Prohibited signs. 
    The following signs are prohibited in all zoning districts, unless expressly otherwise provided in this chapter: 
(1)  Abandoned. 
a.  Any on-premises sign which advertises or identifies a business, product or service that has not been in use at that location for 90 days. 
b.  Any off-premises advertising sign which does not correctly advertise or identify a bona fide business, product, service or interest for 90 days. 
c.  Any sign that is not in a state of repair in conformance with section 38-10. 
(2)  Improperly attached. Any sign which is attached to standpipe, gutter drain, unbraced parapet wall, fire escape, rock, tree, or utility pole. 
(3)  Obscene material. Any sign which contains statements, words, or pictures calculated to shock the moral senses by disregard of modesty. 
(4)  Public nuisance. Any sign which is a public nuisance because of amplified sound, smoke emission, emitted visible vapor particles or objectionable odors, noise, vibration, lighting or constitutes a nuisance under state law or chapter 32. 
(5)  Restriction of access. Any sign erected or placed so as to prevent free egress from any door or window or any other access or exit required by building, fire, or housing codes, or by any other ordinance or law. 
(6)  Right-of-way (ROW). Any sign other than an official public traffic, street, or related sign located in any street or highway ROW, unless allowed by this chapter. 
(7)  Snipe. Any sign nailed or otherwise attached in any way to any tree, pole, building, or structure advertising any business, commodity, service, or facility sold or offered elsewhere than upon the same zoning lot where the sign is located. 
(8)  Traffic hazard. Any sign which: 
a.  By reason of its size, shape, design, location or manner of illumination constitutes a traffic hazard or a detriment to traffic safety by obscuring the vision of drivers. 
b.  By reason of its size, shape, design, location, content, coloring, or manner of illumination may be construed as, or confused with, any official traffic control device, street sign or signal, or which bears the terms "stop," "go slow," "caution," "danger," "warning," or similar terms which imply the need for special actions on the part of any vehicle operator or pedestrian. 
c.  Contains a rotating beam or flashing illumination resembling an emergency light in connection with any sign display which is visible from an adjacent street. 
(9)  Unauthorized placement. Any sign placed on private or public property without the consent of the owner or the owner's authorized agent unless posted by law. 
(10)  Violation of other laws. Any sign which violates or advertises products or activities which violate city, state, or federal law. 
(Code 1996, § 128.04) 
Sec. 38-4. - Corner visual clearance required. 
    In all zoning districts except C-2, an unobscured visual site area which is bounded by the street curb lines of the intersecting streets and a line connecting two points on the street curb lines 45 feet from their point of intersection shall be maintained. Such unobscured area, at a minimum, shall extend from a distance of two feet above finished street curb grade to ten feet above finished street curb grade. No sign faces, message boards, or other sign structure except for two poles or post supports of no more than ten inches in diameter shall be permitted within such unobscured area. 
(Code 1996, § 128.05(1)) 
Sec. 38-5. - Home occupation signs and displays subject to zoning regulations. 
    Home occupations signage and advertising displays pertaining to home occupations shall comply with all provisions of city zoning regulations. 
(Code 1996, § 128.05(4)) 
Sec. 38-6. - Illuminated signs display time restricted. 
    Illuminated signs may not be turned on sooner than 6:00 a.m. and must be turned off by 12:00 midnight in all residentially zoned districts. 
(Code 1996, § 128.05(6)) 
Sec. 38-7. - Clearance from electrical lines must meet electrical code. 
    The minimum clearance must meet regulations set forth in the electrical code adopted by the city . 
(Code 1996, § 128.05(2)) 
Sec. 38-8. - Temporary signs time period. 
    Temporary signs are allowed to be displayed for no longer than 120 days. 
(Code 1996, § 128.05(4)) 
Sec. 38-9. - Real estate signs posting period. 
    Real estate signs are considered temporary signs but may remain posted as long as the property is actively for sale. 
(Code 1996, § 128.05(7)) 
Sec. 38-10. - Sign maintenance standards. 
    All signs and their structures, both permanent and temporary, shall be maintained by the sign owner or the owner of record of the real property upon which the sign is located. Signs shall be maintained so as to be structurally sound, in good repair, safe condition, and shall be kept in a state of undeteriorated appearance by means of painting, sealing or coating and repair or replacement of damaged parts, panels or lights. Maintenance carried out in accordance with this section shall not require a sign permit provided the sign is not enlarged, moved or altered in any manner which would create or increase a nonconforming condition. Any sign violating these requirements shall be repaired or removed as required. 
(1)  No sign shall be allowed to have more than 20 percent of its total surface area covered with disfigured, cracked, faded, rotted, ripped or peeling paint or poster paper, or any combination of these conditions for more than 30 consecutive days. 
(2)  No sign shall be allowed to stand with bent or broken sign facing, broken supports, loose appendages or struts which cause the sign to stand more than 15 degrees from the perpendicular for more than 30 consecutive days. 
(3)  No sign or sign structure shall be allowed to have weeds, vines or other vegetation obscuring more than 20 percent of the sign from the street or highway from which it is intended to be viewed for more than 30 consecutive days. 
(4)  No illuminated sign shall be allowed to stand with only partial illumination for more than 30 consecutive days. 
(Code 1996, § 128.08) 
Sec. 38-11. - Nonconforming uses. 
(a)  Authority for continuance of nonconforming signs. Any legally established nonconforming sign, except as provided in subsection (c) of this section, shall be allowed to continue but shall not be altered or reconstructed unless the action is in compliance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  Ordinary repairs and maintenance. Ordinary repairs and maintenance of nonconforming signs may be carried out provided that no alterations are made which would add to the size, area, or degree of nonconformity of the size. For the purpose of this section, the term "ordinary repairs and maintenance" includes cleaning; painting; replacement of sign faces, bulbs, letters, figures, characters, posters, or other embellishments which do not increase the size of the sign; or landscaping around the sign. 
(c)  Termination of nonconforming status. In the following circumstances, a legal nonconforming sign shall immediately lose its legal nonconforming status, if: 
(1)  The sign is altered to comply with the provisions of this chapter; or 
(2)  The sign is determined to be abandoned as provided by section 38-3(1), in which case the sign must be removed in accordance with section 38-127(c); or 
(3)  The sign is destroyed or damaged to the extent of more than 50 percent of its replacement cost, in which case the sign must be removed in accordance with section 38-127(c), unless otherwise authorized by the zoning board of adjustment. 
(Code 1996, § 128.09) 
Sec. 38-12. - Calculation of sign area. 
    The area of a sign shall be determined as follows: 
(1)  The area included within a border or module shall be summed and then totaled to determine total area. The area shall include the extreme points or edges of the sign, within the border which form an integral part of the display, but shall not include the supporting structure, framing, pole covers, decorative roofing and similar embellishments, provided there is not written advertising copy on such embellishments. 
(2)  The area of a sign composed of individual letters, symbols or characters, attached to a building or a wall, shall be determined by the total area within the perimeter of all the letters, symbols or characters. 
(3)  Where a sign has two or more faces, the area of all faces shall be included in determining the area of the sign, except when two faces are back to back and are of equal area. 
(Code 1996, § 128.05(3)) 
Secs. 38-13-38-38. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - DISTRICT REGULATIONS 

Sec. 38-39. - G-1 (Greenbelt District). 
(a)  Temporary signs are allowed up to a maximum of 40 square feet. No sign may be larger than five square feet. Permanent signs are allowed for these uses: 
(1)  Essential services building. 
(2)  Farm or apiary. 
(3)  Forests. 
(4)  Golf Courses and driving ranges. 
(5)  Nature and wild life reserves. 
(6)  Parking lot. 
(7)  Parks. 
(8)  Plant and nursery and truck gardens. 
(9)  Tennis courts and similar gaming areas. 
(b)  Maximum square footage shall be 40 square feet. 
(Code 1996, § 128.03(1)) 
Sec. 38-40. - A-1 (Agricultural District). 
    Temporary signs are allowed up to a maximum of 40 square feet. No sign may be larger than five square feet. Permanent signs are allowed for these uses, up to a maximum of 20 square feet: 
(1)  Farms. 
(2)  Forests. 
(3)  Parking lots. 
(4)  Park, sports arena, playground and recreation area, including country clubs, golf courses, and swimming pools. 
(5)  Plant nursery and truck garden. 
(6)  Stable. 
(7)  Airport, landing field, or landing strip. 
(8)  Vineyards and associated eating and drinking establishments. 
(Code 1996, § 128.03(2)) 
Sec. 38-41. - R-1 (Single-Family Dwelling District). 
    Temporary signs are allowed up to a maximum of 40 square feet. No sign may be larger than five square feet. Permanent signs are allowed for these uses, up to a maximum of 50 square feet: 
(1)  Cemetery. 
(2)  Essential services building. 
(3)  Hospital. 
(4)  Park or playground. 
(5)  Nursery school, preschool, child day care and adult day care. 
(6)  Parking lot. 
(7)  Public and private school or college for academic instruction. 
(8)  Church. 
(9)  Planned business or technology park. 
(Code 1996, § 128.03(3)) 
Sec. 38-42. - R-2 (Multiple-Family Dwelling District). 
    Temporary signs are allowed up to a maximum of 40 square feet. No sign may be larger than five square feet. Permanent signs are allowed for these uses, up to a maximum of 50 square feet: 
(1)  Boarding/bed and breakfast or lodging house. 
(2)  Essential services building. 
(3)  Hospital. 
(4)  Park or playground. 
(5)  Nursery school, preschool, child day care and adult day care. 
(6)  Parking lot. 
(7)  Public and private school or college for academic instruction. 
(8)  Church. 
(9)  Clinic. 
(10)  Municipal, county, township, state or federal building, except maintenance and storage buildings. 
(11)  Mortuary, funeral home. 
(12)  Planned business or technology park, 
(Code 1996, § 128.03(4)) 
Sec. 38-43. - R-3 (Over Four-Unit Multiple Family Dwelling District). 
    Temporary signs are allowed up to a maximum of 40 square feet. No sign may be larger than five square feet. Permanent signs are allowed for these uses, up to a maximum of 50 square feet: 
(1)  Boarding/bed and breakfast. 
(2)  Church. 
(3)  Clinic, sanitarium, pharmacy, home for the aged, nursing home, assisted living facility, nonprofit fraternal institution, lodge, and institution of an educational, religious, philanthropic or charitable nature. 
(4)  Essential services building. 
(5)  Hospital. 
(6)  Museum, library, park or playground. 
(7)  Nursery school, preschool, child day care and adult day care. 
(8)  Parking lot. 
(9)  Public and private schools and colleges for academic instruction. 
(10)  Dance studio. 
(11)  Mortuary, funeral home. 
(12)  Apartment complexes of four units or more. 
(13)  Planned business or technology park, 
(Code 1996, § 128.03(5)) 
Sec. 38-44. - R-4 (Mobile Home Park). 
    Temporary signs are allowed up to a maximum of 40 square feet per lot. No sign may be larger than five square feet. Permanent signs are allowed for essential services and mobile home park uses, up to a maximum of 50 square feet. 
(Code 1996, § 128.03(6)) 
Sec. 38-45. - C-2 (Central Business District). 
    Temporary signs are allowed up to a maximum of 60 square feet. Permanent signs for commercial use are allowed; permanent signs for residential use are prohibited. In addition, permanent signs are subject to the following restrictions: 
(1)  Maximum sign square footage is as set forth below. The square footage allotment can only be used on the side of the lot for which it is configured, e.g., the front property line allotment may only be used on the front of the building. Maximum square footage per side is limited to: 
a.  Front of property: Four square feet for each foot of lot width. 
b.  Side of property: Four square feet for each foot of lot length. 
c.  Rear of property: Four square feet for each foot of lot width. 
(2)  Maximum sign height is 25 feet; provided, however, that a permit may be issued for a maximum height of 75 feet in a C-2, C-3, M-1, or M-2 district if the following provisions are met: 
a.  The sign is located on the business site to which the sign applies. 
b.  The sign is located within 2,500 feet south or north of the ROW centerline of U.S. Highway No. 20. 
c.  The applicant must demonstrate to the building official that additional height is necessary for the sign to be viewed from the ROW centerline of U.S. Highway No. 20. 
(3)  Signs may not project into or over ROW more than four feet and must have a minimum of ten feet clearance from grade. Signs must be self-supported, have no poles, posts or supports on city ROW. This allowable sign projection applies only to properties that have a building built on the property line. 
(Code 1996, § 128.03(7)) 
Sec. 38-46. - C-3 (Highway Business District). 
    Temporary signs are allowed up to a maximum of 60 square feet. Permanent signs for commercial use are allowed; permanent signs for residential use are prohibited. In addition, permanent signs are subject to the following restrictions: 
(1)  Maximum sign square footage is as set forth below. The square footage allotment can only be used on the side of the lot for which it is configured, e.g., the front property line allotment may only be used on the front of the building. Maximum square footage per side is limited to: 
a.  Front of property: Four square feet for each foot of lot width. 
b.  Side of property: Four square feet for each foot of lot length. 
c.  Rear of property: Four square feet for each foot of lot width. 
(2)  Maximum sign height is 25 feet; provided, however, that a permit may be issued for a maximum height of 75 feet in a C-2, C-3, M-1, or M-2 district if the following provisions are met: 
a.  The sign is located on the business site to which the sign applies. 
b.  The sign is located within 2,500 feet south or north of the ROW centerline of U.S. Highway No. 20. 
c.  The applicant must demonstrate to the building official that additional height is necessary for the sign to be viewed from the ROW centerline of U.S. Highway No. 20. 
(Code 1996, § 128.03(8)) 
Sec. 38-47. - M-1 (Light Industrial District). 
    Temporary signs are allowed up to a maximum of 80 square feet. Permanent signs for industrial and commercial use are allowed; permanent signs for residential use are prohibited. In addition, permanent signs are subject to the following restrictions: 
(1)  Maximum sign square footage is as set forth below. The square footage allotment can only be used on the side of the lot for which it is configured, e.g., the front property line allotment may only be used on the front of the building. Maximum square footage per side is limited to: 
a.  Front of property: Four square feet for each foot of lot width. 
b.  Side of property: Four square feet for each foot of lot length. 
c.  Rear of property: Four square feet for each foot of lot width. 
(2)  Maximum sign height is 35 feet; provided, however, that a permit may be issued for a maximum height of 75 feet in a C-2, C-3, M-1, or M-2 district if the following provisions are met: 
a.  The sign is located on the business site to which the sign applies. 
b.  The sign is located within 2,500 feet south or north of the ROW centerline of U.S. Highway No. 20. 
c.  The applicant must demonstrate to the building official that additional height is necessary for the sign to be viewed from the ROW centerline of U.S. Highway No. 20. 
(Code 1996, § 128.03(9)) 
Sec. 38-48. - M-2 (Heavy Industrial District). 
    Temporary signs are allowed up to a maximum of 80 square feet. Permanent signs for industrial and commercial use are allowed; permanent signs for residential use are prohibited. In addition, permanent signs are subject to the following restrictions: 
(1)  Maximum sign square footage is as set forth below. The square footage allotment can only be used on the side of the lot for which it is configured, e.g., the front property line allotment may only be used on the front of the building. Maximum square footage per side is limited to: 
a.  Front of property: Four square feet for each foot of lot width. 
b.  Side of property: Four square feet for each foot of lot length. 
c.  Rear of property: Four square feet for each foot of lot width. 
(2)  Maximum sign height is 35 feet; provided, however, that a permit may be issued for a maximum height of 75 feet in a C-2, C-3, M-1, or M-2 district if the following provisions are met: 
a.  The sign is located on the business site to which the sign applies. 
b.  The sign is located within 2,500 feet south or north of the ROW centerline of U.S. Highway No. 20. 
c.  The applicant must demonstrate to the building official that additional height is necessary for the sign to be viewed from the ROW centerline of U.S. Highway No. 20. 
(Code 1996, § 128.03(10)) 
Secs. 38-49-38-69. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PERMITS 

Sec. 38-70. - Permanent sign permits required; electrical permits required for illuminated signs; fees. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person to erect, alter, or relocate within the city any sign or other advertising structure without first obtaining a sign permit. This section shall not apply to a copy or replacement of a sign face on an existing sign provided the size or height of the sign is not altered or to normal maintenance, cleaning, or repair of a sign but not structural alteration. 
(b)  All illuminated signs shall be subject to the provisions and requirements of the city's electrical code, including the requirement for electrical permit. The electrical permit shall be in addition to the sign permit required under this article. 
(c)  Fees shall be established and modified by the current fee schedule set by city council. 
(Code 1996, §§ 128.06(1), (4), (5)) 
Sec. 38-71. - Sign permit exemptions. 
    The following signs are exempted from the sign permit requirements: 
(1)  Historical marker. A marker, monument, plaque, sign or notice located on public or private property which identifies or records historical event, incident, or fact and which conforms to state law. 
(2)  Memorial. Any sign or tablet identifying the name of a building and date of construction when cut into a masonry surface or inlaid so as to be part of the building. 
(3)  Public sign. Any sign required or specifically authorized for a public purpose by law or by any court, governmental order, rule or regulation. 
(4)  Traffic sign. Any traffic or similar sign of a public agency, such as a railroad crossing sign. 
(5)  Warning sign.Any sign warning or danger, hazard, or unsafe conditions, but containing no advertising material. Such sign shall be removed upon termination of the danger. 
(Code 1996, § 128.06(2)) 
Sec. 38-72. - Non-sign items that do not require permit. 
    The following items are not considered signs and do not require permits: 
(1)  Flags. A piece of fabric (most often rectangular or quadrilateral) with a distinctive design that is used as a symbol, as a signaling device, or as decoration not to be used as a commercial advertising device. 
(2)  Holiday decorations. Temporary decorations or displays celebrating the occurrence of traditionally accepted national, local, or religious holidays, provided that such decorations are located outside the city's right-of-way and the corner visual clearance area and do not otherwise create a sight visibility problem or other hazard for motor vehicles. 
(3)  Mural. A large expanse of wall area covered by paint or other artistic medium that does not contain any advertising or commercial symbolism such as logos or trademarks or does not represent any product, except to identify the artist. 
(4)  Religious symbol. Religious symbol at a place of worship or at a facility owned or operated by a religious institution. 
(Code 1996, § 128.06(3)) 
Sec. 38-73. - Failure to obtain permit; penalty. 
    When any sign is erected, placed, or structurally altered prior to obtaining a permit as required by this article, the fee specified in section 38-70 shall be doubled. The payment of such double fee shall not relieve any person from complying with other provisions of this section or from any penalties prescribed in this section. 
(Code 1996, § 128.06(6)) 
Sec. 38-74. - Application for sign permit. 
    Application for a permit for the erection, alteration or relocation of a sign shall be made to the building official upon a form provided by the city and shall include the following information: 
(1)  Name, address, and telephone number of person or firm erecting the sign. 
(2)  Name and address of the owner of the sign. 
(3)  Street address or location of the property on which the sign is to be located. 
(4)  Name and address of the owner of the property on which the sign is to be located. 
(5)  A site plan showing the proposed location of the sign and the location of all other existing signs on the same premises. 
(6)  Drawing or specifications showing the dimensions, materials, design, structural supports, and electrical components of the proposed sign. If required by the building official, engineering data shall be supplied or plans submitted certified by an architect or engineer licensed by the state. 
(Code 1996, § 128.06(7)) 
Sec. 38-75. - Denial of permits. 
    When a sign permit is denied, the applicant shall receive a written notice stating the reasons for denial. The applicant may appeal the denial of the sign permit according to the procedures contained in section 38-128. 
(Code 1996, § 128.06(8)) 
Sec. 38-76. - Revocation of permits. 
    The sign permit may be revoked for any false statement, alteration of the sign or misrepresentation of fact in the application. 
(Code 1996, § 128.06(9)) 
Sec. 38-77. - Inspections. 
    All signs for which a permit is required shall be subject to inspection by the building official. Footing inspections may be required by the building official for all signs having footings. All signs containing electrical wiring shall be subject to the provisions of the governing electrical code and the electrical components used shall bear the label of an approved testing agency. All signs may be re inspected at the discretion of the building official. 
(Code 1996, § 128.06(10)) 
Secs. 38-78-38-97. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - DESIGN STANDARDS AND CONSTRUCTION SPECIFICATIONS 

Sec. 38-98. - Design criteria. 
(a)  General. Signs and sign structures shall be designed and constructed to resist wind and seismic forces as specified in this subsection. All bracing systems shall be designed and constructed to transfer lateral forces to the foundations. For signs on buildings, the dead and lateral loads shall be transmitted through the structural frame of the building to the ground in such a manner as not to overstress any of its elements. The overturning moment produced from lateral forces shall in no case exceed two-thirds of the dead-load resisting moment. Uplift due to overturning shall be adequately resisted by proper anchorage to the ground or to the structural frame of the building. The weight of earth superimposed over footings may be used in determining the dead-load resisting moment. Such earth shall be carefully placed and thoroughly compacted. 
(b)  Wind loads. Signs and sign structures shall be designed and constructed to resist wind forces as specified in the city building code. 
(c)  Seismic loads. Signs and sign structures shall be designed and constructed to resist seismic forces as specified in the city building code. 
(d)  Combined loads. Wind and seismic loads need not be combined in the design of signs or sign structures; only that loading producing the larger stresses need be used. Vertical design loads, except roof live loads, shall be assumed to be acting simultaneously with the wind or seismic loads. 
(e)  Allowable stresses. The design of wood, concrete, steel or aluminum members shall conform to the requirements of the city building code. Loads, both vertical and horizontal exerted on the soil shall not produce stresses exceeding those specified in the city building code. The working stresses of wire rope and its fastenings shall not exceed 25 percent of the ultimate strength of the rope or fasteners. Working stresses for wind or seismic loads combined with dead loads may be increased as specified in the city building code. 
(Code 1996, § 128.07(1)) 
Sec. 38-99. - Construction standards and specifications. 
(a)  General. The supports for signs or sign structures shall be placed in or upon private property and shall be securely built, constructed and erected in conformance with the requirements of this section. 
(b)  Materials. Materials of construction for signs and sign structures shall be of the quality and grade as specified for buildings in the city building code. In signs and sign structures the materials and details of construction shall, in the absence of specified requirements, conform to the following: 
(1)  Structural steel shall be of such quality to conform with International Building Code Standard No. 27-1. Secondary members in contact with or directly supporting the display surface may be formed of light gauge steel, provided such members are designed in accordance with the specifications of the design of light gauge steel as specified in International Building Code Standard No. 27-9 and in addition shall be galvanized. Secondary members, when formed integrally with the display surface, shall be not less than No. 24 gauge in thickness. When not formed integrally with the display surface, the minimum thickness of the secondary members shall be No. 12 gauge. The minimum thickness of hot-rolled steel members furnishing structural support for signs shall be one-quarter-inch, except, that if galvanized, such members shall not be less than one-eighth-inch thick. Steel pipes shall be of such quality as to conform with International Building Code Standard No. 27-1. Steel members may be connected with one galvanized bolt, provided the connection is adequate to transfer the stresses in the members. 
(2)  Anchors and supports when of wood and embedded in soil, or within six inches of the soil, shall be of all heartwood of a durable species or shall be marked or branded by an approved agency. 
(c)  Restrictions on combustible materials. Ground signs may be constructed of any material meeting the requirements of this Code. Roof signs, wall signs, projecting signs and signs on marquees shall be constructed of noncombustible materials, except as provided in subsection (d) of this section. No combustible materials other than approved plastics shall be used in the construction of electric signs. 
(d)  Nonstructural trim. Nonstructural trim and portable display surfaces may be of wood, metal, approved plastics or any combination thereof. 
(e)  Anchorage. Members supporting unbraced signs shall be proportioned that the bearing loads imposed on the soil in either direction, horizontal or vertical, shall not exceed the safe values. Braced ground signs shall be anchored to resist the specified wind or seismic load acting in any direction. Anchors and supports shall be designed for safe bearing loads on the soil and for an effective resistance to pullout amounting to a force 25 percent greater than the required resistance to overturning. Anchors and supports shall penetrate to a depth below ground greater than that of the frost line. Signs attached to masonry, concrete or steel shall be safely and securely fastened thereto by means of metal anchors, bolts or approved expansion screws of sufficient size and anchored to support safely the loads applied. No wooden blocks or plugs or anchors with wood used in connection with screws or nails shall be considered proper anchorage, except in the case of signs attached to wood framing. No anchor or support of any sign shall be connected to, or supported by, an unbraced parapet wall, unless such wall is designed in accordance with the requirements for parapet walls specified for seismic zones in the city building code. 
(f)  Display surfaces. Display surfaces in all types of walls may be made of metal, glass, or approved plastics. Glass thickness and area limitations shall be in accordance with the following: 
Size, Thickness and Type of Glass Panels in Signs 
Maximum Size of Exposed Glass Panel Minimum 
Thickness of Glass (inches) Type of Glass Any Dimension 
(inches) Area 
(sq.in.) 30 500 ? Plain, plate or wired 45 700 3/16Plain, plate or wired 144 3600 1/4 Plain, plate or wired over 144 over 3600 1/4 Wired  
Sections of approved plastics on wall signs shall not exceed 225 square feet in area. 
(g)  Exceptions. Sections of approved plastics on signs other than wall signs may be of unlimited area if approved by the building official. Sections of approved plastics on wall signs shall be separated three feet laterally and six feet vertically by the required exterior wall construction. Sections of approved plastics on signs other than wall signs may not be required to be separated if approved by the building official. 
(h)  Approved plastics. The building official shall require that sufficient technical data be submitted to substantiate the proposed use of any plastic material and, if it is determined that the evidence submitted is satisfactory for the use intended, he may approve its use. 
(Code 1996, § 128.07) 
Secs. 38-100-38-126. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 38-127. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Responsibility. The city planning department and such deputies or assistants that have been or shall be duly appointed, shall have the responsibility and authority to enforce this chapter, except as otherwise provided in this chapter. 
(b)  Violations. The city planning department shall, upon determination of any violation of this chapter, notify in writing the owner of the sign structure, or of the land, building, or structure upon which the sign is located. Such written notification of violation shall identify the sign or sign structure, state the nature of the violation, and order the action necessary to correct the violation. Specifically, the city planning department may order one or more of the following actions: 
(1)  Repair or modification of a sign or sign structure. 
(2)  Removal of any sign unlawfully installed, erected, or maintained. 
(3)  Order the discontinuance of illegal work being done. 
(4)  Order the discontinuance of illegal or prohibited signs or structures. 
(5)  Take any other action authorized by city zoning regulations to ensure compliance with or to prevent violation of its provisions, and in particular shall, where necessary or appropriate, recommend to the city Attorney the institution of legal or equitable actions that may be required for enforcement of this article. 
(c)  Removal of signs. Upon determination of any violation of this chapter, subsequent removal procedures will be as follows: 
(1)  Permanent signs. 
a.  Signs on private property. If a sign identifies a business, product or service that has been closed or not in use for 90 days or longer the city planning department shall issue notice to the property owner to have the sign removed within 30 days. For all other violations of this chapter the city planning department shall issue a notice in accordance with section 1-17 of this Code. 
b.  Where a safety hazard exists, the city may remove a sign without notice and all costs shall be paid by the property owner. 
c.  Signs in ROW. When a sign is placed on public property the city shall have the right to remove the sign immediately and store the sign for not less than three days, whereupon the city may dispose of the sign in a manner similar to other abandoned property. (Reference to placement of signs in city ROW in sections 38-3(6) and 42-31.) 
(2)  Temporary signs. A notice shall be sent to the property owner stating the violation and the specific time in which the sign must be removed. If the owner fails to have the sign removed in the prescribed timeframe, the city will follow may proceed to pursue a municipal infraction. 
(d)  Appeals. Any person affected by a decision of the city planning department in his enforcement of this chapter may appeal the decision according to the procedures contained in section 38-128. 
(Code 1996, § 128.10) 
Sec. 38-128. - Appeals and variances. 
(a)  Zoning board of adjustment. Any person affected by a decision regarding the enforcement or interpretation of this chapter may appeal that decision to the zoning board of adjustment according to the procedures set forth in city zoning regulations. Appeals to the zoning board of adjustment may include the following: 
(1)  Requests for variances or exceptions in specific cases from the specific provisions of this chapter except as set forth in subsections (a)(2), (3) and (4) of this section. 
(2)  Requests for an extension of time for the compliance of any notice or order issued pursuant to this chapter. 
(3)  Allegations of error in any order, requirement, decision or determination made in the enforcement of this chapter. 
(4)  Requests for permission to reconstruct or re-erect a nonconforming sign or sign structure which has been damaged by fire, explosion, or act of God to the extent of more than 50 percent of its replacement cost. 
(b)  Building code board of appeals. Appeals of decisions regarding the enforcement or interpretation of this chapter shall be taken to the building board of appeals according to the procedures set forth in the city building code. 
(Code 1996, § 128.11) 
Chapter 40 - SOLID WASTE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Solid waste disposal, Code of Iowa § 455B.301 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 40-1. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this chapter pertaining to solid waste control is to provide for the sanitary storage, collection and disposal of solid waste and, thereby, to protect the citizens of the city from such hazards to their health, safety and welfare as may result from the uncontrolled disposal of solid waste. 
(Code 1996, § 105.01) 
Sec. 40-2. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Approved incinerator means equipment or facilities for the enclosed burning of refuse having a stack adequate to maintain a draft sufficient for efficient combustion and equipped with a screen sufficiently fine to prevent ejection of particles of burning materials as acceptable to the environmental protection commission. 
    Back yard burning means the disposal of residential waste by open burning on the premises of the property where such waste is generated. 
    Burn barrel means a container used for the purposes of burning residential waste as defined in this section, excluding garbage, plastics, tires and trade waste. 
    Discard means to place, cause to be placed, throw, deposit or drop. 
    Executive director means the executive director of the state department of natural resources or any designee. 
    Garbage means all solid and semisolid, putrescible animal and vegetable waste resulting from the handling, preparing, cooking, storing, serving and consuming of food or of material intended for use as food, and all offal, excluding useful industrial by-products, and includes all such substances from all public and private establishments and from all residences. 
    Landscape waste means any vegetable or plant waste except garbage. The term includes trees, tree trimmings, branches, stumps, brush, weeds, leaves, grass, shrubbery and yard trimmings. 
    Litter means any garbage, rubbish, trash, refuse, waste materials or debris. 
    Open burning means any burning of combustible materials where the products of combustion are emitted into the open air without passing through a chimney or stack. 
    Open dumping means the depositing of solid waste on the surface of the ground or into a body or stream of water. 
    Owner means, in addition to the record titleholder, any person residing in, renting, leasing, occupying, operating or transacting business in any premises, and as between such parties the duties, responsibilities, liabilities and obligations hereinafter imposed shall be joint and several. 
    Refuse means putrescible and non-putrescible waste, including, but not limited to, garbage, rubbish, ashes, incinerator residues, street cleanings, market and industrial solid waste and sewage treatment waste in dry or semisolid form. 
    Residential waste means any refuse generated on the premises as a result of residential activities. The term "residential waste" includes landscape waste grown on the premises or deposited thereon by the elements, but excludes garbage, tires and trade wastes. 
    Rubbish means non-putrescible solid waste consisting of combustible and non-combustible waste, such as ashes, paper, cardboard, tin cans, yard waste, wood, glass, bedding, crockery or litter of any kind. 
    Sanitary disposal means a method of treating solid waste so that it does not produce a hazard to the public health or safety or create a nuisance. 
    Sanitary disposal project means all facilities and appurtenances, including all real and personal property connected with such facilities, which are acquired, purchased, constructed, reconstructed, equipped, improved, extended, maintained, or operated to facilitate the final disposition of solid waste without creating a significant hazard to the public health or safety, and which are approved by the executive director. 
    Solid waste means garbage, refuse, rubbish, and other similar discarded solid or semisolid materials, including, but not limited to, such materials resulting from industrial, commercial, agricultural, and domestic activities. Solid waste may include vehicles, as defined by the Code of Iowa § 321.1. 
    Toxic and hazardous waste means waste materials, including, but not limited to, poisons, pesticides, herbicides, acids, caustics, pathological waste, flammable or explosive materials and similar harmful waste which requires special handling and which must be disposed of in such a manner as to conserve the environment and protect the public health and safety. 
    Yard waste means any debris such as grass clippings, leaves, garden waste, brush and trees. Yard waste does not include tree stumps. 
(Code 1996, § 105.02) 
Sec. 40-3. - Health hazard. 
    It is unlawful for any person to permit to accumulate on any premises, improved or vacant, or on any public place, such quantities of solid waste, either in containers or not, that shall constitute a health or sanitation hazard. 
(Code 1996, § 105.03) 
Sec. 40-4. - Fire hazard. 
    It is unlawful for any person to permit to accumulate quantities of solid waste within or close to any building, unless the same is stored in containers in such a manner as not to create a fire hazard. 
(Code 1996, § 105.04) 
Sec. 40-5. - Littering prohibited. 
    No person shall discard any litter onto or in any water or land, except that nothing in this section shall be construed to affect the authorized collection and discarding of such litter in or on areas or receptacles provided for such purpose. When litter is discarded from a motor vehicle, the driver of the motor vehicle shall be responsible for the act in any case where doubt exists as to which occupant of the motor vehicle actually discarded the litter. 
(Code 1996, § 105.06) 
Sec. 40-6. - Open dumping prohibited. 
    No person shall dump or deposit or permit the dumping or depositing of any solid waste at any place other than a sanitary disposal project approved by the executive director, unless a special permit to dump or deposit solid waste on land owned or leased by such person has been obtained from the executive director. However, this section does not prohibit the use of dirt, stone, brick or similar inorganic material for fill, landscaping, excavation, or grading at places other than a sanitary disposal project. 
(Code 1996, § 105.07) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Iowa § 455B.307. 
Sec. 40-7. - Toxic and hazardous waste. 
    The collection, storage and disposal of toxic and hazardous waste shall be subject to the following: 
(1)  Labeling. All containers sued for the storage, collection or transportation of toxic or hazardous waste shall be plainly marked so as to provide adequate notice of the contents thereof. 
(2)  Vehicles and containers. All vehicles and containers used for the storage, collection and transportation of toxic and hazardous waste shall be so constructed that they can be loaded, moved and unloaded in a manner that does not create a danger to public health or safety and in compliance with federal and state laws, rules and regulations. 
(3)  Disposal. No person shall deposit in a solid waste container or otherwise offer for collection any toxic or hazardous waste. Such materials shall be transported and disposed of as prescribed by the executive director. 
(Code 1996, § 105.08) 
Sec. 40-8. - Waste storage containers. 
    Every person owning, managing, operating, leasing or renting any premises, dwelling unit or any place where refuse accumulates shall provide and at all times maintain in good order and repair portable containers for refuse in accordance with the following: 
(1)  Container specifications. Waste storage containers shall comply with the following specifications: 
a.  Residential. Residential waste containers shall be of not less than 20 gallons or more than 35 gallons in nominal capacity; shall be leak-proof, waterproof and fitted with a fly-tight lid which shall be kept in place except when depositing or removing the contents thereof. They shall have handles, bails or other suitable lifting devices or features and be of a type originally manufactured for the storage of residential waste with tapered sides for easy emptying. They shall be of light weight and sturdy construction with the total weight of any individual containers and contents not exceeding 75 pounds. Galvanized metal containers, rubber or fiberglass containers and plastic containers which do not become brittle in cold weather may be used. Disposable containers or other containers as approved by the city may also be used. 
b.  Commercial. Every person owning, managing, operating, leasing or renting any commercial premises where an excessive amount of refuse accumulates and where its storage in portable containers as required above is impractical, shall maintain metal bulk storage containers approved by the city. 
(2)  Location of containers. Residential solid waste containers shall be stored upon the residential premises. Commercial solid waste containers shall be stored upon private property, unless the owner has been granted written permission from the city to use public property for such purposes. The storage site shall be well-drained; fully accessible to collection equipment, public health personnel and fire inspection personnel. 
(3)  Nonconforming containers. Solid waste containers which are not adequate will be collected together with their contents and disposed of after due notice to the owner. 
(Code 1996, § 105.09) 
Sec. 40-9. - Sanitary disposal required. 
    It shall be the duty of each owner to provide for the sanitary disposal of all refuse accumulating on the owner's premises before it becomes a nuisance. Any such accumulation remaining on any premises for a period of more than 30 days shall be deemed a nuisance and the city may proceed to abate such nuisances in accordance with the provisions of article IV of chapter 32 or by initiating proper action in district court. 
(Code 1996, § 105.10) 
Sec. 40-10. - Prohibited practices. 
    It is unlawful for any person to: 
(1)  Unlawful use of containers. Deposit refuse in any solid waste containers not owned by such person without the written consent of the owner of such containers. 
(2)  Interfere with collectors. Interfere in any manner with solid waste collection equipment or with solid waste collectors in the lawful performance of their duties as such, whether such equipment or collectors be those of the city, or those of any other authorized waste collection service. 
(3)  Radioactive material. Dispose of radioactive material in a sanitary disposal project. Luminous timepieces are exempt. 
(4)  Unlawful collection. Engage in the business of collecting, transporting, processing or disposing of refuse within the city without a valid license therefor. 
(5)  Incinerators. Burn rubbish or garbage except in approved incinerators so maintained and operated as to prevent the emission of objectionable odors or particulate matter. 
(Code 1996, § 105.11) 
Secs. 40-11-40-38. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - COLLECTION AND TRANSPORTATION 

Sec. 40-39. - Collection service. 
    The collection of solid waste within the city shall be only by collectors licensed by the city. 
(Code 1996, § 106.01) 
Sec. 40-40. - Collection vehicles. 
    Vehicles or containers used for the collection and transportation of garbage and similar putrescible waste or solid waste containing such materials shall be leak-proof, durable and of easily cleanable construction. They shall be cleaned to prevent nuisances, pollution or insect breeding and shall be maintained in good repair. 
(Code 1996, § 106.02) 
Sec. 40-41. - Loading. 
    Vehicles or containers used for the collection and transportation of any solid waste shall be loaded and moved in such a manner that the contents will not fall, leak, or spill therefrom, and shall be covered to prevent blowing or loss of material. Where spillage does occur, the material shall be picked up immediately by the collector or transporter and returned to the vehicle or container and the area properly cleaned. 
(Code 1996, § 106.03) 
Sec. 40-42. - Frequency of collection. 
    All solid waste shall be collected from residential premises at least once each week and from commercial, industrial and institutional premises twice each week except during the period from April 1 to November 1 when collection from commercial, industrial and institutional premises shall be on a daily basis, excluding Sundays and holidays. 
(Code 1996, § 106.04) 
Sec. 40-43. - Location of containers. 
    Containers for the storage of solid waste awaiting collection shall be placed outdoors at some easily accessible place by the owner or occupant of the premises served. 
(Code 1996, § 106.05) 
Sec. 40-44. - Separation of yard waste required. 
    All yard waste shall be separated by the owner or occupant from all other garbage and refuse accumulated on the premises and shall be lawfully disposed of. 
(Code 1996, § 106.06) 
Sec. 40-45. - Collection of leaf and grass clippings. 
    Leaf and grass clippings shall be contained in biodegradable bags so as to prevent the dispersal of such waste upon the premises served or upon adjacent property or public rights-of-way. A licensed collector can pick up curbside leaf and grass clipping waste in biodegradable bags. 
(Code 1996, § 106.07) 
Sec. 40-46. - Right of entry. 
    Solid waste collectors are authorized to enter upon private property for the purpose of collecting solid waste therefrom as required by this article; however, solid waste collectors shall not enter dwelling units or other residential buildings. 
(Code 1996, § 106.08) 
Sec. 40-47. - Collector's license. 
    No person shall engage in the business of collecting, transporting, processing or disposing of solid waste other than waste produced by that person within the city without first obtaining from the city an annual license in accordance with the following: 
(1)  Application. Application for a solid waste collector's license shall be made to the clerk and provide the following: 
a.  Name and address. The full name and address of the applicant, and if a corporation, the names and addresses of the officers thereof. 
b.  Equipment. A complete and accurate listing of the number and type of collection and transportation equipment to be used. 
c.  Collection program. A complete description of the frequency, routes and method of collection and transportation to be used. 
d.  Disposal. A statement as to the precise location and method of disposal or processing facilities to be used. 
(2)  Insurance. No collector's license shall be issued until and unless the applicant therefor, in addition to all other requirements set forth, shall file and maintain with the city evidence of satisfactory public liability insurance covering all operations of the applicant pertaining to such business and all equipment and vehicles to be operated in the conduct thereof in the following minimum amounts: 
Bodily Injury: $100,000.00 per person. $300,000.00 per occurrence. Property Damage: $50,000.00  
Each insurance policy required hereunder shall include as a part thereof provisions requiring the insurance carrier to notify the city of the expiration, cancellation or other termination of coverage not less than ten days prior to the effective date of such action. 
(3)  License fee. A license fee in the amount of $100.00 shall accompany the application for a solid waste collector's license. In the event the requested license is not granted, the fee paid shall be refunded to the applicant. 
(4)  License issued. If the council upon investigation finds the application to be in order and determines that the applicant will collect, transport, process or dispose of solid waste without hazard to the public health or damage to the environment and in conformity with law and ordinance, the requested license shall be issued to be effective for a period of one year from the date approved. 
(5)  License renewal. An annual license may be renewed simply upon payment of the required fee, provided the applicant agrees to continue to operate in substantially the same manner as provided in the original application and provided the applicant furnishes the clerk with a current listing of vehicles, equipment and facilities in use. 
(6)  License not transferable. No license authorized by this article may be transferred to another person. 
(7)  Owner may transport. Nothing herein is to be construed so as to prevent the owner from transporting solid waste accumulating upon premises owned, occupied or used by him, provided such refuse is disposed of properly in an approved sanitary disposal project. 
(8)  Grading or excavation excepted. No license or permit shall be required for the removal, hauling, or disposal of earth and rock material from grading or excavation activities; however, all such materials shall be conveyed in tight vehicles, trucks or receptacles so constructed and maintained that none of the material being transported shall spill upon the public rights-of-way. 
(9)  Business office. Each licensed garbage collector shall maintain an office equipped with a telephone with some person in attendance during ordinary office hours. The person in charge of the office shall be capable of handling requests for service, complaints and other routine business. 
(10)  Designated transport. All solid waste picked up within the city shall be transported to the sanitary landfill facility designated by the county solid waste commission. 
(Code 1996, § 106.09) 
Sec. 40-48. - Collection fees. 
(a)  Generally. Fees for collection of solid waste by licensed collectors shall be based upon the volume of waste collected from individual dwelling units. The city manager shall verify the method of proposed collection is volume based. Licensed collectors shall be responsible for customer billing and collection. The billing method for solid waste collection shall correspond with billing for electric service. 
(b)  Recycling fee. A recycling fee in the amount of $3.75 per month per dwelling unit shall be paid and shall be billed by the city financial office monthly. 
(c)  Landfill fees. A landfill fee shall be billed by the city financial office monthly as follows: 
Residential units $1.75 Commercial/industrial-level 1 $2.75 Commercial/industrial-level 2 $35.00 Commercial/industrial-level 3 $475.00 Commercial/industrial-level 4 $900.00  
(1)  The landfill fee billing method will correspond to electric meters and their responsible party. 
(2)  Landfill fees collected shall be used to not only offset the city's responsibilities associated with the landfill's usage, but also be used for other programs established by the city to deter the overuse of the current landfill for those items that, if not for these established programs, would otherwise potentially end up at the landfill. These program expenditures shall include, but not be limited to: 
a.  Expenditures directly related to the costs of the handling of grass clippings and mulch at the city's leaf and grass clippings collection site located at 100 East Ohio Street. 
b.  Expenditures directly related to the costs of the handling and grinding of trees and wood chips created at the city's tree collection site located at 100 East Ohio Street. 
c.  Expenditures directly related to the costs of collection and disposal of items from the annual city wide cleanup. 
(Code 1996, § 106.10; Ord. No. 2018-1815, § 1, 8-20-2018) 
Secs. 40-49-40-69. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - TREES, BRUSH AND LEAVES 

Sec. 40-70. - Public dumping ground. 
    A public dumping ground for the exclusive use of residents of the city for the disposing of trees, brush and leaves is established on the following described real estate: 
(1)  A tract of land described as follows: 
Commencing at a point one rod north of the southeast corner of the north half of the southwest quarter of section 6, Township 88 north, Range 25 west of the 5th P.M., Iowa, thence west 403 feet, thence north 202 feet, thence west 200 feet, thence north to the center of the Boone River, thence in a westerly direction along the center of the Boone River to the west line of the southwest quarter of southeast quarter of section 6, thence south to the south line of the north half of the southwest quarter of the southeast quarter of the section 6, thence east 80 rods to the east line of the southwest quarter of southeast quarter, thence north one rod to the place of beginning. 
(2)  This location is known as the Webster City Street Shed Site. 
(Code 1996, § 108.01) 
Sec. 40-71. - Fires prohibited. 
    It is unlawful for any unauthorized person to set a fire in any part of the public dumping ground. 
(Code 1996, § 108.02) 
Sec. 40-72. - Defacing of signs prohibited. 
    It is unlawful to destroy, damage or deface any sign erected or posted by the city on or near the dumping ground to display the rules and regulations regarding dumping of materials. 
(Code 1996, § 108.03) 
Sec. 40-73. - Hours for dumping. 
    The council shall have the right to establish by resolution the hours during which the dumping ground will be open for public use. It is unlawful for any person or persons to deposit any trees, brush or leaves at the dumping ground except during the hours above prescribed. 
(Code 1996, § 108.04) 
Sec. 40-74. - Other uses prohibited. 
    It is further unlawful for any person to utilize the public dumping ground for any purpose other than depositing trees, brush or leaves. 
(Code 1996, § 108.05) 
Sec. 40-75. - Scavenging prohibited. 
    It is unlawful for any person to scavenge the waste material which is deposited in the public dumping ground or to remove any items from the site without the permission of the city manager. 
(Code 1996, § 108.06) 
Chapter 42 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 42-1-42-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - STREET AND ALLEY USE 

Sec. 42-19. - Removal of warning devices. 
    It is unlawful for a person to willfully remove, throw down, destroy or carry away from any street or alley any lamp, obstruction, guard or other article or thing, or extinguish any lamp or other light, erected or placed thereupon for the purpose of guarding or enclosing unsafe or dangerous places in the street or alley without the consent of the person in control thereof. 
(Code 1996, § 175.01) 
Sec. 42-20. - Obstructing or defacing. 
    It is unlawful for any person to obstruct, deface, or injure any street or alley in any manner. 
(Code 1996, § 175.02) 
Sec. 42-21. - Placing debris on; littering. 
    It is unlawful for any person to throw or deposit on any street or alley any glass, glass bottle, nails, tacks, wire, cans, trash, garbage, rubbish, litter, offal, landscape waste, yard waste or any other debris. 
(Code 1996, § 175.03) 
Sec. 42-22. - Playing in. 
    It is unlawful for any person to coast, sled or play games on streets or alleys, except in the areas blocked off by the city for such purposes. 
(Code 1996, § 175.04) 
Sec. 42-23. - Traveling on barricaded street or alley. 
    It is unlawful for any person to travel or operate any vehicle on any street or alley temporarily closed by barricades, lights, signs, or flares placed thereon by the authority or permission of any city official, police officer or member of the fire department. 
(Code 1996, § 175.05) 
Sec. 42-24. - Use for business purposes. 
    It is unlawful to park, store or place, temporarily or permanently, any machinery or junk or any other goods, wares, and merchandise of any kind upon any street or alley for the purpose of storage, exhibition, sale or offering same for sale, without permission of the council. 
(Code 1996, § 175.06) 
Sec. 42-25. - Washing vehicles. 
    It is unlawful for any person to use any public sidewalk, street or alley for the purpose of washing or cleaning any automobile, truck equipment, or any vehicle of any kind when such work is done for hire or as a business. This shall not be construed to prevent any person from washing or cleaning his own vehicle or equipment when it is lawfully parked in the street or alley. 
(Code 1996, § 175.07) 
Sec. 42-26. - Burning prohibited. 
    No person shall burn any trash, leaves, rubbish or other combustible material in any curb and gutter or on any paved or surfaced street or alley. 
(Code 1996, § 175.08) 
Sec. 42-27. - Antenna and radio wires. 
    It is unlawful for a person to allow antenna wires, antenna supports, radio wires or television wires to exist over any street, alley, highway, sidewalk, or public property. 
(Code 1996, § 48.12) 
Sec. 42-28. - Maintenance of parking or terrace. 
(a)  It shall be the responsibility of the abutting property owner to maintain all property outside the lot and property lines and inside the curb lines upon the public streets, except that the abutting property owner shall not be required to remove diseased trees or dead wood on the publicly-owned property or right-of-way. Maintenance includes timely mowing, trimming trees and shrubs and picking up litter. 
(b)  If the abutting property owner does not perform an action required under the above section within a reasonable time, the city may perform the required action and assess the cost against the abutting property for collection in the same manner as a property tax. 
(Code 1996, §§ 175.10, 175.11) 
Sec. 42-29. - Dumping of snow. 
    It is unlawful for any person to throw, push, or place or cause to be thrown, pushed or placed, any ice or snow from private property, sidewalks, or driveways onto the traveled way of a street or alley so as to obstruct gutters, or impede the passage of vehicles upon the street or alley or to create a hazardous condition therein; except where, in the cleaning of large commercial drives in the business district it is absolutely necessary to move the snow onto the street or alley temporarily, such accumulation shall be removed promptly by the property owner or agent, and only after first making arrangements for such prompt removal at the owner's cost of the accumulation within a reasonably short time. 
(Code 1996, § 175.12) 
Sec. 42-30. - Driveway culverts. 
    The property owner shall, at the owner's expense, install any culvert deemed necessary under any driveway or any other access to the owner's property, and before installing a culvert, permission must first be obtained from the city. In the event repairs are needed at any time with respect to culverts, it shall be the responsibility of the property owner to make such repairs, and, in the event the owner fails to do so, the city shall have the right to make the repairs. If the property owner fails to reimburse the city for the cost of the repairs, the cost shall be certified to the county treasurer and specially assessed against the property as by law provided. 
(Code 1996, § 175.13) 
Sec. 42-31. - Sign posts or other structures. 
    No billboard, advertising sign or device, fence other than right-of-way boundary fence, or other obstruction except signs or devices authorized by law or approved by highway authorities shall be placed, erected or maintained upon the right-of-way of any public street or highway. 
(Code 1996, § 175.14) 
Sec. 42-32. - Building material. 
    No person shall place or deposit any building material in any street, without a written permit from the city manager, subject to revocation by the council, to use part of the street in front of or adjacent to the lot whereon such building is being erected for depositing therein the material for such building, but all material shall be placed in such a manner as not to obstruct the gutters of the street. The person occupying a portion of the street shall, at all times, enclose or guard the same in such manner as to protect persons and animals from injury thereby, and with barricades and warning lights. 
(Code 1996, § 175.15) 
Sec. 42-33. - Excavations. 
    No person shall dig, excavate or in any manner disturb any street, parking lot or alley unless such person shall first obtain a permit therefor as herein provided or as provided in other sections of this Code. 
(1)  Application. Before such permit shall be granted, the person shall file with the city a written application. The application shall give an exact description of the property, by lot and street number, in front of or along which it is desired to excavate, state the purpose, for whom and by whom the excavation is to be made, and who will be responsible for the refilling of the excavation and restoration of the street or alley surface. 
(2)  Public convenience. Streets and alleys shall be opened in the manner which will cause the least inconvenience to the public and admit the uninterrupted passage of water along the gutter on the street. 
(3)  Barricades and lighting. Adequate barricades and warning lights meeting standards specified by the city shall be so placed as to protect the public from hazard. Any costs incurred by the city in providing or maintaining adequate barricades or warning lights shall be paid to the city by the permit holder/property owner. 
(4)  Bond required. The applicant shall post with the city a penal bond in the minimum sum as established by resolution of the council, issued by a surety company authorized to issue such bonds in the state. The bond shall guarantee the permittee's payment for any damage done to the city or to public property, and payment of all costs incurred by the city in the course of administration of this section. In lieu of a surety bond, a cash deposit may be filed with the city. 
(5)  Insurance required. Each applicant shall also file a certificate of insurance indicating that the applicant is carrying public liability insurance in effect for the duration of the permit covering the applicant and all agents and employees for the following minimum amounts: 
a.  Bodily injury: $50,000.00 per person; $100,000.00 per accident. 
b.  Property damage: $50,000.00 per accident. 
(6)  Restoration of public property. Streets, sidewalks, alleys and other public property disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored to the condition of the property prior to the commencement of the work, or in a manner satisfactory to the city, at the expense of the permit holder/property owner. 
(7)  Inspection. All work shall be subject to inspection by the city. Backfill shall not be deemed completed, or resurfacing of any improved street or alley surface begun, until such backfill is inspected and approved by the city. The permit holder/property owner shall provide the city with notice at least 24 hours prior to the time when inspection of backfill is desired. 
(8)  Completion by the city. Should any excavation in any street or alley be left open or unfinished for a period of 24 hours or should the work be improperly done, the city has the right to finish or correct such work and the expense shall be charged to the permit holder/property owner. 
(9)  Responsibility for costs. All costs and expenses incident to the excavation shall be borne by the permit holder or property owner. The permit holder and owner shall indemnify the city from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by such excavation. 
(10)  Permit issued. Upon approval of the application, filing of bond and insurance certificate, and payment of any required fees, a permit shall be issued. 
(Code 1996, § 175.09) 
Secs. 42-34-42-54. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - VACATION AND DISPOSAL 

Sec. 42-55. - Power to vacate. 
    When, in the judgment of the council, it would be in the best interest of the city to vacate a street or alley or portion thereof, the council may do so by ordinance in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1996, § 176.01) 
Sec. 42-56. - Planning commission. 
    Any proposal to vacate a street or alley shall be referred by the council to the planning commission for its study and recommendation prior to further consideration by the council. The planning commission shall submit a written report including recommendations to the council within 30 days after the date the proposed vacation is referred to the commission. 
(Code 1996, § 176.02) 
Sec. 42-57. - Notice of vacation hearing. 
    The council shall cause to be published a notice of public hearing of the time at which the proposal to vacate shall be considered. 
(Code 1996, § 176.03) 
Sec. 42-58. - Findings required. 
    No street or alley, or portion thereof, shall be vacated unless the council finds that: 
(1)  Public use. The street or alley proposed to be vacated is not needed for the use of the public, and therefore, its maintenance at public expense is no longer justified. 
(2)  Abutting property. The proposed vacation will not deny owners of property abutting on the street or alley reasonable access to their property. 
(Code 1996, § 176.04) 
Sec. 42-59. - Disposal of vacated streets or alleys. 
    When, in the judgment of the council, it would be in the best interest of the city to dispose of a vacated street or alley, or portion thereof, the council may do so in accordance with the provisions of the Code of Iowa § 364.7. 
(Code 1996, § 176.05) 
Sec. 42-60. - Disposal by gift limited. 
    The city may not dispose of a vacated street or alley, or portion thereof, by gift except to a governmental body for a public purpose. 
(Code 1996, § 176.06) 
Secs. 42-61-42-78. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - STREET GRADES 

Sec. 42-79. - Established grades. 
    The grades of all streets, alleys and sidewalks which have been heretofore established by ordinance are confirmed, ratified and established as official grades. 
(Code 1996, § 177.01) 
Sec. 42-80. - Record maintained. 
    The clerk shall maintain a record of all established grades and furnish information concerning such grades upon request. 
(Code 1996, § 177.02) 
Sec. 42-81. - Datum. 
    The city datum or base of levels for establishing the grades of all streets and for the elevations for all public works and private improvements within the corporate limits of the city shall be 400 feet above city datum as established by ordinance July 7, 1875, the plane being 400 feet above low water of the Mississippi River in 1864, at Dubuque, Iowa, and 984 feet above Mean Gulf level, (sea level) at Biloxi, Mississippi. 
(Code 1996, § 177.03) 
Sec. 42-82. - Benchmark. 
    The city datum of base levels as provided in section 42-81 shall be indicated by the city benchmark located about 50 feet south and 12 feet east of the southwest corner of Bank and Des Moines Streets, being the top of a half-inch copper bolt, leaded vertically in a concrete monument set six feet below ground. Elevation, 64.01 feet above city datum as herein established. 
(Code 1996, § 177.04) 
Sec. 42-83. - Legal standard. 
    The elevation of the city benchmark as set out in section 42-82 shall be the legal and only standard representing city datum. 
(Code 1996, § 177.05) 
Secs. 42-84-42-109. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - NAMING OF STREETS 

Sec. 42-110. - Naming new streets. 
    New streets shall be assigned names in accordance with the following: 
(1)  Extension of existing street. Streets added to the city that are natural extensions of existing streets shall be assigned the name of the existing street. 
(2)  Resolution. All street names, except streets named as a part of a subdivision or platting procedure, shall be named by resolution. 
(3)  Planning commission. Proposed street names shall be referred to the planning commission for review and recommendation. 
(Code 1996, § 178.01) 
Sec. 42-111. - Changing name of street. 
    The council may, by resolution, change the name of a street. 
(Code 1996, § 178.02) 
Sec. 42-112. - Recording street names. 
    Following official action naming or changing the name of a street, the clerk shall file a copy thereof with the county recorder, county auditor, and county assessor. 
(Code 1996, § 178.03) 
Sec. 42-113. - Official street name map. 
    Streets within the city are named as shown on the official street name map which is adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this article. The official street name map shall be identified by the signature of the mayor and bearing the seal of the city under the following words: "This is to certify that this is the Official Street Name Map referred to in section 42-113 of the Code of Ordinances of Webster City, Iowa." 
(Code 1996, § 178.04) 
Sec. 42-114. - Revision of street name map. 
    If, in accordance with the provisions of this article, changes are made in street names, such changes shall be entered on the official street name map promptly after the change has been approved by the council with an entry on the official street name map as follows: "On (date), by official action of the city council, the following changes were made in the Official Street Name Map: (brief description)," which entry shall be signed by the mayor and attested by the clerk. 
(Code 1996, § 178.05) 
Secs. 42-115-42-141. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - BUILDING NUMBERING 

Sec. 42-142. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Owner means the owner of the principal building. 
    Principal building means the main building on any lot or subdivision thereof. 
(Code 1996, § 179.01) 
Sec. 42-143. - Owner requirements. 
    Every owner shall comply with the following numbering requirements: 
(1)  Obtain building number. The owner shall obtain the assigned number to the principal building from the clerk. 
(2)  Display building number. The owner shall place or cause to be installed and maintained on the principal building the assigned number in a conspicuous place to the street in figures not less than 21/2 inches in height and of a contrasting color with their background. 
(3)  Failure to comply. If an owner refuses to number a building as herein provided or fails to do so for a period of 30 days after being notified in writing by the city to do so, the city may proceed to place the assigned number on the principal building and assess the costs against the property for collection in the same manner as a property tax. 
(Code 1996, § 179.02) 
Sec. 42-144. - Building numbering map. 
    The building official shall be responsible for preparing and maintaining a building numbering map. 
(Code 1996, § 179.03) 
Secs. 42-145-42-171. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - CONTROLLED ACCESS FACILITIES 

Sec. 42-172. - Statement of policy. 
    The city establishes the following rules for control of access to city streets. 
(1)  Property rights. The city shall at all times recognize that no property owner shall be deprived of the right to reasonable, free and convenient access to the owner's property without just compensation therefor. 
(2)  Consideration. In connection with each application of access rules to a particular situation, the city shall at all times consider the following: 
a.  Safety to the traveling public. 
b.  Perpetuation of the traffic-carrying capacity of the street. 
c.  The impact upon the economy of the city. 
d.  Protection of the rights of property owners, including the rights of abutting property owners. 
e.  The rights and convenience of the traveling public and of property owners to have access to homes and business facilities. 
(Code 1996, § 180.01) 
Sec. 42-173. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Access means a method of ingress or egress between a city street and abutting property or a public road. 
    Driveway or entrance means that part of any approach for motor vehicles to private property that lies between the property line and the roadway of the public street. 
    Frontage means the length along the street right-of-way line of a single property tract. Corner property at a public road intersection has a separate frontage along each roadway. 
    Frontage road means a public street or road auxiliary to and usually located alongside and parallel to a primary highway or arterial street for purposes of maintaining local road continuity and for control of access. 
    Median means the portion of a divided highway or divided driveway separating the traveled ways for opposing traffic. Medians may be depressed, raised or painted. New median openings for private or commercial use shall not be permitted in the primary highway except for intersecting public roads or streets or large traffic-generating facilities such as large shopping centers or industrial plants. Median openings may be permitted if satisfactorily justified and in the public interest. Costs incurred for additional median openings shall not be borne by the city. 
    Paving means any kind of hard surfacing including, but not limited to, Portland Cement Concrete (PCC), bituminous concrete, brick, stabilized gravel, or combinations of such materials, with the necessary base. The term "paving" does not include surfacing with oil, gravel, oil and gravel, or chloride. Driveways for apartments of four or more units, businesses, schools, churches, and industries shall be a minimum of six inches thick PCC. 
    Right-of-way line means the boundary line between the land acquired for or dedicated to street use and the adjacent property. 
    Shoulder means the portion of the street contiguous to the traveled way for the accommodation of disabled vehicles and for emergency use. 
    Traffic control devices means all signs, signals, markings, and devices that conform to the Iowa Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices, placed or erected by authority of the public body or public agency having jurisdiction, for the purpose of regulating, warning or guiding traffic. 
    Turning lane means an auxiliary lane, including tapered areas, primarily for the acceleration or deceleration and storage of vehicles entering or leaving the through-traffic lanes. 
(Code 1996, § 180.02) 
Sec. 42-174. - Types, number and arrangement of entrances. 
    The types, number and arrangement of entrances shall be in accordance with the Iowa Statewide Urban Design and Specifications, chapter 5I-4 (Thin Maintenance Surfaces). 
(Code 1996, § 180.03) 
Sec. 42-175. - Drainage requirements. 
    Adequate drainage for all access locations shall be provided as follows: 
(1)  Entrances. Entrances must be constructed so that they do not adversely affect the street drainage or drainage of the adjacent property. The drainage and the stability of the street subgrade must not be impaired by driveway construction or roadside development. In no case may the construction of an entrance cause water to flow across the street pavement, or to pond on the shoulders or in the ditch or result in erosion within the street right-of-way limits. 
(2)  Site drainage discharge. Drainage collected by ditches, gutters, or pipes on private property shall not be discharged into the street drainage system unless expressly approved by the city. The applicant may be required to submit a drainage study to the city justifying the drainage system proposed and the pipe or sewer sizes to be used. Laws governing natural drainage must be adhered to at all times. 
(3)  Culverts. When the construction of an entrance necessitates crossing a highway or street ditch that has been constructed to carry drainage, a drainage structure shall be installed in the ditch by the applicant at the applicant's expense. The low point of the ditch shall dictate the location for the culvert placement unless specified differently by the city. Under no circumstances shall existing ditches or gutters be filled without adequate alternate provisions for drainage. 
(4)  Curb drainage. Where drainage is carried along an existing curb, the entrance shall be constructed with a short rise in elevation to prevent runoff from spilling into private property. The flow line of the gutter through the entrance shall be restored. Where curbs are cut for the construction of entrances, the entire curb and gutter section or a minimum of a two-foot-wide strip of integral paving shall be removed. Removal of only the raised portion of the curb and then paving over the broken section shall not be allowed. Cut curb ends shall be replaced and tapered from full height to pavement level in a distance of approximately six feet. 
(Code 1996, § 180.04) 
Sec. 42-176. - Additional requirements for certain developments. 
    The following additional requirements or guidelines shall be applicable to commercial, industrial, or residential developments: 
(1)  General. The following general provisions shall apply: 
a.  The most important factors in developing an access plan for a commercial site are a determination of the potential traffic generated by the site and the directional distribution of site-generated traffic on the major approach routes and proposed driveways serving the site. Entrances serving developments represent an important element in the efficiency and safety of the street onto which their traffic enters and exits. In order to properly handle traffic from such entrances, the anticipated traffic volumes must be determined by the applicant and submitted to the city. 
b.  The location of entrances, particularly commercial ones, is a critical factor in minimizing the hazard and disruption to traffic and pedestrians. Sites must be developed to permit entrances to be well located. 
c.  Adequate storage must be provided on commercial sites so that vehicles do not wait on the street to enter. Adequate storage space is a function of the demand volume, service time per facility, and the number of service facilities available. The geometrics of the internal circulation control a portion of the service time. The service time is dependent upon the time required to maneuver into position and the time necessary to obtain the service. The radii of internal curves should be as large as possible. Buildings should be arranged on the site to allow for the maximum storage available on the site for existing traffic and situated so they will not disrupt the free flow of entering traffic. 
d.  Service station sites should be designed to provide a minimum distance of 15 feet from the right-of-way line to the near edge of the pump island. 
e.  When property is being developed, consideration must be given to locating the access directly opposite an existing commercial entrance or street connection. 
f.  To properly review an entrance permit request, the city must be provided with a plan, drawing or sketch of the property or site that is to be served by the access as requested. This may vary from a simple sketch in the case of a Type "B" or "C" entrance to a detailed plan in the case of a Type "A" entrance. 
(2)  Shopping center and industrial access requests. All entrance permit requests for shopping centers and industrial developments shall when applicable for the development proposed include the following in detail: 
a.  Type and location of proposed development. 
b.  Site plan. 
c.  Location of all proposed entrances, turning lanes on adjacent highways or streets, and internal traffic lanes and parking facilities within the development area. This information shall be sufficiently complete to allow determination of dimensions, the direction of traffic flow, and restrictions caused by planting, curbing, medians, walls, signing, etc., to traffic. 
d.  Detailed design of the proposed street pavement widening, additional lane provisions, relocations, and other improvements considered necessary to the efficient operation of the proposed development. 
e.  Proposed traffic signal locations. 
f.  Preliminary drainage data. 
g.  Gross leaseable floor area in square feet. 
h.  Number of parking spaces. 
i.  Anticipated total daily trips inbound and outbound during an average 24-hour period. Special holiday shopping traffic shall not be used for this estimate. 
j.  Estimated hourly shopping center traffic volumes arriving and departing during each of the following hourly periods: 
1.  The normal street peak hour (usually 5:00 p.m. to 6:00 p.m.). 
2.  The peak outbound shopper hour (usually the closing hour). 
k.  Distribution of shopping center traffic via individual entrances. Hourly volumes should be shown for each of the hours mentioned in subsection (j) of this section. 
l.  Distribution of shopping center traffic by percentage of total daily trips via major streets from origin to shopping center. 
m.  Traffic analysis to be completed for total site development even if only part of the area is being developed at time of entrance request. 
(3)  Action by the city following preliminary evaluation. 
a.  Upon receipt of the information furnished by the applicant, the city inspector shall either approve the request or notify the applicant of any revisions necessary before the request shall be approved. 
b.  Major commercial developments often involve a variety of special access requirements. In addition to the entrance permit, an agreement shall be drawn to fit the particular situation, outlining in detail the responsibilities of the applicant. After the design has been approved by the city, the city shall forward to the applicant an agreement which shall outline the responsibilities of the applicant and the city. The city shall not be responsible for costs incurred as a result of the proposed development. 
c.  No work shall be done within the street right-of-way until final approval has been given by the city. 
d.  The city reserves the right to inspect and approve any construction within the right-of-way. Failure on the part of the applicant to perform the work as required and agreed to in the agreement and attachments shall cause the city to revoke the permission as set forth in the agreement for such construction and deny use of the entrance until such time as these conditions are corrected. If the work performed by the applicant does not conform to the specifications, the city may make the necessary changes and charge the cost thereof to the party responsible, and may take court action if deemed necessary. 
(Code 1996, § 180.05) 
Sec. 42-177. - Permit. 
(a)  Before any person shall construct, modify, or repair a driveway, the person shall obtain a written permit from the city. A written application for the permit shall be filed with the city. The application shall include a legal description of the property, the name of the property owner, the name and address of the person who will do the work, and the proposed plan of construction or repair which shall include the depth, width, and type of surfacing material to be used. No other plan shall be followed except by written permission of the city, and the city may allow amendments to the application or permit that do not conflict with this article. 
(b)  The city inspector or authorized representative of the city shall issue the permit, bearing the signature of the city Inspector or representative and the date of issuance, a statement that the proposed plan meets all of the requirements of this article, and that the construction repair as planned will not create any substantial hazard in the use of the street or sidewalk for public travel or drainage, or create any defect. Each permit shall expire six months from the date of issuance, if not constructed within that time. 
(Code 1996, § 180.06) 
Sec. 42-178. - Driveway requirements. 
    All driveways shall be of paving of a depth of not less than six inches and shall be at least 16 feet in width. The driveway may be placed directly on compact and well-drained soil. Where soil is not well-drained, a four inch sub-base of compact, clean, coarse gravel or sand shall be laid. The driveway shall slope not more than two inches per foot toward the roadway. 
(Code 1996, § 180.08) 
Sec. 42-179. - Sidewalks. 
    The grade of any sidewalk shall not be altered by the work done. The driveway shall be at the same level as any existing sidewalk unless grade change is approved by the city engineer. 
(Code 1996, § 180.09) 
Sec. 42-180. - Excavations. 
    Excavations to do work under this article shall be dug so as to occasion the least possible inconvenience to the public and to provide for the passage of water along the gutter. All such excavations shall have proper barricades at all times, and warning lights placed from one-half hour before sunset to one-half hour after sunrise. In refilling the excavation, the earth must be laid in layers and each layer tamped thoroughly. Any street, sidewalk or other public property that is affected by the work shall be restored to as good a condition as it was previous to the excavation. The affected area shall be maintained in good repair to the satisfaction of the council for one year after refilling. 
(Code 1996, § 180.10) 
Sec. 42-181. - Revocation of permit. 
    The city inspector may at any time revoke the permit for any violation of this article and may require that the work be stopped. 
(Code 1996, § 180.11) 
Sec. 42-182. - Inspection and approval. 
    The driveway must be inspected and approved in writing by the city within 30 days after completion of the work. The city inspector shall keep a record of such approvals. If the city inspector refuses to approve the work, it must be corrected immediately so that it will meet with approval. If the work has been done improperly, the city inspector shall have the right to finish or correct the work, and the council shall assess the costs to the property owner. Such assessment shall be collected with the general property taxes and in the same manner. 
(Code 1996, § 180.12) 
Sec. 42-183. - Appeal for exceptions. 
    Any exception to these regulations may be made by the council upon written appeal explaining the need for the exception. The written request shall be submitted to the city engineering department for an accompanying recommendation to the council prior to action by the council. 
(Code 1996, § 180.13) 
Secs. 42-184-42-204. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - STANDARD ASSESSMENT POLICY 

Sec. 42-205. - Policy applied. 
    The standard assessment policy for street improvements shall be as follows: 
(1)  All street improvements as defined in section 42-173 shall be assessed in the manner provided by state law and this Code. 
(2)  All infrastructure requirements or other improvements required in street improvement projects and not included in section 42-173 shall be financed through all financing methods available to the city except by assessment. 
(3)  This policy applies to the maintenance, construction and reconstruction of streets. Streets in newly platted subdivisions shall be subject to subdivision requirements and other requirements of this Code. 
(4)  The formula to be used in calculating the assessment against benefited property for all street improvements defined in section 42-173 is: 
F = 2-2 a where  a =  75-Y 
 75 where  Y =  The perpendicular distance from the improved street 
right-of-way to the property boundary line.  and  F =  The assessment factor for "Y" depth.  
  
(5)  A lot with frontage on two non-intersecting streets will be assessed at a percentage, determined by the council, of the assessable cost for the street improvement made to the street to the rear of the majority of the buildings. The term "rear" means the opposite of the address. 
(Code 1996, § 181.01) 
Sec. 42-206. - Definitions of assessable street improvements. 
(a)  Street construction or reconstruction projects. Maximum assessments are based on the following: 
(1)  Existing street surface, curb and gutter removal and replacement shall be based on a street width of 31 measured from back of curb to back of curb. Assessments will be based on paving up to six inches deep and 31 feet wide and shall be PCC. Assessment cost shall not include intersections which shall be from the beginning to the end of the radius. 
(2)  Preparation of the subgrade which may include the excavation and disposal of excess fill material or the hauling and placement of a select fill material. The subgrade preparation shall also include any shouldering materials and erosion protection. 
(3)  Removal and replacement of sidewalks and driveways will be included in the total assessable cost. The replacement shall include PCC and crushed rock driveway. The removal and replacement of sidewalks in the intersection area from the beginning to the end of radius shall not be assessed. 
(4)  If the street construction contract includes water main or sanitary sewer main repair or replacement and the water or sanitary sewer services are identified as materials not currently approved in the city's standard specifications, the services shall be replaced to the limits defined as follows: 
a.  Water services shall be assessed to the benefited property from the water main to and including the curb stop. 
b.  Sanitary sewer services shall be assessed to the benefited property from the sewer main to the back of the sidewalk. 
Note: The contract shall not include any work on private property that requires a license. 
(5)  Seeding or sodding of areas disturbed during the reconstruction project including erosion control. 
(6)  Legal, administrative, engineering and inspection fees and project contingencies. 
(b)  Street resurfacing projects. (Those projects requiring an excess of 11/2-inch nominal thickness.) Maximum assessments are based on the following: 
(1)  Street surface based on a street width of 31 feet from back of curb to back of curb, subgrade repair, surface and full depth patching, joint repair or sealing, grinding or rotomilling, curb and gutter removal and replacement, removal or replacement of PCC and crushed rock driveways, seeding or sodding of areas disturbed during the project including driveways, seeding or sodding of areas disturbed during the project including erosion control and shouldering. 
(2)  Legal, administrative, engineering, and inspection fees and project contingencies. 
(3)  The assessment shall not include work in the intersections from the beginning to the end of the radius. 
(Code 1996, § 181.02) 
Secs. 42-207-42-235. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - SIDEWALKS 

Sec. 42-236. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this article is to enhance safe passage by citizens on sidewalks, to place the responsibility for the maintenance, repair, replacement or reconstruction of sidewalks upon the abutting property owner and to minimize the liability of the city. 
(Code 1996, § 185.01) 
Sec. 42-237. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Approach sidewalk means the sidewalk from the curb line or traveled portion of the public street to the main public sidewalk, perpendicular to the curb line, not to exceed the right-of-way line, extended parallel with the street. 
    Broom finish means a sidewalk finish that is made by sweeping the sidewalk when it is hardening. 
    Defective sidewalk means any public sidewalk exhibiting one or more of the following characteristics: 
(1)  Vertical separations equal to three-fourths inch or more. 
(2)  Horizontal separations equal to one-half inch or more. 
(3)  Holes or depressions equal to three-fourths inch or more and at least four inches in diameter. 
(4)  Spalling over 50 percent of a single square of the sidewalk with one or more depressions equal to one-half inch or more. 
(5)  Spalling over less than 50 percent of a single square of the sidewalk with one or more depressions equal to three-fourths inch or more. 
(6)  A single square of sidewalk cracked in such a manner that no part thereof has a piece greater than one square foot. 
(7)  A sidewalk with any part thereof missing to the full depth. 
(8)  A change from the design or construction grade equal to or greater than three-fourths inch per foot. 
    Established grade means that grade established by the city for the particular area in which a sidewalk is to be constructed. 
    One-course construction means that the full thickness of the concrete is placed at one time, using the same mixture throughout. 
    Owner means the person owning the fee title to property abutting any sidewalk and includes any contract purchaser for purposes of notification required herein. For all other purposes, the term "owner" includes the lessee, if any. 
    Portland cement concrete (PCC) means any type of cement except bituminous cement. 
    Sidewalk means all permanent public walks in business, residential or suburban areas. 
    Sidewalk improvements means the construction, reconstruction, repair, replacement or removal, of a public sidewalk or the excavating, filling or depositing of material in the public right-of-way in connection therewith. 
    Wood float finish means a sidewalk finish that is made by smoothing the surface of the sidewalk with a wooden trowel. 
(Code 1996, § 185.02) 
Sec. 42-238. - Removal of snow, ice and accumulations. 
(a)  It shall be the responsibility and duty of an abutting property owner or resident to remove snow, ice and accumulations from sidewalks within a reasonable time. Failure to perform shall be a simple misdemeanor. 
(b)  If an abutting property owner or resident fails to remove snow, ice or accumulations from sidewalks within a reasonable time, the city may do so and assess the costs against the property owner for collection in the same manner as a property tax. 
(c)  For the purposes of subsections (a) and (b) of this section, the term "resident" means the person renting, occupying or owning the abutting property. Proof of renting, occupying or ownership shall be determined by the name or names listed on the official billing records of the city utilities office on the date of the offense. 
(Code 1996, § 185.03) 
Sec. 42-239. - Responsibility for maintenance. 
    It is the responsibility of the abutting property owners to repair, replace or reconstruct, or cause to be repaired, replaced or reconstructed, all broken or defective sidewalks and to maintain in a safe and hazard-free condition any sidewalk outside the lot and property lines and inside the curb lines or traveled portion of the public street. 
(Code 1996, § 185.04) 
Sec. 42-240. - Failure to maintain; personal injuries. 
    If the abutting property owner does not maintain or repair defective sidewalks as required and action is brought against the city for personal injuries alleged to have been caused by its negligence, the city may notify in writing any person by whose negligence it claims the injury was caused. The notice shall state the pendency of the action, the name of the plaintiff, the name and location of the court where the action is pending, a brief statement of the alleged facts from which the cause arose, that the city believes that the person notified is liable to it for any judgment rendered against the city and asking the person to appear and defend. A judgment obtained in the suit is conclusive in any action by the city against any person so notified, as to the existence of the defect or other cause of the injury or damage, as to liability of the city to the plaintiff in the first named action, and as to the amount of the damage or injury. The city may maintain an action against the person notified to recover the amount of the judgment together with all the expenses incurred by the city in the suit. 
(Code 1996, § 185.05) 
Sec. 42-241. - City may order repairs. 
    If the abutting property owner does not maintain sidewalks as required, the council may serve notice on such owner, by certified mail, requiring the owner to repair, replace or reconstruct sidewalks within a reasonable time and if such action is not completed within the time stated in the notice, the council may require the work to be done and assess the costs against the abutting property for collection in the same manner as a property tax. 
(Code 1996, § 185.06) 
Sec. 42-242. - Sidewalk construction ordered. 
    The council may, by resolution, order the construction or reconstruction of permanent sidewalks upon any street or court. Unless the owners of a majority of the linear feet of the property fronting on the improvement petition the council therefor, new permanent sidewalks shall not be required unless three-fourths of all the members of the council, by resolution, order the making thereof, all in accordance with state law for special assessments. 
(Code 1996, § 185.07) 
Sec. 42-243. - Permit required. 
    No person shall remove, reconstruct or install a sidewalk unless such person has obtained a permit from the city and has agreed in writing that the removal, reconstruction or installation will comply with all ordinances and requirements of the city for such work. 
(Code 1996, § 185.08) 
Sec. 42-244. - Indemnification. 
    Any person securing a permit as required above shall agree to hold the city free from all liability for damages on account of injuries received by anyone through the negligence of such person or such person's agents or employees in making the sidewalk improvements, or by reason of such person's failure to properly guard the premises. 
(Code 1996, § 185.09) 
Sec. 42-245. - Sidewalk standards. 
    Sidewalks repaired, replaced or constructed under the provisions of this article shall be of the following construction and meet the following standards: 
(1)  Cement. Portland cement concrete shall be the only cement used in the construction and repair of sidewalks. 
(2)  Construction. Sidewalks shall be of one-course construction. 
(3)  Sidewalk base. Concrete may be placed directly on compact and well-drained soil. Where soil is not well-drained, a three inch sub-base of compact, clean, coarse gravel, sand or cinders shall be laid. The adequacy of the soil drainage is to be determined by the city. 
(4)  Sidewalk bed. The sidewalk bed shall be so graded that the constructed sidewalk will be at established grade. 
(5)  Length, width and depth. Length, width and depth requirements are as follows: 
a.  Residential sidewalks shall be at least four feet wide and four inches thick, and each section shall be no more than four feet in length. 
b.  Business district sidewalks shall extend from the property line to the curb. Each section shall be four inches thick and no more than six feet in length. 
c.  Driveway areas shall be not less than six inches in thickness. 
(6)  Location. Residential sidewalks shall be located with the inner edge (edge nearest the abutting private property) one foot from the property line, unless the council establishes a different distance due to circumstances. 
(7)  Grade. Curb tops shall be on level with the centerline of the street which shall be the established grade. 
(8)  Elevations. The street edge of a sidewalk shall be at an elevation even with the curb at the curb or not less than one-half inch above the curb for each foot between the curb and the sidewalk. 
(9)  Slope. All sidewalks shall slope one-quarter inch per foot toward the curb. 
(10)  Finish. All sidewalks shall be finished with a "broom" or "wood float" finish, or in the business district, sidewalks shall be finished back to their pre-repaired or replaced design including, but not limited to, replacing or repairing bricks to the previous design matching adjacent property owners. 
(11)  Ramps for persons with disabilities. There shall be not less than two curb cuts or ramps per linear block which shall be located on or near the crosswalks at intersections. Each curb cut or ramp shall be at least 30 inches wide, shall be sloped at not greater than one inch of rise per 12 inches linear distance, except that a slope no greater than one inch of rise per eight inches linear distance may be used where necessary, shall have a nonskid surface, and shall otherwise be so constructed as to allow reasonable access to the crosswalk for persons with disabilities using the sidewalk. 
(12)  Approach sidewalk. The initial construction of sidewalks shall include the approach sidewalk, where applicable, the intent being to provide pedestrian access to the traveled portion of a public street. 
(Code 1996, § 185.10; Ord. No. 2019-1819, § 1, 3-4-2019) 
Sec. 42-246. - Barricades and warning lights. 
    Whenever any material of any kind is deposited on any street, avenue, highway, passageway or alley when sidewalk improvements are being made or when any sidewalk is in a dangerous condition, it shall be the duty of all persons having an interest therein, either as the constructor or the owner, agent, or lessee of the property in front of or along which such material may be deposited, or such dangerous condition exists, to put in conspicuous places at each end of such sidewalk and at each end of any pile of material deposited in the street, a sufficient number of approved warning lights or flares, and to keep them lighted during the entire night and to erect sufficient barricades both at night and in the daytime to secure the same. The parties using the street for any of the purposes specified in this article shall be liable for all injuries or damage to persons or property arising from any wrongful act or negligence of the parties, or their agents or employees or for any misuse of the privileges conferred by this article or of any failure to comply with provisions hereof. 
(Code 1996, § 185.11) 
Sec. 42-247. - Failure to repair or barricade. 
    It shall be the duty of the owner of the property abutting the sidewalk, or the owner's contractor or agent to notify the city immediately in the event they fail or are unable to make necessary sidewalk improvements or to install or erect necessary barricades as required by this article. 
(Code 1996, § 185.12) 
Sec. 42-248. - Interference with sidewalk improvements. 
    No person shall knowingly or willfully drive any vehicle upon any portion of any sidewalk or approach thereto while in the process of being improved or upon any portion of any completed sidewalk or approach thereto or shall remove or destroy any part or all of any sidewalk or approach thereto, or shall remove, destroy, mar or deface any sidewalk at any time or destroy, mar, remove or deface any notice provided by this article. 
(Code 1996, § 185.13) 
Sec. 42-249. - Awning over sidewalk. 
    It is unlawful for a person to erect or maintain any awning over any sidewalk unless all parts of the awning are elevated at least seven feet above the surface of the street or sidewalk and the roof or covering is made of duck, canvas or other suitable material supported by iron frames or brackets securely fastened to the building, without any posts or other device that will obstruct the sidewalk or hinder or interfere with the free passage of pedestrians. 
(Code 1996, § 185.14) 
Sec. 42-250. - Encroaching steps. 
    It is unlawful for a person to erect or maintain any stairs or steps to any building upon any part of any sidewalk without permission by resolution of the council. 
(Code 1996, § 185.15) 
Sec. 42-251. - Openings and enclosures. 
    It is unlawful for a person to: 
(1)  Stairs and railings. Construct or build a stairway or passageway to any cellar or basement by occupying any part of the sidewalk, or to enclose any portion of a sidewalk with a railing without permission by resolution of the council. 
(2)  Openings. Keep open any cellar door, grating or cover to any vault on any sidewalk except while in actual use with adequate guards to protect the public. 
(3)  Protect openings. Neglect to properly protect or barricade all openings on or within six feet of any sidewalk. 
(Code 1996, § 185.16) 
Sec. 42-252. - Fires on sidewalks. 
    It is unlawful for a person to make a fire of any kind on any sidewalk. 
(Code 1996, § 185.17) 
Sec. 42-253. - Fuel on sidewalks. 
    It is unlawful for a person to place or allow any fuel to remain upon any sidewalk. 
(Code 1996, § 185.18) 
Sec. 42-254. - Defacing sidewalks. 
    It is unlawful for a person to scatter or place any paste, paint or writing on any sidewalk. 
(Code 1996, § 185.19) 
Sec. 42-255. - Debris on sidewalks. 
    It is unlawful for a person to throw or deposit on any sidewalk any glass, nails, glass bottles, tacks, wire, cans, trash, garbage, rubbish, litter, offal, or any other debris, or any substance likely to injure any person, animal or vehicle. 
(Code 1996, § 185.20) 
Sec. 42-256. - Merchandise display. 
    It is unlawful for a person to place upon or above any sidewalk, any goods or merchandise for sale or for display in such a manner as to interfere with the free and uninterrupted passage of pedestrians on the sidewalk; in no case shall more than three feet of the sidewalk next to the building be occupied for such purposes. 
(Code 1996, § 185.21) 
Sec. 42-257. - Removal of sidewalk. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person to remove any existing sidewalk except for the following special exception: The sidewalk contributes to less than one-half the distance of contiguous sidewalk on that side of the block. A block, for this purpose, shall be designated by the numerical numbering system utilized such as the 1000 block, 1100 block, 1200 block, etc. 
(b)  Permission to remove any sidewalk shall be obtained in the inspection department. If permitted, a sidewalk permit will be issued before any removal may commence. Failure to obtain a permit for removal may result in the filing of a municipal infraction against the property owner. 
(Code 1996, § 185.22) 
Secs. 42-258-42-268. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - RAILROADS 

Sec. 42-269. - Requirements. 
    Requirements are as listed in SUDAS (Statewide Urban Design and Specifications), per chapter 5, H-1. 
Secs. 42-270-42-277. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XI. - TREES AND SHRUBBERY 

Sec. 42-278. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this article is to beautify and preserve trees and shrubs for the appearance of the city and to provide for the abatement of diseased and dangerous trees to promote public safety. 
(Code 1996, § 142.01) 
Sec. 42-279. - Dangerous trees defined. 
    All trees which, by reason of their size, age, condition, disease or location, may endanger public life or safety, or the safety of property, are declared to be dangerous trees and are also declared to be a nuisance which should be removed and abated. If there is a danger that all or a substantial portion of such trees might fall on any public alley, street or other public property or any private property, such condition is also declared to be sufficient evidence that such tree or trees constitute a nuisance. 
(Code 1996, § 142.02) 
Sec. 42-280. - City forester. 
    The city manager shall designate a person to act as city forester and such person shall have jurisdiction over all trees and other plantings on the streets within the city in order to provide orderly tree planting, to protect the health of all trees from disease, and to require trees and plantings to be maintained in a manner not dangerous to public safety. 
(Code 1996, § 142.03) 
Sec. 42-281. - Duties of city forester. 
    The city forester shall have the following authorities and duties: 
(1)  Prevent the indiscriminate trimming or removal of trees or plants within streets. 
(2)  Regulate new planting of trees or other plantings in streets in accordance with street tree planting regulations approved by the council and on file in the office of the clerk. 
(3)  Order private persons to comply with duties placed upon them by this article. 
(4)  Supervise all work by city employees or contractors in the trimming, preservation, planting, or removal of trees or other plantings in the streets. 
(Code 1996, § 142.04) 
Sec. 42-282. - Duties of private owners. 
    It shall be the duty of any person growing a tree or other plantings on private property abutting on streets or public places: 
(1)  Trim for clearance. To trim trees or plantings so that they shall not cause a hazard to the public or block public walks or ways or interfere with proper lighting of public streets or places. The minimum clearance of any overhanging portion shall be eight feet over walks and 14 feet above the surface of the traveled portion of the street. 
(2)  Planting restricted. Not to plant any tree or other planting on private property which would cause a public danger or nuisance. At intersections, all trees and shrubbery shall be so trimmed and pruned as to give clear vision to all vehicular traffic approaching from any direction. 
(3)  Planting at intersections. Not to plant trees or other plantings on corner lots or lots adjacent to an alley in the area bounded by the street or alley lines of such lots and a line joining points along the street or alley lines 25 feet from the point of intersection of the right-of-way lines. If the lot is located at the intersection of an alley or street and a street or alley designated for one-way traffic, the city forester shall have the authority to allow trees or other plantings within the area, provided the planting does not restrict visibility of approaching vehicles or pedestrians at the intersection. 
(4)  Planting at sidewalk or alley line. Not to plant any tree nearer than four feet to the sidewalk line or alley right-of-way line. 
(5)  Diseased trees or plants. To treat in an accepted manner or remove any tree or plant so diseased or insect ridden as to constitute a hazard to other trees and especially those dangerous to trees or plants in public streets or places. 
(6)  Prohibited species. Not to plant any of the following species: cottonwood (unless cottonless), cotton-bearing poplar, box-elder or ash and any trees not recommended for planting by the state department of natural resources. 
(Code 1996, § 142.05) 
Sec. 42-283. - Removal of dangerous and infected trees. 
    The owner, occupant or person in charge of any property shall remove at his own expense any tree, brush, wood or debris infected with Dutch elm disease or other crippling disease or in dangerous condition found thereon when so notified by the city forester. The notice shall state that the owner may appear before the council at an appointed time not less than 14 days from the date of mailing to show cause why the tree, brush, wood or debris should not be declared a public nuisance. At the meeting the council may resolve and declare the same to be a public nuisance and may order its removal by the owner. 
(Code 1996, § 142.06) 
Sec. 42-284. - Removal by city. 
    In the event the owner fails to comply with the resolution and order of the council to so remove the public nuisance, the city forester shall cause the public nuisance to be removed and shall submit the costs incident to the service and removal to the council, which shall certify the same to the county treasurer for collection with and in the same manner as general property taxes. 
(Code 1996, § 142.07) 
Sec. 42-285. - Multiple owners. 
    If such tree, brush, wood or debris is growing upon the property of two different owners, or two different occupants, notices shall be served upon both and the expense of removal shall be divided equally between them. 
(Code 1996, § 142.08) 
Sec. 42-286. - Shrubbery. 
    All shrubbery, bushes and other growth within the confines of the area between the outer line of the sidewalk and the curb, or if there is no curb, the surfaced portion of the street, shall be kept trimmed and pruned by the owner of the premises abutting so as not to impede or interfere with traffic or travel on the streets or sidewalks. 
(Code 1996, § 142.09) 
Sec. 42-287. - Obstruction of enforcement. 
    It is unlawful for any person to hinder, obstruct or otherwise interfere with the agents or employees of the city while engaged in carrying out the provision of section 42-283 through 42-285 upon order of the council made thereunder. 
(Code 1996, § 142.10) 
Sec. 42-288. - Abuse or mutilation of trees. 
    No person shall willfully damage, cut, carve, pick the seeds of, or injure the bark of any tree or plant on the streets or public places of the city. Tree trimming shall be done in accordance with good practice and the regulations of the city. 
(Code 1996, § 142.11) 
Sec. 42-289. - Continuing violation. 
    Each day that any condition prohibited herein is maintained shall be considered a separate offense and may be punished accordingly. 
(Code 1996, § 142.12) 
Secs. 42-290-42-311. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XII. - FRANCHISES, LICENSES AND EASEMENTS 

Sec. 42-312. - Purpose. 
    The council finds that in order to ensure public safety and provide efficient delivery of services by the city and others wishing to utilize streets and other public property for the delivery of utility or other services, in order to protect public and private investment, ensure orderly use of public property and ensure the health, safety and welfare of the population, to provide for the regulation and administration of the public streets and other public property and secure the rights of the city to a return on its investment in public property that it is necessary for the city to establish uniform rules and controls. This article is to be interpreted in light of these findings for the benefit of the public and users of the streets and other public property. 
(Code 1996, § 113.01) 
Sec. 42-313. - Applicability. 
    This article shall apply to all franchises, licenses and easements granted by the city including all existing franchises, licenses and easements. 
(Code 1996, § 113.13) 
Sec. 42-314. - Home rule. 
    This article is intended to be and shall be construed as consistent with the reservation of local authority contained in the 25th amendment to the state constitution granting cities home rule powers. To such end any limitation on the power of the city contained herein is to be strictly construed and the city reserves to itself the right to exercise all power and authority to regulate and control its local affairs and all ordinances and regulations of the city shall be enforceable against the holder of any franchise, license or easement. 
(Code 1996, § 113.14) 
Sec. 42-315. - Franchise, license or easement required. 
    No person or their entity shall use the public right-of-way or other public property without first obtaining a franchise, license or easement from the city. The city shall not enter into or issue any franchise, license or easement which grants exclusive rights. This section shall not apply to the state. 
(Code 1996, § 113.02) 
Sec. 42-316. - Fee required. 
    No franchise, license or easement for the use of public right-of-way or other public property shall be granted without requiring the grantee thereof to pay a reasonable and competitively neutral fee for the use of public right-of-way or other public property. 
(Code 1996, § 113.03) 
Sec. 42-317. - Limit on term. 
    No franchise, license or easement for use of the public right-of-way or other public property shall be granted for a term of more than 15 years. 
(Code 1996, § 113.04) 
Sec. 42-318. - Placement of facilities. 
(a)  The facilities, fixtures and equipment for the distribution, transmission or sale of any utility services, or services provided under license or easement, shall be placed and maintained so as not to unnecessarily or unreasonably interfere with travel on the streets, highways, avenues, alleys, bridges and public places in the city, nor shall such facilities, fixtures and equipment unnecessarily or unreasonably interfere with the proper use of the same, including, but not limited to, ordinary drainage, or the functioning of the sewers, underground pipe or other property of the city. 
(b)  In the event that facilities, fixtures and equipment of any person or other entity located within a public right-of-way must be relocated because of paving, road construction, or road reconstruction, sewer construction or sewer reconstruction, or the construction or reconstruction of public drainage systems or similar public works or the construction or reconstruction of the facilities of any city-owned utility, such relocation at the written request of the city, shall be completed by the owner of such facilities at the owner's cost. 
(c)  The city shall upon request of any person or other entity holding a franchise, license or easement, review any plans for the construction of facilities, fixtures and equipment within the public right-of-way and advise the person or other entity of any conflict such construction may have with planned or anticipated public improvements, but failure of the city to so advise such person or other entity will not relieve the owner of such facilities of its obligations under this article. 
(d)  Notwithstanding the forgoing, the city manager or designee may require placement of equipment or facilities belonging to any holder of a franchise, license or easement be limited to locations designated by the city manager or designee if such limitation is deemed by the city manager or designee to be necessary to protect the integrity or use for present and future users of the public right-of-way or other public property. 
(Code 1996, § 113.05) 
Sec. 42-319. - Indemnification. 
(a)  The holder of any license, franchise or easement shall indemnify and hold the city harmless at all times during the term of the franchise, license or easement from and against all claims for injury or damage to persons or property caused by the construction, erection, operation or maintenance of its facilities, fixtures or equipment, or the negligence of its contractors or its employees. 
(b)  In case of any suit or action at law being commenced against the city, upon any claim for damage arising out of any loss, injury or damage, claimed to have been caused by any installation, improvement, obstruction or excavation in any street, alley, sidewalk or public place in the city, and which installation, improvement, obstruction or excavation was made or left in, under or upon such street, sidewalk, alley or public place by the holder of a franchise, easement or license, its agents, contractors or employees, upon being notified in writing by the city of such action or proceeding, the holder of the franchise, license or easement shall appear and make proper defense thereto at the expense of the holder of the franchise, license or easement; and if any judgment or decree shall in any such case be rendered against the city therein, the holder of the franchise, license or easement shall assume, pay and satisfy such judgment or decree, with the costs thereof. 
(Code 1996, § 113.06) 
Sec. 42-320. - Street use regulations. 
    The city reserves to itself the right to make reasonable general regulations for the use of streets and other public property which, unless otherwise specifically provided, shall apply to any holder of a franchise, license or easement. 
(Code 1996, § 113.07) 
Sec. 42-321. - Permit required for construction and excavation. 
(a)  A written permit will be obtained from the city manager or designee whenever it becomes necessary for the holder of any franchise, license or easement to excavate in streets or public grounds of the city. Such permits shall state a particular part or point of the street where the excavation is to be made and the length of time in which such permit shall authorize the work to be done. An exception to a requirement for a permit shall be made in cases of emergency involving public safety, in which case a permit will be obtained at the earliest opportunity after the work has started. 
(b)  In making excavations in the streets the holder of any franchise, license or easement shall proceed with such work as to cause the least possible inconvenience to the public. The holder of any franchise, license or easement shall properly protect, according to safety standards generally accepted at the time of placement, as may be determined from time to time by the city manager or designee, all excavations and obstructions by proper placement of shoring, surface plates, barricades, warning lights and such other or additional devices as circumstances may warrant. If in the opinion of the city manager or designee such excavation or obstruction is not properly and safely protected, the city manager or designee shall notify such holder of a franchise, license or easement who shall immediately comply with such reasonable instructions. 
(c)  Immediately after use any trenches for excavations which the holder of a franchise, license or easement has opened shall be filled. No trench or excavation in the streets shall be filled or covered without giving the city the right to inspect the same. All backfilling in streets will be according to city specifications. Temporary street surfacing will be placed in such excavations as soon as the same has been backfilled. Pavements, sidewalks, curbs and gutters or other portions of streets and public places opened, disturbed or damaged shall be promptly restored and replaced with like materials at the expense of the holder of a franchise, license or easement and left in as good condition as before the opening, disturbance or damage occurred. In the event like replacement materials are not available, the holder of the franchise, license or easement shall notify the city manager or designee who must approve the use of any alternate materials. 
(d)  In the event that the holder of a franchise, license or easement fails to comply with the provisions of this section, after having been given reasonable notice, the city may do such work as may be needed to properly repair such pavements, sidewalks, curbs and gutters or other portions of streets and public places and the cost thereof shall be repaid to the city by the holder of the franchise, license or easement. In cases where a cut or disturbance is made in a section of street paving or sidewalks but causes disturbances to an area greater than the cut area, rather than replace only the area cut, the holder of a franchise, license or easement shall replace that area as may be ordered by the city manager or designee, which in no event shall exceed the panel or panels disturbed. 
(Code 1996, § 113.08) 
Sec. 42-322. - City construction and paving. 
(a)  Whenever the city shall pave or repave any street or shall change the grade line of any street or public place or shall construct or reconstruct any conduit, water main service or water connection, sewer or other city-owned public works or city-owned utility, it shall be the duty of the holder of any franchise, license or easement, when so ordered by the city, to relocate its service lines and other property in the streets or other public places at its own expense so as to conform to the established grade or line of such street or public place and so as not to interfere with the public improvements so constructed or reconstructed. In the case of other public improvements, including, but not limited to, urban renewal projects, the city may require the holder of a franchise, license or easement to relocate its poles, service lines and appurtenances in the streets at the owner's expense. 
(b)  The city may at its discretion assign personnel for inspection of excavation and related work being performed by the holder of a franchise, license or easement. Should the holder of the franchise, license or easement fail or refuse to do and perform the things provide in this article, the city may, after reasonable notice, perform the work and charge the expense thereof to the holder of the franchise, license or easement and the holder of the franchise, license or easement shall promptly pay the charges. 
(Code 1996, § 113.09) 
Sec. 42-323. - Design notice to city. 
(a)  The holder of a franchise, license or easement shall promptly upon request furnish the city manager or designee a detailed map or maps of its distribution system, both within the city limits and the area immediately surrounding the city. The holder of a franchise, license or easement shall thereafter update the map or maps, upon request, but not more often than every year, showing all subsequent additions or deletions to the distribution system. Prior to any excavation by the city, or its agents, a representative must contact the holder of any franchise, license or easement regarding current information on the location of underground lines or facilities in the area concerned. 
(b)  The obligation to contact the holder of a franchise, license or easement under this section shall be satisfied if contact is made with a corporation organized pursuant to the Code of Iowa ch. 480 or any entity with a similar function utilized by both the city and the company, currently the state One-Call System. 
(Code 1996, § 113.10) 
Sec. 42-324. - Assignment. 
    No sale, assignment or lease of any franchise, license or easement for the use of the public right-of-way or other public property shall be effective until it is approved by the council and until the holder thereof has filed in the office of the clerk written notice of the proposed sale, transfer, disposition or assignment, such notice to clearly summarize the proposed procedure and the terms and conditions thereof. Such approval by the city shall not be unreasonably witheld. The proposed vendee, assignee or lessee shall similarly file an instrument, duly executed, reciting such proposal, accepting the terms of the franchise, license or easement and agreeing to perform all the conditions thereof. 
(Code 1996, § 113.11) 
Sec. 42-325. - Forfeiture. 
    The violation of any material portion of a franchise, license or easement by the holder thereof or its successors or assigns, or its failure promptly to perform any of the provisions of this article shall be cause for forfeiture of the franchise, license or easement and the termination of all rights thereunder. Such forfeiture shall be accomplished by ordinance of the city after written notice to the holder thereof and a continuation of the violation, failure or default specified on the notice for at least 30 days from the date the notice was served. 
(Code 1996, § 113.12) 
Sec. 42-326. - New technologies. 
    Should, within the term of any franchise, license or easement, developments within the field for which the grant was made offer to the holder thereof the opportunity to more effectively, efficiently and economically serve its customers through use of a substance or material other than those for which the grant was originally made, then the holder of the franchise, license or easement may petition the council which, with such requirements or limitations as it deems necessary to protect public health, safety and welfare, may allow the use of such substances under the terms and conditions of the franchise, license or easement. 
(Code 1996, § 113.15) 
Sec. 42-327. - Vacating of certain streets and/or alleys, by ordinance number. 
Ordinance No. Title 42 Vacate S. 42' of Dubuque between River and Union 81 Seneca Street vacated south of Pleasant Street 82 Narrows Street from W. line Superior to E. line of Prospect 83 Vacates St. N. of Block 114 D. and Pac. R.R. Add. 84 Vacates Superior St. north of Ill. Central R.R. for Water Works 17 (1-19-75) Vacate for Court House 36 Vacated alley Block 4 and 5, Odell and Willson Addition 39 Vacates portion of Des Moines St. (between Bank and Elm) for Water Works 48 Vacates Grove St. north of James Street 57 Vacates Elm Street east of River Street 65 Vacates Elm Street east of River Street (duplicate of 57) 70 Vacates Dubuque 15' Wide Willson Avenue to Des Moines and Lots 1 to 7 incl., Block 26, City 71 Vacate alley. Block 33 and 34 Orig. Town 72 Vacate Street between Ct. House and Sch. House from Bank to Elm 126 Vacate James Street east of north line of Superior Street 133 Vacates Street north of Superior and Block 113-W.C. Brick and Tile 143 Vacates Dubuque Street Lots 13, 4, 5, 6, Block 25 149 Vacates Alley Block 8, Lawn Hill, Lots 1 to 4 incl. 151 Vacates Alley, Block 7, Lawn Hill, Lots 1 to 4 incl. 161 Vacates part of Division Street and alley in Block 9, D and P R.R. 178 Vacates portion of 4th St. (Ill. Cent. R.R. R.O.W.) 185 Vacates portion of Woolsey Ave. (Repealed by 190) 190 Vacates portion Woolsey Ave. S. Line of E1.R.R. to N. line of Ill. R.R. 218 Vacates Alley Block 6, W.C. 228 Vacates portion of Dubuque St. 260 Vacates portion of Pleasant St.- W. of Willson Ave. 4-5-1905 295 Vacates 33 Strip Blocks 6 and 7 West, New Castle Add. 297 Vacates 33' Strip-West New Castle 298 Vacates part of 4th St. 3-31-1911 300 Vacates 14' off W. Side Superior St. from Ill. Central R.R. S. to alley- April 4-1911 301 Union Street vacated in South City 309 Vacates Seneca St. N. of Ill. Central R.R. R.O.W. (Nov. 6-1911) 340 Vacates Alley abutting Lots 6 and 7, Blk., 7, Orig. New Castle 354 Vacates Alley-between Lots 2 and 3, Blk. 8, Orig. New Castle 368 Vacates Alley Lots 4 and 8, Div. 4, Sec. 10, Hopevale Graceland Cemetery 370 Vacates Alley Blk 8, Orig. N. Castle Between Lots 6 and 7 377 Vacates Fink St. 378 Vacates highway (west of Marvel Sales Barn) 388 Vacates Funk St. between 3rd St. and James St. 396 Vacates Fink St. between Boone and Ohio 422 Vacates Road on W. Side of Graceland Cemetery 432 Vacates portion of 2nd Street 455 Vacates Alley-Lots 6 and 7, Blk 2, Orig. New Castle 459 Vacates 6' off E. side of Young St. from 4th St. S. 80' to Ill. Cent. R.R. 571 Vacates alley between Lots 6 and 7, Blk 6 of New Castle 573 Vacates part of Superior Street. 585 Vacates alley-between Lots 6 and 7, Block 5 New Castle 594 Vacates Alley-Lots 2 and 3, Blk 7, New Castle 595 Vacates Alley-Lots 6 and 7, Blk 5, New Castle 625 Vacates Alley, Blk 8, North W.C. 654 34th St. vacation (Hart-Carter Factory) 672 Vacates Alley Blk 3, Lawn Hill, Alley Blk 18, Park Add. 673 Vacates Elm Ave. between Linn St. and 2nd and alley between Lots 6 and 7, Block 4, New Castle 675 Vacates Alley between Lots 2 and 3, Blk 4, New Castle and alley between Blk 42 and 45, Orig. Town 678 Vacates S. 12' of N. 21' of Dubuque Street 682 Vacates William St. west of West line of Broadway 690 Vacates Alley between Lot 2 and 3, Blk 1, Newcastle 696 Vacates St. or alley adjoining Blk. 11, Park Add. 697 Vacates Strip W. side River St. Lot 8, Blk. 8, New Castle 698 Vacates Portion of Elm Ave. and Alley Blk 8, Park Add. 702 Vacates Portion of Creet St. (indep. School Dist.) 722 Vacates Portion of Betsy Lane except extens. of Sunset Drive 725 Vacates alley Blk 7 North W.C. (Beam Mfg. Co.) 732 Vacates Third St. between Seneca and Willson Aven. (Morton Packing) 752 Vacating E 17 1/2 ft. of Prospect Street north of 2nd St. to Alley 771 Vacating a strip of land 5 ft. wide off north side of Second Street abutting Lot 13 in Block 3 Lawn Hill Addition and sold to Cities Service Oil Co. 813 Vacates part of alley in Block 4-Newcastle Addition 818 Vacates part of alley in Block 3-Newcastle Addition 867 Vacates portion of alley south of Lots 3 and 4 Blk 42 929 Vacating a portion of Stockdale Street 932 Vacating a Street Right-of-Way north of Bell Avenue at Hilltop School 938 Vacating an unused alley adjacent to the Five Hundred Block of Stockdale Street 939 Vacating a portion of Stockdale Street and Willson Avenue 943 Vacates unused east-west alley in Block 14, Park Addition, between Willow Street and Hazel Street 945 Vacates portion of Stockdale Street between Des Moines Street and Willson Avenue 970 Vacating an alley between Consol. Freight Storage and Weaver Ready Mix 988 Vacating Seneca Street north of the Illinois Central Railroad tracks and a portion of Stockdale Street 1008 Vacating North Street from the west line of the Chicago and Northwestern Railway property of the Boone River 1023 Vacating a portion of the alley located north of Second Street (the 800 block) 1028 Providing for the vacation of that portion of the alley lying between lots 2 and 3, Block 5, original Newcastle Addition lying south of the C & NW Railway Company right-of-way 1051 Providing for the vacation of an unused portion of Creek Street 1052 Providing for the vacation of an unused portion of Seneca Street just south of the Illinois Central Gulf Railroad tracks. 1060 Providing for the vacation of a portion of Clark Street 1061 Providing for the vacation of Fourth Street between Seneca Street and Des Moines Street 1093 Providing for the vacation of the Alley in Block 10, Park Addition 1106 Providing for the vacation of a portion of Lynndale Drive 1108 Providing for the vacation of Fourth Street located in the new water plant property 1154 Vacates easement property consisting of the south five feet of Lots 1 through 3, incl., of Ross Park First Addition 1155 Vacates easement property consisting of the west five feet of Lot Five, the east five feet of the south 73.6 feet of Lot Six and the west ten feet of Lot Six of Carsey Subdivision 1156 Vacates all that part of Willson Avenue lying west of Lot 5, in Block 7, as platted in North City June 26, 1860 83-1231 Vacation of the alleys adjacent to Lots 5, 6, 19, 20, and the east 25' of Lots 7 and 18 in Block 7, Lawn Hill Addition 83-1235 Vacation of all that part of West Avenue lying west of the west line of Block 3, Lawn Hill Addition 84-1238 Vacates east-west alley abutting Lots 1 through 8, in Block 2 of the Newcastle Addition 84-1242 Vacates the alley abutting Lots 10, 11, 12, 13, 14 and 15, Block 3, Park Addition 87-1303 Providing for the vacation of the alley located in Block 11, Dubuque and Pacific Railroad Addition and Original City Addition, except that portion lying between Lots 4 and 5, Block 11, Original City Addition 87-1306 Providing for the vacation of streets located in Odell and Willson Addition and North City Addition 88-1314 Providing for the vacation of Fourth Street located in West New Castle Addition 88-1323 Providing for the vacation of Stockdale Street (lying between the west line of Des Moines Street and the east line of Prospect Street) and Lucas Street (lying between the west line of Des Moines Street and the east line of Prospect Street) located in Odell and Willson Addition and Jones and Smith Addition 90-1362 Providing for the vacation of Merritt Street lying between the west line of Des Moines Street and the east line of Propsect Street 90-1363 Providing for the vacation of the north six feet of Second Street right-of-way 91-1376 Providing for the vacation of an alley located in Block three, Park Addition 91-1377 Providing for the vacation of Franklin Avenue located in Edgewood Addition No. 1 92-1390 Providing for the vacation of an alley located in Block eight, Park Addition 92-1402 Providing for the vacation of alleys located in Block 19, Block 9, Block 21, and the vacation of the alley in Block 4 adjacent to Lots 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, and 15 all located in Park Addition 92-1403 Vacation of a portion of Hazel Street abutting Lot 1, Block 14, and Lot 9, Block 15, Park Addition 94-1437 Vacation of the alley located in Block 20, adjacent to Lots 1 and 16, Park Addition 94-1439 Vacation of a portion of Millards Lane 98-1510 Vacation of a portion of Dubuque Street, Dubuque and Pacific Addition 99-1531 Vacation of alleys located in Block 111, Funk and Co. Addition, Block 111, Dubuque & Pacific Railroad Addition, and Block 110, Funk and Co. Addition 99-1532 Amends Ord. 99-1531 by providing the accurate legal description of the alleys vacated 99-1533 Vacation of a portion of Des Moines Street, Dubuque and Pacific Railroad Addition 2000-1548 Vacation of a portion of Seneca Street, West New Castle Addition 2002-1587 Vacation of a portion of Clark Street 2005-1635 Vacation of a portion of Maple Avenue right-of-way, Park Addition 2010-1708 Vacation of a portion of Funk Street right-of-way, Wilson Funk and Co's Addition 2011-1742 Vacation of a portion of an alley located in Block 6, Original New Castle, Webster City, Iowa 2011-1744 Vacation of a portion of an alley located in Block 7, Lawn Hill Addition, Webster City, Iowa 2015-1782 Vacation of a portion of east Street right-of-way, Jones and Smith Addition 2015-1783 Vacation of a portion of Third Street right-of-way, west of Prospect Street 2016-1789 Vacation of an alley adjacent to Lot 7, Block 82, West New Castle Addition  
Sec. 42-328. - Establishment of street or sidewalk grades, by ordinance number. 
Ordinance No. Adopted Ch. 802 of the 1967 Municipal Code which codified ordinances 64 through 817 listed below April 17, 1967  
Ordinance No. Title 64 Grades April 4, 1892 (Repealed by 159?) 131 Grades Jan. 12, 1899 (Repealed by 159?) 139 Grades Third St. Sept. 18, 1899 (Repealed by 159?) 142 Sidewalk line-in front of K. Y. Library 3-5-1900 159 Repeals all ordinances as to grades-July 13, 1901 182 Sidewalk grades May 5, 1904 224 Sidewalk and St. Grade Second St. 6-17-1907 236 Grades Willson Avenue and 1st St. 5-3-1908 243 Grades 2nd St., Des Moines St., Willson Ave., Seneca St., Superior St. 1-18-09 253 Grade Market Square 267 Grades Alley between 1st and 2nd and Des Moines and Willson Ave. 3-15-1910 271 Grades 2nd St. Prospect to Grove 1st Seneca to Grove Div. Seneca to Grove Des Moines Div. to Elm April 4, 1910 290 Grades Willson Ave. 1st to Div. 10-3-10 315 Grades Bank, Water, Elm, Walnut, Boone, Willson Ave., Des Moines, Prospect, Broadway 3-6-1912 327 Sidewalk Grade Dubuque St. Park to Bluff 341 Street and Alley Grades 5-14-1913 345 Street and Alley grades (amend Ord. 341) 351 Street Grades (amends 315) 7-8-1913 353 Street Grades (amends 315) 7-11-1913 356 Sidewalk Grades-Odell and Des Moines 360 Street Grades-Boone, Cedar, and Ohio 361 Street Grades Ohio, , Dubuque, Bank, Division, Grove, Elm, Water, Alley between 2nd and 3rd, Broadway, Prospect 2-2-14 363 Street Grades-amends 361 371 Sidewalk and Street Grades (Pleasant Street and Others) 387 Alley Grade (Block 37) 394 Street Grades-Prospect 7-19-1915 395 Street Grades-Cedar, , Ohio, Grove, Broadway, Fink, Wauneta Court, and Sparboe Court 407 Street Grades-Des Moines, Prospect and Broadway 3-27-16 409 Changes Street Grades-Des Moines between Lucas and Odell 8-21-16 27 413 Street Grades 426 Sidewalk Grades 449 Street Grades-High St. Aug. 18, 1922 497 Street Grades-Second Street from Boone River Bridge East 546 Street Grades-Alley Block 107-99 D. and PRR and 107 of Funk and Co's. 11-6-33 555 Street Grades-Second Street 9-17-34 576 Sidewalk Grades 586 Grades-1st and Union Streets 10-7-36 688 Street Grades-May 16, 1949 689 Repeals 130-314-362 Curb Lines 695 Street Grades August 15, 1949 708 Street Grades 12-3-51 714 Street Grades 12-15-52 724 Street Grades 740 Street Grades 1-3-56 747 Sidewalk Grades 10-1-56 748 Sidewalk Grades 11-18-57 758 Street Grades 11-18-57 774 Street Grades 12-7-59 788 Street Grades 11-20-61 817 Street Grades on James Street 924 June 17, 1968 Establish or re-establish the center line grades on certain streets 1070 June 21, 1976 Street Grades-Beach Street 1096 January 3, 1978 Street Grades 1110 December 18, 1978 Street Grades-Ohio Street 1167 April 6, 1981 Street Grades 1188 March 15, 1982 Street Grades 1191 March 15, 1982 Street Grades 1192 March 15, 1982 Street Grades 83-1223 June 6, 1983 Street Grades 85-1262 September 3, 1985 Summit Drive and North Terrace Drive 86-1279 August 4, 1986 Street Grades-West Second Street 86-1282 August 18, 1986 Street Grades-South Des Moines Street 86-1285 September 15, 1986 Street Grades-Closz Drive 88-1314 June 20, 1988 Street Grades-Darren Avenue 88-1315 June 20, 1988 Street Grades-Industrial Park Road 88-1316 June 20, 1988 Street Grades-Third Street 88-1317 June 20, 1988 Street Grades-Superior Street 95-1454 November 20, 1995 Street Grades-Lynx Avenue 96-1464 April 1, 1996 Street Grades-Fairmeadow Drive, North Terrace Drive, Summit Drive and Rodlyn Road 96-1468 June 3, 1996 Street Grades-Summit Drive 97-1503 Street Grades-Oakwood Drive 99-1536 September 20, 1999 Street Grades-Brewer Creek Estates 3 rd and 4 th Additions 2000-1546 July 3, 2000 Street Grades-Tasler Drive 2000-1547 July 3, 2000 Street Grades-Home 4 th Addition 2000-1549 August 7, 2000-Second Street 2001-1563 April 16, 2001-Second Street 2002-1575 June 17, 2002-Closz Drive 2002-1579 July 1, 2002-Oakwood Drive and Delaware Drive 2002-1589 September 16, 2002-Virginia Parkway 2003-1602 July 21, 2003-Commerce Drive 2004-1617 May 17, 2004-Commerce Drive 2009-1694 February 16, 2009-Red Bull Division Drive and unnamed street 2011-1737 March 21, 2011-Centerline Street Grades-Dubuque Street and Walnut Street  
Chapter 44 - SUBDIVISIONS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 44-1. - Purpose and intent. 
    The purpose of this chapter is to provide minimum standards for the design, development and improvement of all new subdivision and resubdivisions of land, so that existing land uses will be protected and so that adequate provisions are made for public facilities and services, and so that growth occurs in an orderly manner, consistent with the comprehensive plan, and to promote the public health, safety and general welfare of the citizens of the city. 
(Code 1996, § 125.01) 
Sec. 44-2. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Agricultural building means a structure designed and constructed to house farm implements, hay, grain, poultry, livestock or other horticultural products. This structure shall not be a place of human habitation or a place of employment where agricultural products are processed, treated or packaged; nor shall it be a place used by the public. 
    Agricultural subdivision means a subdivision not meeting the definition of a major or minor subdivision and involving the sale or exchange of parcels of agricultural land having only agricultural buildings located on the land to or between the owners of adjacent properties, where such sale or exchange does not create any additional parcels. 
    Alley means a public or private right-of-way primarily designed to serve as secondary access to the side or rear of those properties whose principal frontage is on some other street. 
    Applicant means the owner of land to be subdivided or a representative of the owner. 
    Block means a tract of land bounded by streets, or by a combination of streets and public parks, cemeteries, railroad rights-of-way, shorelines of waterways, or corporate boundaries. 
    Bond means any form of security including a cash deposit, surety bond, collateral, property or instrument of credit in an amount and form satisfactory to the council. 
    Building means any structure built for support, shelter, or enclosure of persons, animals, chattels, or movable property of any kind, and includes any structure. 
    Central sewage system means a private sewer system including collection and treatment facilities established by the developer to serve a new subdivision or resubdivision. 
    Central water system means a private water system established by the developer to serve a new subdivision or resubdivision. It includes water treatment and distribution facilities. 
    City engineer means the person designated by the council to furnish engineering assistance for the administration of these regulations. 
    Commission means the planning and zoning commission of the city. 
    Comprehensive plan means the general plan for development of the community, which plan has been adopted by the council. The term "comprehensive plan" shall include any part of such plan separately adopted, and any amendment to such plan or parts thereof. 
    Cul-de-sac means a municipal service street with only one outlet and having an appropriate terminal for safe and convenient reversal of traffic movement. 
    Developer means the owner of land proposed to be subdivided or a representative of the owner. 
    Easement means an authorization by a property owner for the use by another, and for a specified purpose, of any designated part of the owner's property. 
    Frontage means that portion of a lot abutting on a street or way and complying with the setback and front yard requirements as they may exist, but it shall not be considered as the side of a corner lot. 
    Individual sewage disposal system means a septic tank, seepage tile sewage disposal system, or any other approved sewage treatment device. 
    Local board of health means a county, city or district board of health. 
    Lot means a portion of a subdivision or other parcel of land intended for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of transfer of ownership or for building development. 
    Major subdivision means any subdivision that does not meet the definition of a minor subdivision, an agricultural subdivision, or a property line adjustment. 
    Minor subdivision means any subdivision fronting on an existing public street, not involving any new street, sewer, water or the extension or the creation of any municipal facility or public improvement. 
    Municipal arterial streets means those streets which connect principal traffic generating areas or connect such areas with other street systems. 
    Municipal collector streets means those streets that collect traffic from municipal service streets and connect to other street systems. 
    Municipal service street means those streets that primarily provide access to property. 
    Owner means any person having legal title to or sufficient proprietary interest in the land to be sought to be subdivided under these regulations. 
    Plat means a map, drawing or chart on which the developer's plan of the subdivision of land is presented and which the developer submits for approval and intends, in final form, to record. 
    Property line adjustment means a subdivision of one or more lots or parcels which meets the following criteria: 
(1)  No additional lots or parcels shall be created. 
(2)  No part of the divided lot or parcel of land will be transferred to anyone but the owner or owners of a lot or parcel of land abutting that part of the divided lot or parcel of land to be transferred. 
(3)  No affected lot or parcel created by the adjustment shall conflict with any provision or portion of the city's zoning regulations. 
    Public improvement means any drainage ditch, roadway, parkway, sidewalk, pedestrian crosswalk, tree, lawn, off-street parking area, lot improvement, or other facility for which the local government may ultimately assume the responsibility for maintenance and operation, or which may affect an improvement for which local government responsibility is established. 
    Resubdivision means any subdivision of land which has previously been included in a recorded plat. In appropriate context it may be a verb referring to the act of preparing a plat of previously subdivided land. 
    Right-of-way means a strip of land occupied or intended to be occupied by a street, crosswalk, railroad, road, electric transmission line, oil or gas pipeline, water main, sanitary or storm sewer main, shade trees, or for another special use. The usage of the term "right-of-way" for land platting purposes means that every right-of-way hereafter established and shown on a final plat is to be separate and distinct from the lots or parcels adjoining such right-of-way and not included within the dimensions or areas of such lots or parcels. Rights-of-way intended for streets, crosswalks, water mains, sanitary sewers, storm drains, or any other use involving maintenance by a public agency shall be dedicated to public use by the maker of the plat on which such right-of-way is established. 
    Roadway means that portion of the street available for vehicular traffic, and where curbs are laid, the portion from back to back of curbs. 
    Sketch plat means a freehand sketch drawing which depicts the proposed division of a tract of land which meets the requirements of this chapter. 
    Street means and includes any public way, highway, street, avenue, boulevard, parkway, or other public thoroughfare, and each of such words includes every other of them, and includes the entire width between property lines. 
    Subdivider means a person undertaking the subdivision or resubdivision of a tract or parcel of land. 
    Subdivision means the division of land into two or more parts, for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of transfer of ownership or building development. The term "subdivision," when appropriate to the context, may refer to the process of subdividing or to land subdivided. However, the sale or exchange of small parcels of land to or between the owners of adjacent platted lots, where such sale or exchange does not create any additional lots and where the land sold or exchanged constitutes less than 50 percent of the area of the enlarged lot after such transfer, is not considered a subdivision. 
    Surveyor means a land surveyor licensed and registered under the provisions of Code of Iowa ch. 114. 
(Code 1996, § 125.02) 
Sec. 44-3. - Policy. 
    It is declared to be the policy of the city to consider the subdivision of land and the subsequent development of the subdivided land as subject to the control of the city to provide for the orderly, efficient and economical development of the city. And further: 
(1)  Character of land. Land to be subdivided shall be of such character that it can be used safely for building purposes without danger to health or peril from fire, flood or other menace. 
(2)  Regulations to supplement and facilitate. It is intended that these subdivision regulations shall supplement and facilitate the enforcement of provisions and standards, ordinances or regulations of the city. 
(Code 1996, § 125.03) 
Sec. 44-4. - Jurisdiction. 
    Every owner of any tract or parcel of land who has subdivided or shall hereafter subdivide or plat the tract or parcel into two or more parts, for the purpose of laying out an addition, subdivision, building lot, or lots, acreage or suburban lots within the city or within the following described area: 
    Commencing at the northeast corner of the southeast one quarter of the southeast one quarter of section 23-Township 89 north-Range 26 west of the 5th P.M., Iowa; thence east along the north line of the south one-half of the southwest one quarter of section 24-Township 89 north-Range 26 west of the 5th P.M., Iowa to the northeast corner of the south one-half of the southwest one quarter, thence east along the north line of the southwest one quarter of the southeast one quarter of the section 24 to the northeast corner of the southwest one quarter of the southeast one quarter; thence north along west line of the northeast one quarter of the southeast one quarter of the section 24 to the northwest corner of the northeast one quarter of the southeast one quarter, thence east along the north line of the northeast one quarter of the southeast one quarter to the northeast corner of the southeast one quarter of the section 24; thence east along the north line of the south one-half of section 19-Township 89 north-Range 25 west of the 5th P.M., Iowa to the northeast corner of the south one-half of the section 19; thence east along the north line of the southwest one quarter of section 20-Township 89 north-Range 25 west of the 5th P.M., Iowa to the northeast corner of the southwest one quarter of the section; thence north along the west line of the northeast one quarter of the section to the northwest corner of the southwest one quarter of the northeast one quarter of the section; thence east along the north line of the south one-half of the northeast one quarter of the section to the northeast corner of the southeast one quarter of the northeast one quarter of the section; thence east along the north line of the southwest one quarter of the northwest one quarter of section 21-Township 89 north-Range 25 west of the 5th P.M., Iowa to the northeast corner of the southwest one quarter of the northwest one quarter of the section 21; thence north along the west line of the northeast one quarter of the northwest one quarter of the section 21 to the northwest corner of the northeast one quarter of the northwest one quarter of the section 21; thence east along the north line of the section 21 to the northeast corner of the section; thence east along the north line of section 22- Township 89 north-Range 25 west of the 5th P.M., Iowa to the northeast corner of the northwest one quarter of the northeast one quarter of the section 22; thence south along the east line of the northwest one quarter of the northeast one quarter of the section 22 to the southeast corner of the northwest one quarter of the northeast one quarter of the section 22; thence east along the north line of the southeast one quarter of the northeast one quarter of the section 22 to the northeast corner of the southeast one quarter of the northeast one quarter of the section 22; thence east along the north line of the south one-half of the northwest one quarter of section 23-Township 89 north-Range 25 west of the 5th P.M, Iowa to the northeast corner of the south one-half of the northwest one quarter of the section 23; thence south along the east line of the south one-half of the northwest one quarter to the southeast corner of the south one half; thence east along the north line of the southeast one quarter of the section 23 to the northeast corner of the southeast one quarter of the section 23; thence south along the east line of the southeast one quarter to the southeast corner of the northeast one quarter of the southeast one quarter of the section 23; thence east along the north line of the southwest one quarter of the southwest one quarter of section 24-Township 89 north-Range 25 west of the 5th P.M., Iowa to the northeast corner of the southwest one quarter of the southwest one quarter of the section 24; thence south along the east line of the southwest one quarter of the southwest one quarter of the section 24 to the southeast corner of the southwest one quarter of the southwest one quarter of the section 24; thence south along the east line of the northwest one quarter of the northwest one quarter of section 25-Township 89 north-Range 25 west of the 5th P.M., Iowa to the southeast corner of the northwest one quarter of the northwest one quarter, thence east along the north line of the southeast one quarter of the northwest one quarter to the northeast corner of the southeast one quarter of the northwest one quarter, thence south along the center line of the section 25 to the southeast corner of the southwest one quarter of the section 25; thence east along the north line of section 36-Township 89 north-Range 25 west of the 5th P.M., Iowa to the northeast corner of the northwest one quarter of the northeast one quarter of the section 36; thence south along the east line of the west one-half of the northeast one quarter of the section 36 to the southeast corner of the northwest one quarter of the southeast one quarter of the section 36; thence east along the north line of the southeast one quarter of the southeast one quarter of the section 36 to the northeast corner of the southeast one quarter of the southeast one quarter, thence south along the east line of the southeast one quarter of the southeast one quarter to the southeast corner of the southeast one quarter of the southeast one quarter; thence west along the south line of the southeast one quarter of the southeast one quarter to the northeast corner of section 3-Township 88 north-Range 25 west of the 5th P.M., Iowa; thence south along the east line of the section 3 to the southeast corner of the northeast one quarter of the section 3; thence west along the south line of the northeast one quarter to the northeast corner of the northwest one quarter of the southeast one quarter of the section 3; thence south along the east line of the west one-half of the southeast one quarter of the section 3 to the southeast corner of the west one half; thence west along the south line of the section 3 to the southwest corner of the west one-half of the southeast one quarter of the section 3; thence south along the east line of the northeast one quarter of the northwest one quarter of section 10-Township 88 north-Range 25 west of the 5th P.M., Iowa to the southeast corner of the northeast one quarter of the northwest one quarter of the section 10; thence west along the south line of the northeast one quarter of the northwest one quarter to the southwest corner of the northeast one quarter of the northwest quarter; thence south along the east line of the southwest one quarter of the northwest one quarter to the southeast corner of the west one-half of the southwest one quarter of the section 10; thence south along the east line of the west one-half of the northwest one quarter of section 15-Township 88 north-Range 25 west of the 5th P.M., Iowa to the southeast corner of the west one half; thence west along the south line of the west one-half of the northwest one quarter of the section 15 to the southwest corner of the west one half; thence south along the east line of section 16-Township 88 north-Range 25 west of the 5th P.M., Iowa to the southeast corner of the section 16; thence west along the south line of the section 16 to the northeast corner of the northwest one quarter of the northeast one quarter of section 21-Township 88 north-Range 25 west of the 5th P.M., Iowa; thence south along the east line of the northwest one quarter of the northeast one quarter of the section 21 to the southeast corner of the northwest one quarter of the northeast one quarter; thence west along the south line of the northwest one quarter of the northeast one quarter to the southwest corner of the northwest one quarter of the northeast one quarter; thence south along the east line of the northwest one quarter of the section 21 to the southeast corner of the northwest one quarter; thence west along the south line of the northwest one quarter of the section 21 to the northeast corner of the northwest one quarter of the southwest one quarter of the section 21; thence south along the east line of the northwest one quarter of the southwest one quarter to the southeast corner of the northwest one quarter of the southwest one quarter; thence west along the south line of the northwest one quarter of the southwest one quarter to the southwest corner of the northwest one quarter of the southwest one quarter; thence south along the west line of the southwest one quarter of the section 21 to the southwest corner of the section 21; thence south along the east line of section 29-Township 88 north-Range 25 west of the 5th P.M., Iowa to the southeast corner of the northeast one quarter of the northeast one quarter of the section 29; thence west along the south line of the northeast one quarter of the northeast one quarter to the southwest corner of the northeast one quarter of the northeast one quarter; thence south along the east line of the southwest one quarter of the northeast one quarter of the section 29 to the southeast corner of the southwest one quarter of the northeast one quarter; thence west along the south line of the southwest one quarter of the northeast one quarter to the southwest corner of the southeast one quarter of the northwest one quarter of the section 29; thence south along the east line of the northwest one quarter of the southwest one quarter of the section 29 to the southeast corner of the northwest one quarter of the southwest one quarter; thence west along the south line of the northwest one quarter of the southwest one quarter to the southwest corner of the northwest one quarter of the southwest one quarter, thence west along the south line of the north one-half of the southeast one quarter of section 30-Township 88 north-Range 25 west of the 5th P.M., Iowa to the southwest corner of the north one-half of the southeast one quarter, thence south along the east line of the southwest one quarter of the section 30 to the southeast corner of the southwest one quarter of the section 30; thence west along the south line of the southwest one quarter to the southwest corner of the section 30; thence north along the west line of the section 30 to the northwest corner of the southwest one quarter of the southwest one quarter of the section 30; thence west along the south line of the north one-half of the southeast one quarter of section 25-Township 88 north-Range 26 west of the 5th P.M., Iowa to the southwest corner of the north one-half of the southeast one quarter, thence west along the south line of the northeast one quarter of the southwest one quarter of the section 25 to the southwest corner of the northeast one quarter of the southwest one quarter; thence north along the west line of the northeast one quarter of the southwest one quarter of the section 25 to the northwest corner of the northeast one quarter of the southwest one quarter; thence west along the south line of the northwest one quarter of the section 25 to the southwest corner of the northwest one quarter of the section 25; thence north along the west line of the northwest one quarter of the section 25 to the northwest corner of the southwest one quarter of the northwest one quarter of the section 25; thence west along the south line of the northeast one quarter of the northeast one quarter of section 26-Township 88 north-Range 26 west of the 5th P.M., Iowa to the southwest corner of the northeast one quarter of the northeast one quarter of the section 26; thence north along the west line of the northeast one quarter of the northeast one quarter to the northwest corner of the northeast one quarter of the northeast one quarter; thence west along the south line of the southeast one quarter of section 23-Township 88 north-Range 26 west of the 5th P.M., Iowa to the southwest corner of the southeast one quarter of the section 23; thence north along the west line of the southeast one quarter of the section 23 to the northwest corner of the southwest one quarter of the southeast one quarter of the section 23; thence west along the south line of the north one-half of the southwest one quarter of the section 23 to the southwest corner of the north one-half of the southwest one quarter; thence north along the west line of the section 23 to the northwest corner of the southwest one quarter of the section 23; thence west along the south line of the northeast one quarter of section 22-Township 88 north-Range 26 west of the 5th P.M., Iowa to the southwest corner of the northeast one quarter of the section 22; thence north along the west line of the northeast one quarter of the section 22 to the southeast corner of the north one-half of the northwest one quarter of the section 22; thence west along the south line of the north one-half of the northwest one quarter to the southwest corner of the north one-half of the northwest one quarter; thence north along the west line of the northwest one quarter of the section 22 to the northwest corner of the section 22; thence west along the south line of section 16-Township 88 north-Range 26 west of the 5th P.M., Iowa to the southwest corner of the east one-half of the southeast one quarter of the section 16; thence north along the west line of the east one-half of the southeast one quarter to the northwest corner of the east one-half of the southeast one quarter; thence west along the south line of the northeast one quarter of the section 16 to the southwest corner of the northeast one quarter; thence north along the west line of the northeast one quarter of the section 16 to the northwest corner of the northeast one quarter; thence north along the west line of the southeast one quarter of section 9-Township 88 north-Range 26 west of the 5th P.M., Iowa to the northwest corner of the southwest one quarter of the southeast one quarter of the section 9; thence west along the south line of the northeast one quarter of the southwest one quarter of the section 9 to the southwest corner of the northeast one quarter of the southwest one quarter; thence north along the west line of the northeast one quarter of the southwest one quarter to the northwest corner of the northeast one quarter of the southwest one quarter; thence north along the west line of the southeast one quarter of the northwest one quarter to the northwest corner of the southeast one quarter of the northwest one quarter; thence west along the south line of the northwest one quarter of the northwest one quarter of the section 9 to the southwest corner of the northwest one quarter of the northwest one quarter; thence north along the west line of the northwest one quarter of the northwest one quarter of the section 9 to the northwest corner of the section 9; thence north along the west line of section 4-Township 88 north-Range 26 west of the 5th P.M., Iowa to the northwest corner of the section 4; thence west along the south line of section 34-Township 89 north-Range 26 west of the 5th P.M., Iowa to the southwest corner of the east one-half of the southeast one quarter of the section 34; thence north along the west line of the east one-half of the southeast one quarter of the section 34 to the northwest corner of the east one-half of the southeast one quarter; thence east along the north line of the southeast one quarter of the section 34 to the northeast corner of the southeast one quarter; thence north along the east line of the section 34 to the northeast corner of the section 34; thence north along the west line of section 26-Township 89 north-Range 26 west of the 5th P.M., Iowa to the northwest corner of the southwest one quarter of the southwest one quarter of the section 26; thence east along the north line of the southwest one quarter of the southwest one quarter of the section 26 to the northeast corner of the southwest one quarter of the southwest one quarter; thence north along the west line of the northeast one quarter of the southwest one quarter of the section 26 to the northwest corner of the northeast one quarter of the southwest one quarter; thence north along the west line of the southeast one quarter of the northwest one quarter of the section 26 to the northwest corner of the southeast one quarter of the northwest one quarter; thence east along the north line of the southeast one quarter of the northwest one quarter of the section 26 to the northeast corner of the southeast one quarter of the northwest one quarter of the section 26; thence north along the west line of the northwest one quarter of the northeast one quarter of the section 26 to the northwest corner of the northwest one quarter of the northeast one quarter; thence east along the north line of the section 26 to the northeast corner of the section 26; thence north along the west line of section 24-Township 89 north-Range 26 west of the 5th P.M., Iowa to the point of beginning, 
shall cause plats of such area to be made in the form and containing the information, as hereinafter set forth before selling any lots therein contained or placing the plat on record. 
(Code 1996, § 125.04) 
Sec. 44-5. - Interpretation. 
    In their interpretation or application, the provisions of these regulations shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety, and general welfare. Specifically: 
(1)  Relationship to other public provisions. These regulations are not intended to interfere with, or abrogate, or annul any other ordinance, rule or regulation, statute, or other provision of law. Where any provision of these regulations imposes a restriction different from those imposed by any other provision of these regulations or any other ordinance, rule or regulation, or other provision of law, whichever provisions are more restrictive or impose higher standards shall control. 
(2)  Relationship to private provisions. These regulations are not intended to abrogate any easement, covenant or any other private agreement or restriction, provided that where the provisions of these regulations are more restrictive or impose higher standards or regulations than such easement, covenant or other private agreement or restriction, the requirements of these regulations shall govern. 
(Code 1996, § 125.05) 
Sec. 44-6. - Action under prior provisions. 
    These regulations do not abate any action now pending under, or by virtue of, prior existing subdivision regulations. Nor do they discontinue, abate, modify or alter any penalty accrued or about to accrue, or affect the liability of any person, or waive any right of the city under any section or provision existing at the time of adoption of the ordinance from which this section is derived. Nor do they vacate or annul any rights obtained by any person, by lawful action of the city except as expressed in these regulations. 
(Code 1996, § 125.06) 
Sec. 44-7. - Variations and exceptions. 
    The following shall apply to the granting of variations or exceptions: 
(1)  Hardships. Where the council finds that extraordinary hardships or particular difficulties regarding the physical development of land may result from strict compliance with these regulations, it may make variations or exceptions to the regulations so that substantial justice may be done and the public interest secured, provided that such variation or exception shall not have the effect of nullifying the intent and purpose of these regulations; and further provided the council shall not grant variations or exceptions to these regulations unless it shall make findings based upon the evidence presented to it in each specific case that: 
a.  The granting of the variation will not be detrimental to the public safety, health or welfare or injurious to other property or improvements in the neighborhood in which the property is located. 
b.  The conditions upon which the request for a variation is based are unique to the property for which the variation is sought, and are not applicable, generally, to other property. 
c.  Because of the particular physical surroundings, shape or topographical conditions of the specific property involved, a particular hardship to the owner would result, as distinguished from a mere inconvenience, if the strict letter of the regulations were carried out. 
d.  The purpose of the variation is not based exclusively upon a desire to make more money out of the property. 
(2)  Conditions. In granting variations and exceptions the council may require such conditions as will, in its judgment, secure substantially the objectives of the standards or requirements of these regulations. 
(3)  Procedure for a variance. A petition for any such variance shall be submitted in writing by the developer at the time when the preliminary plat is filed. The petition shall state fully the grounds for the application and all of the facts relied upon by the petitioner. 
(Code 1996, § 125.07) 
Sec. 44-8. - Changes and amendments. 
    Any provisions of these regulations may be changed and amended from time to time by the council; provided, however, that such changes or amendments shall not become effective until after a public hearing has been held, public notice of which shall have been given as required by law. Such proposed amendments shall first be submitted to the commission for study and recommendation before the hearing is held. The commission shall forward its recommendations to the council within 30 days after which the council shall give notice of and hold a public hearing on the proposed amendment. 
(Code 1996, § 125.08) 
Sec. 44-9. - Enforcement, violations and penalties. 
    No plat or subdivision within the city or within two miles thereof shall be filed or recorded with the county, nor shall any plat or subdivision have any validity until it complies with the provisions of these regulations, has been approved by the council as herein set forth, and further: 
(1)  Issuance of building permits. No building permit for construction on any lot, parcel, or tract, where a subdivision is required by these regulations, unless and until a final plat of such subdivision has been approved and recorded in accordance herewith, and until the improvements required herein have been accepted by the city. 
(2)  Sale or lease without plat. Any person who shall dispose of or offer for sale or lease any lots in the city or addition to the city, until the plat thereof has been acknowledged and recorded as provided in these regulations, shall forfeit and pay $50.00 for each lot and part of lot sold or disposed of, leased, or offered for sale. 
(Code 1996, § 125.09) 
Secs. 44-10-44-36. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PROCEDURE 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 44-37. - Pre-application procedure. 
(a)  Pre-application conference. Whenever a subdivision located within the subdivision platting jurisdiction of the city is proposed, the subdivider may meet with the city officials responsible for the administration of these regulations. The purpose of such conference is to acquaint the city with the proposed subdivision and to acquaint the subdivider with the requirements, procedures and any special problems relating to the proposed subdivision. No commitments shall be made during this conference which will be binding upon the city. 
(b)  Sketch plat required. For the pre-application conference, the subdivider shall provide a map or sketch showing the location of the subdivision, the general location of any proposed streets and other improvements, and the general layout and arrangement of intended land uses in relation to the surrounding area. 
(c)  Official submission dates. For the purpose of these regulations, the date of the meeting of the planning and zoning commission at which the plat is first considered shall constitute the official submittal date of the plat. 
(Code 1996, § 126.01) 
Sec. 44-38. - Agricultural subdivision plats. 
(a)  Preparation and recordation. The agricultural subdivision plat shall be prepared in conformity with the provisions of the Code of Iowa § 355.7. The surveyor shall record the agricultural subdivision plat and description with the county recorder before acceptance by the city. 
(b)  Plat submission. The surveyor shall submit a plat in accordance with the provisions of subsection (a) of this section and which shall be filed with the city planning department. Submission shall include the appropriate filing fee and one copy of the recorded survey plat. 
(c)  Review. The plat shall be reviewed by the city planning department to determine its conformity with the regulations and remain on file in the city clerk's office. 
(Code 1996, § 126.01.1-126.01.3) 
Sec. 44-39. - Property line adjustments. 
(a)  Filing sketch plat. For property line adjustments, a sketch plat shall be filed with the city planning department. The sketch plat may be drawn as a freehand sketch at a legible scale or depicted on a print copy of the appropriate page of the county auditor's official plat book, which is on record in the office of the county auditor. The sketch plat shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The names, addresses and telephone numbers of the owners of the land and the developer/surveyor, if other than the owner. 
(2)  The street address or general location and legal description of the subject property. 
(3)  The present and proposed uses and zoning classifications of the subject property. 
(4)  Date of document, true north arrow and scale of document. 
(5)  General location of the property. 
(6)  Location of property lines. 
(b)  Review by city staff. The sketch plat shall be reviewed by the city planning department to determine its conformity with the regulations and remain on file in the city clerk's office. 
(c)  Approval. Following such review of the sketch plat for a property line adjustment, the city planning department shall either approve the sketch plat with or without specified conditions, to be accepted by the developer as a condition of such approval or disapproval the sketch plat. The city planning department will notify the developer of his decision in writing. 
(1)  Effect of approval. Approval of the sketch plat shall signify the general acceptability of the proposed property line adjustment with respect to compliance with the requirements of the city's zoning regulations and this article and shall be deemed to be authorization to proceed with preparation of necessary instruments for conveyance of a portion of one lot or parcel to the owner of an adjoining lot or parcel. 
(2)  Plat of survey required. A plat of survey shall be prepared for the division. One copy of the plat of survey shall be prepared by an Iowa registered land surveyor and filed with the city planning department before final approval may be given. 
(3)  Other instruments. A copy of the decision shall be recorded simultaneously with all instruments filed with the county recorder which transfer the ownership of the property being divided. Such instruments shall contain a deed restriction directing the county auditor to combine the portion of land described in the instrument with the adjoining tract or parcel to create a single parcel. A copy of such instrument shall be submitted for review by the city planning department prior to being recorded to ensure that the deed restriction is included. 
(d)  Disapproval. Disapproval of the sketch plat shall signify the general unacceptability of the proposed property line adjustment with respect to compliance with the requirements of the city's zoning regulations and this article. 
(Code 1996, § 126.01.9) 
Secs. 44-40-44-66. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - MINOR SUBDIVISION PLATS 

Sec. 44-67. - General plat requirements. 
(a)  Contents of minor subdivision plats. Every plat of a minor subdivision offered for record shall conform to all of the following provisions where applicable: 
(1)  The minor subdivision plat shall be prepared in conformity with the provisions of the Code of Iowa § 354.6. 
(2)  Subdivision boundary lines, showing approximate dimensions and references to section, townships and range lines or corners are to be indicated with a solid heavy line. 
(3)  Present streets and alleys with their rights-of-way, in or adjoining the subdivision, including dedicated widths of existing surfaces. 
(4)  Proposed layout of blocks and lots showing approximate dimensions, radii and the square foot areas of lots that are not rectangular, and the lot and block number in numerical order. 
(5)  Front yard building setback line. 
(6)  A table of the following information: 
a.  Total acreage of subdivision. 
b.  Total number of lots. 
c.  Minimum, average, and maximum lot area. 
(7)  Present and proposed easements, showing locations, widths, purposes and limitations. 
(8)  Location and names of adjoining parcels of unsubdivided and subdivided land. 
(9)  If the proposed subdivision is in or near the area designated as floodplain by the flood boundary and floodway maps of the city, boundaries of the highest known flood of record affecting the subdivision and the source of information must be stated on the plat. If the proposed subdivision is not located in the floodplain, this fact must be stated on the plat. 
(10)  Existing blocks, lots, and any buildings within the required building setback. 
(11)  Present and proposed utility systems including sanitary and storm sewers, other drainage facilities, and water lines. If the subdivision is within one mile of public sewer or water or both, notation shall be made of the direction and distance to such facilities. 
(12)  Names and addresses of the owner, and subdivider if different than the owner, and surveyor who prepared the plat. 
(13)  Existing and proposed zoning of the proposed subdivision and adjoining properties, including airport zoning if applicable. 
(14)  A key map showing the general location of the proposed subdivision in relation to surrounding development. 
(15)  Elevation or topographic information may be required as determined by the commission. 
(b)  Information to be provided in accompanying material. The following material shall be submitted to the city planning department at least two weeks prior to the council meeting to be acted upon following the commission's action on the minor subdivision plat. If not submitted within the above time frame, the 30-day consideration period shall be extended until such time as the city staff has two weeks to review the accompanying material prior to a regular council meeting. 
(1)  A statement by the proprietors and their spouses, if any, that the plat is prepared with their free consent and in accordance with their desire, signed and acknowledged before an officer authorized to take the acknowledgment of deeds. The statement by the proprietors may also include a dedication to the public of all lands within the plat that are designated for streets, alleys, parks, open areas, school property, or other public use, if the dedication is approved by the governing body. 
(2)  A statement from the mortgage holders or lienholders, if any, that the plat is prepared with their free consent and in accordance with their desire, signed and acknowledged before an officer authorized to take the acknowledgment of deeds. An affidavit and bond, as provided for in the the Code of Iowa § 354.12, may be recorded in lieu of the consent of the mortgage or lienholder. When a mortgage or lienholder consents to the subdivision, a release of mortgage or lien shall be recorded for any areas conveyed to the governing body or dedicated to the public. 
(3)  An abstract and title opinion by an attorney at law who has examined the abstract of title of the land being platted. The opinion shall state the names of the proprietors and holders of mortgages, liens, or other encumbrances on the land being platted and shall note the encumbrances, along with any bonds securing the encumbrances. Utility easements shall not be construed to be encumbrances for the purpose of this section. 
(4)  A resolution by the council either approving the subdivision or waiving the right to review. 
(5)  A statement by the auditor approving the name or title of the subdivision plat. 
(6)  A certificate of the treasurer that the land is free from certified taxes and certified special assessments or that the land is free from certified taxes and that the certified special assessments are secured by bond in compliance with the Code of Iowa § 354.12. 
(7)  An attorney's opinion showing that the fee title to the subdivision land is in the proprietor's name and that the land is free from encumbrances other than those secured by any encumbrance bond. 
(Code 1996, § 126.02) 
Sec. 44-68. - Submission of plat. 
    The subdivider shall submit a plat in accordance with the provisions of section 44-67 and shall file with the clerk an application for final approval of the plat. The application shall include: 
(1)  Forms and fees. To be made on forms available from the city planning department together with a filing fee as set by the most current resolution of the city council; 
(2)  Number of copies of plat. To be accompanied by a minimum of 16 copies of the plat; and 
(3)  Time of submission. To be presented to the clerk at least two weeks prior to the regular meeting of the commission. If submitted less than two weeks prior to the regular meeting, the plat for a minor subdivision will be presented at the following regular meeting of the commission. 
(Code 1996, § 126.03) 
Sec. 44-69. - Referral of plat. 
    One copy of the plat shall be placed on file in the clerk's office with the remaining copies referred to the city planning department, who then distributes these plat copies to the appropriate persons for review. 
(Code 1996, § 126.04) 
Sec. 44-70. - Review of plat. 
    The plat shall be reviewed by the commission to determine its conformity with these regulations and all other ordinances and regulations in force affecting subdivisions. 
(Code 1996, § 126.05) 
Sec. 44-71. - Action by the commission. 
    The commission shall, upon receiving the minor subdivision plat from the city planning department, as soon as possible, but not more than 30 days thereafter, consider the plat, and if the same is recommended for approval, shall submit its recommendation of approval to the council together with a copy of its minutes showing the action taken by the commission. If the commission recommends approval of the plat, such approval and the date thereof shall be noted on the plat over the signature of the chairperson of the commission and the plat and five copies shall be transmitted to the council, and one copy shall be returned to the subdivider. 
(1)  The commission approval of a minor subdivision plat shall be effective for a period of 12 months. At the end of such time, council approval must have been obtained. 
(2)  Any plat not receiving the final approval within the 12-month period shall be considered null and void and the subdivider shall be required to resubmit the plat subject to any new zoning restrictions, subdivision regulations and current filing fees. 
(Code 1996, § 126.06) 
Sec. 44-72. - Action by council. 
    Upon receipt of the certification by the commission, the council shall, within 30 days, either approve or disapprove the plat of the minor subdivision. 
(1)  Disapproval of plat. In the event that the plat is disapproved by the council, such disapproval shall be expressed in writing and shall point out wherein the proposed plat is objectionable. 
(2)  Acceptance of plat. In the event that the plat is found to be acceptable and in accordance with these regulations, the council shall accept the same. 
(3)  Final approval and recording of plat. The passage of a resolution by the council accepting the plat shall constitute final approval of the platting of the area shown on the plat, but the subdivider or owner shall cause such plat to be recorded in the office of the county recorder where the land to be subdivided is located and shall file satisfactory evidence of such recording in the office of the clerk before the city shall recognize the plat as being in full force and effect. The subdivider shall provide six copies of the plat signed and stamped as required after the plat has been accepted by the council. 
(Code 1996, § 126.07) 
Secs. 44-73-44-102. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - PRELIMINARY PLATS 

Sec. 44-103. - General plat requirements. 
(a)  Purpose of the preliminary plat. Every proposed major subdivision shall be submitted for tentative approval in the form of a preliminary plat prior to the submission of a final record plat. The purpose of the preliminary plat is to provide all facts needed for the commission and council to determine whether the proposed subdivision is satisfactory from the standpoint of the public interest. The following graphic and descriptive material is required to be provided on the preliminary plat. 
(b)  Contents of preliminary plat. The preliminary plat shall be prepared by a registered land surveyor at a convenient scale preferably of not more than one inch equals 100 feet, may be prepared in pen or pencil, and the sheets shall be numbered in sequence if more than one sheet is used. The following information shall be shown on the preliminary plat: 
a.  Title, scale, north point and date; 
b.  Subdivision boundary lines, showing approximate dimensions and references to section, townships and range lines or corners are to be indicated with a solid heavy line; 
c.  Present and proposed streets and alleys with their rights-of-way, in or adjoining the subdivision, including dedicated widths and widths of existing surfaces; 
d.  Proposed layout of blocks and lots showing approximate dimensions, radii and the square foot areas of lots that are not rectangular, and the lot and block number in numerical order; 
e.  Front yard building setback line; 
f.  A table of the following information: 
1.  Total acreage of subdivision; 
2.  Total number of lots; 
3.  Minimum, average and maximum lot area; 
4.  Acreage of public lands to be dedicated or reserved other than streets; 
g.  Present and proposed easements, showing locations, widths, purposes and limitations; 
h.  Location and names of owners having adjoining parcels of unsubdivided and subdivided land; 
i.  If the proposed subdivision is in or near the area designated as floodplain by the flood boundary and floodway maps of the city, boundaries of the highest known flood of record affecting the subdivision and the source of information must be stated on the plat. If the proposed subdivision is not located in the floodplain, this fact must be stated on the preliminary plat; 
j.  Existing blocks, lots, and any buildings within the required building setback; 
k.  Present and proposed utility systems including sanitary and storm sewers, other drainage facilities, and water lines. If the subdivision is within one mile of pub;ic sewer or water or both, notation shall be made of the direction and distance to such facilities; 
l.  Proposed name of the subdivision; 
m.  Names and addresses of the owner or subdivider, and surveyor who prepared the preliminary plat; 
n.  Description of the property being platted; 
o.  Elevation or topographic information may be required as determined by the commission; 
p.  Existing and proposed zoning of the proposed subdivision and adjoin property, including airport zoning if applicable; 
q.  Location of all proposed monuments; 
r.  A key map showing the general location of the proposed subdivision in relation to surrounding development. 
(Code 1996, § 126.08) 
Sec. 44-104. - Submission of plat. 
    The subdivider shall prepare a preliminary plat in accordance with the provisions of section 44-103 and shall file with the clerk an application in triplicate for the tentative approval of the plat. The application shall include the following: 
(1)  Forms and fees. To be made on forms available from the city planning department together with a filing fee per subdivision lot or the minimum filing fee per subdivision (whichever is greater) as set by the most current resolution of the city council. 
(2)  Number of plats. To be accompanied by a minimum of 16 copies of the preliminary plat. 
(3)  Time of submission. To be presented to the clerk at least two weeks prior to the regular meeting of the commission. If submitted less than two weeks prior to the regular meeting, the preliminary plat will be presented at the following regular meeting of the commission. 
(Code 1996, § 126.09) 
Sec. 44-105. - Referral of plat. 
    One copy of the preliminary plat shall be placed on file in the clerk's office with the remaining copies referred to the city planning department who then distributes these preliminary plat copies to the appropriate persons for review. 
(Code 1996, § 126.10) 
Sec. 44-106. - Review of plat. 
    The preliminary plat shall be reviewed by the commission to determine its conformity with these regulations and all other ordinances and regulations in force affecting subdivisions. 
(Code 1996, § 126.11) 
Sec. 44-107. - Action by the commission. 
    The commission shall, upon receiving the preliminary plat from the city planning department, as soon as possible, but not more than 30 days thereafter, pass upon the preliminary plat as originally submitted or modified. If the commission does not act within 30 days, the preliminary plat shall be deemed to be approved; provided, however, that the subdivider may agree to an extension of the time period not to exceed an additional 60 days. It shall then set forth its recommendations in writing, whether of approval, modification or disapproval. 
(1)  Reasons for changes or disapproval. In the event that substantial changes or modifications are made by the commission or the commission recommends disapproval of the plat, it shall give its reasons therefor and it may request and cause the revised preliminary plat to be resubmitted in the same manner as the original plat. 
(2)  Tentative approval. If the commission recommends approval, it shall express its approval as tentative approval and state the conditions of such approval, if any. 
(3)  Documenting approval. The action of the commission shall be documented on eight copies of the preliminary plat, referenced and attached to any conditions determined. One copy shall be returned to the subdivider, two copies shall be retained by the commission, and five copies shall be referred to the council. 
(Code 1996, § 126.12) 
Sec. 44-108. - Action by council. 
    Within 30 days of the receipt of the preliminary plat, the council shall, by resolution, tentatively approve or disapprove the plat. If the preliminary plat is disapproved, objections to it shall be returned to the commission for further review and the city planning department shall notify the subdivider of such action. If approved, the clerk shall affix his signature to three copies of the preliminary plat with the notation of the date the preliminary plat received the council's tentative approval. Two copies shall be returned to the commission and one copy shall be returned to the subdivider. The tentative approval by the council shall not constitute final acceptance of the addition or subdivision by the city but an authorization to proceed with preparation of the final plat. 
(Code 1996, § 126.13) 
Sec. 44-109. - Effective period of tentative approval; submission of construction documents. 
(a)  The tentative approval of a preliminary plat shall be effective for a period of one year, at the end of which time final approval must have been obtained. Any plat not receiving final approval within this period of time shall be void, and the subdivider shall be required to resubmit a new plat for tentative approval subject to all new zoning restrictions and subdivision regulations. However, extensions of preliminary plat approval in one-year increments may be granted by the council, with recommendations by the commission, prior to the end of the one-year time period provided the plat complies with current zoning and subdivision control regulations. Requests must be made, in writing, to the city planning department at least two weeks prior to the regular commission meeting. 
(b)  Specifications and engineering construction drawings including profiles, cross sections (if requested by the city engineering department), and details of all public improvements shall be submitted, with the improvement plans, to the city. Elevations shall be referred to mean sea level as exhibited in standard U.S. Geological Survey Maps. 
(c)  Specifications and references shall meet those required by the city's construction and specification standards. 
(d)  Two complete sets of improvement plans shall be submitted to the public works director for approval after the preliminary plat has been approved but prior to submission of the final plat. 
(e)  The developer is required to provide the city with a grade ordinance for all streets. The grade ordinance must be submitted with the improvement plans. No construction shall be started prior to approval of grading and improvement plans. All grading necessary to bring the area within the street right-of-way to the proposed profiles shall be completed prior to the installation of any improvements. 
(f)  Prior to the start of construction, a preconstruction meeting shall be held by the developer's engineer at the city office designated by city staff. Those attending shall include the developer, developer's engineer, contractors that will do the construction work, public works director, utility company representatives, and other personnel deemed necessary. 
(Code 1996, § 126.14) 
Sec. 44-110. - Completion of improvements and performance bond. 
    The requirements for completion of improvements are set forth in section 44-195. The requirements for performance bonds are set forth in section 44-196. 
(Code 1996, §§ 126.15, 126.16) 
Secs. 44-111-44-133. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - FINAL PLATS 

Sec. 44-134. - Conformance to approved preliminary plat. 
    The final plat shall conform substantially to the preliminary plat as approved, and, if desired by the subdivider, it may constitute only that portion of the approved preliminary plat which the subdivider proposes to record and develop at the time; provided, however, that such portion conforms to all requirements of these regulations. 
(Code 1996, § 126.17) 
Sec. 44-135. - General plat requirements. 
    The following graphic descriptive material is required to be provided on the final plat and in the accompanying material. 
(1)  Contents of the final plats. Every plat of a subdivision offered for record shall conform to the following provisions where applicable: 
a.  The final plat shall be prepared in conformity with the provisions of the Code of Iowa § 354.6. 
b.  Street names and clear designation of public alleys as approved by the commission on the preliminary plat. 
c.  Block and lot numbers. 
d.  Name and address of owner and subdivider, if different from the owner. 
e.  Accurate dimensions for any property to be dedicated or reserved for public use. 
(2)  Information to be provided in accompanying material. The following material shall be submitted to the city planning department at least 15 days prior to the council meeting to be acted upon following commission action on the final plat. If not submitted within the above time frame, the 60-day consideration period shall be extended until such time as the city staff has two weeks to review the accompanying material prior to a regular council meeting. 
a.  A statement by the proprietors and their spouses, if any, that the plat is prepared with their free consent and in accordance with their desire, signed and acknowledged before an officer authorized to take the acknowledgment of deeds. The statement by the proprietors may also include a dedication to the public of all lands within the plat that are designated for streets, alleys, parks, open areas, school property, or other public use, if the dedication is approved by the governing body. 
b.  A statement from the mortgage holders or lienholders, if any, that the plat is prepared with their free consent and in accordance with their desire, signed and acknowledged before an officer authorized to take the acknowledgment of deeds. An affidavit and bond, as provided for in the the Code of Iowa § 354.12, may be recorded in lieu of the consent of the mortgage or lienholder. When a mortgage or lienholder consents to the subdivision, a release of mortgage or lien shall be recorded for any areas conveyed to the governing body or dedicated to the public. 
c.  An abstract and title opinion by an attorney at law who has examined the abstract of title of the land being platted. The opinion shall state the names of the proprietors and holders of mortgages, liens, or other encumbrances on the land being platted and shall note the encumbrances, along with any bonds securing the encumbrances. Utility easements shall not be construed to be encumbrances for the purpose of this section. 
d.  A resolution by the council either approving the subdivision or waiving the right to review. 
e.  A statement by the auditor approving the name or title of the subdivision plat. 
f.  A certificate of the treasurer that the land is free from certified taxes and certified special assessments or that the land is free from certified taxes and that the certified special assessments are secured by bond in compliance with the Code of Iowa § 354.12. 
g.  A certificate by the city engineer that all required improvements and installations have been completed according to the construction plans submitted with the preliminary plat, or that a performance bond guaranteeing completion has been approved by the city attorney and filed with the clerk, or that the council has agreed that the city will provide the necessary improvements and installations and assess the costs against the subdivider or future property owners in the subdivision. 
h.  The encumbrance bond, if any. 
i.  An as-built plan showing mains and service lines to individual lots including water and sanitary sewer lines. The end of each service line and locations for the tap into the main shall be shown on the plan and referred to permanent monuments. A certificate signed by the city engineer and the subdivider's engineer verifying the location of the mains and service lines shall be attached. If a performance bond is posted in lieu of the completion of improvements prior to final plat approval, the as-built plan and attached certificate must be submitted to the city before the performance bond is released. 
j.  All formal irrevocable offers of dedication to the public of all streets, city uses, utilities, and easements in a form approved by the city attorney. Land reserved for future streets shall be deeded to the city at no cost at such time the city deems necessary to commence development of the street. 
k.  A statement clarifying or releasing all existing easements. 
(Code 1996, § 126.18) 
Sec. 44-136. - Submission of plat. 
    The subdivider shall submit a final plat in accordance with the provisions of section 44-135 and shall file with the clerk an application in triplicate for the final approval of the plat. The application shall include: 
(1)  Forms and fees. To be made on forms available from the city planning department together with a filing fee per subdivision lot or the minimum filing fee per subdivision (whichever is greater) as set by the most current resolution of the city council. 
(2)  Number of copies of plat. To be accompanied by a minimum of 16 copies of the final plat. 
(3)  Time of submission. To be presented to the clerk at least two weeks prior to the regular meeting of the commission. If submitted less than two weeks prior to the regular meeting, the final plat will be presented at the following regular meeting of the commission. 
(Code 1996, § 126.19) 
Sec. 44-137. - Referral of plat. 
    One copy of the final plat shall be placed on file in the clerk's office with the remaining copies referred to the city planning department who then distributes the final plat copies to the appropriate persons for review. 
(Code 1996, § 126.20) 
Sec. 44-138. - Action by commission. 
    The commission shall, upon receiving the final plat from the city planning department, as soon as possible, but not more than 30 days thereafter, consider the final plat, and if the same is recommended for approval, shall submit its recommendation of approval to the council together with a copy of its minutes showing the action taken by the commission. If the commission recommends approval of the final plat, such approval and the date thereof shall be noted on eight copies of the plat over the signature of the chairperson of the commission. Five copies shall be transmitted to the council, one copy shall be returned to the subdivider, and two copies shall be retained by the commission. 
(Code 1996, § 126.21) 
Sec. 44-139. - Action by the council. 
    Upon receipt of the certification by the commission the council shall, within 60 days, either approve or disapprove the final plat. 
(1)  Disapproval of plat. In the event that the plat is disapproved by the council, such disapproval shall be expressed in writing and shall point out wherein the proposed plat is objectionable. 
(2)  Acceptance of plat. In the event that the plat is found to be acceptable and in accordance with these regulations, the council shall accept same. 
(3)  Final approval and recording of plat. The passage of a resolution by the council accepting the plat shall constitute final approval of the platting of the area shown on the final plat, but the subdivider or owner shall cause such plat to be recorded in the office of the county recorder and shall file satisfactory evidence of such recording in the office of the clerk before the city shall recognize the plat as being in full force and effect. The subdivider shall provide six copies of the final plat after the plat has been accepted by the council, signed, and stamped as required. 
(Code 1996, § 126.22) 
Secs. 44-140-44-161. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - RESUBDIVISION AND MODEL HOMES 

Sec. 44-162. - Resubdivision of land. 
    The following requirements shall govern the resubdividing of land. 
(1)  Procedure for resubdividing. For any change in a map of an approved or recorded subdivision plat, if such change affects any street layout shown on such map, or area reserved for public use indicated on the map, or any lot line, or if it affects any map or plan legally established prior to the adoption of any regulations controlling subdivisions, such parcel shall be approved by the same procedure, rules, and regulations as for a subdivision. 
(2)  Acreage lots. Whenever a parcel of land is subdivided and the subdivision plat shows one or more lots containing more than one acre of land and there are indications that such lots will eventually be resubdivided into smaller building sites, the commission and Council may require that such parcel of land allow for future opening of streets and the ultimate extension of adjacent streets. Easements providing for the future opening and extension of such streets may be made a requirement of the plat. 
(Code 1996, § 126.23) 
Sec. 44-163. - Model homes. 
    Model homes are single-family residential dwellings open to the public for the promotion of sales of new homes available in a subdivision. A model home is constructed in an approved preliminary plat prior to approval of a final plat. 
(1)  Purpose. The purpose of this section is to permit the construction of a limited number of model homes in an approved preliminary plat prior to final plat approval. Allowing model homes provides an opportunity for developers and builders to showcase their product prior to final plat approval. 
(2)  Application. An application for approval of model homes shall be submitted and concurrently considered with the application for preliminary plat approval. 
(3)  Approval authority. The council may approve, approve conditionally or deny a model home application, under the criteria and requirements set forth in subsections (4) through (6) of this section. 
(4)  Eligibility. A subdivision having received preliminary plat approval is eligible for model homes, provided it meets the following conditions: 
a.  The applicant has submitted a preliminary plat application that meets all the requirements for preliminary plat approval. 
b.  The applicant proposed model homes at the time of his pre-application meeting consistent with the procedures in section 44-37, and has submitted a complete model homes application. 
(5)  Prior to approval of the building permit for the model homes, the applicant will have: 
a.  Installed temporary or permanent drainage facilities necessary to serve the model homes to the satisfaction of the city planning department; 
b.  Met access and fire protection requirements as established by the building official in accordance with the most current city building code; 
c.  Provided an all-weather surface roadway to the model home constructed to city engineering and design standards; 
d.  Installed water and sewer to each lot proposed for model homes, as directed by city planning department; 
e.  Installed adequate street signage; 
f.  Had a licensed, professional land surveyor set the lot corners of all lots proposed to be used for the model homes in accordance with the approved preliminary plat; 
g.  Met all required setbacks and applicable subdivision regulations; 
h.  Met any other conditions of the approved model home application. 
(6)  Prior to the construction of the model homes, an instrument shall be recorded against the parcels containing the model homes stating, "The model homes constructed on this parcel are subject to removal should the preliminary plat not receive final plat approval or expire without an extension." This instrument shall remain in effect until the final plat is recorded or the model homes are removed. 
(7)  Prior to the construction of the model homes, the applicant shall provide a financial security in the amount and form provided for in subsection (9)(k) of this section. 
(8)  The total number of model homes shall not exceed two homes in the case of any plats that propose ten or fewer total homes. For all other plats, the number of model homes shall be limited to five. 
(9)  Application requirements. The following information shall be required in addition to standard requirements for submittal of a single-family residential building permit: 
a.  The applicant shall have written authorization from the property owner permitting the installation of the model homes if the applicant is other than the owner of the approved preliminary plat; 
b.  Current title report; 
c.  Name of the approved preliminary plat, as well as the name of the final plat (if different); 
d.  Parcel numbers for each parcel that comprises the preliminary plat; 
e.  Expiration date of the preliminary plat approval; 
f.  The applicant shall have reviewed the model homes proposal with the city in accordance with the requirements for a pre-application procedure under section 44-37; 
g.  A site plan showing the preliminary plat and the location of all proposed model homes; 
h.  A site plan showing the location and specification of temporary and permanent subdivision improvements as required by article III of this chapter, and the conditions of eligibility, and all other related improvements, including signage, flags, banners, fencing, landscaping and any impervious parking areas or walkways; 
i.  An individual site plan showing the location of the model homes in relation to the property lines and setbacks approved in the preliminary plat; 
j.  A financial security set at 150 percent of a contractor's cost estimate, as approved by the zoning administrator, necessary to restore the site to the conditions that existed prior to the construction of the model homes and all associated structures and improvements; 
k.  Prior to issuance of a permit for a model home, the applicant shall pay a model home review fee as set forth in the most current fee resolution and pay of all other applicable fees, including building permit fees and fees for any related plat improvements to be constructed in accordance with the model home. 
(10)  Restricted occupancy. Occupancy of a model home shall be restricted as follows: 
a.  Prior to any occupancy of the model homes, the applicant shall obtain a temporary occupancy permit, which shall be posted conspicuously at the main entrance of each model home and which shall only permit occupancy in the form of public access associated with the sale of homes in the plat. 
b.  No model home shall be occupied for residential use or any other commercial or business use beyond the limited use for sales purposes until such time as the approved final plat has been recorded. No model home shall be sold, leased, rented or otherwise transferred in ownership until the final plat is recorded, unless the property interest is transferred in conjunction with a transfer of the interest in the plat as a whole. 
c.  Hours of operation of the model home shall be limited to between 8:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. 
d.  The model homes may not be used as a branch real estate office. 
e.  The model homes shall be used for no more than 36 months from the date of approval, at which time a final plat shall have been approved and recorded. 
f.  The model homes shall be properly maintained as to keep up the appearance of the landscaping, home, and all improvements and appurtenances associated thereto. This includes routine maintenance, snow removal, removal of graffiti and other vandalism, and other such actions that maintain the model home as if it were any other residence within the city. 
(11)  Removal and restoration. Should the preliminary plat not receive final plat approval or the property or project be abandoned, the city shall act upon the security provided and have the model homes removed and property restored to its condition prior to preliminary plat approval. In the case where the security does not cover the full cost of removal and restoration, the city shall be entitled to pursue financial remedy through any means thereby permitted by law. 
(Code 1996, § 126.24) 
Secs. 44-164-44-194. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - IMPROVEMENTS 

Sec. 44-195. - Completion of improvements. 
    All street, sanitary sewer and other improvements of the plat must be completed at the sole responsibility of the developer. Before the final plat is approved by the council, all applicants shall be required to complete, in accordance with the council's decision and to the satisfaction of the city planning department all the street, sanitary, and other improvements as required in these regulations or as required by the commission or council, and as approved by the council, and, where the improvements are public, to dedicate same to the city, free and clear of all liens and encumbrances on the property and public improvements thus dedicated. 
(Code 1996, § 127.01) 
Sec. 44-196. - Performance bond. 
    The council, in its discretion, may waive the requirement that the applicant complete and dedicate all public improvements prior to approving the final plat, and that, as an alternative, the applicant post a bond at the time of application for final plat approval in an amount estimated by the council as sufficient to secure to the city the satisfactory construction, installation, and, where required, dedication of the uncompleted portion of the required improvements. In lieu of a performance bond, the council may, at its sole discretion, permit an alternative form of surety, which may include an assignment of cash deposit or irrevocable letter of credit. In addition: 
(1)  Approved by city attorney. Such performance bond or alternative surety shall comply with all statutory requirements and shall be satisfactory to the city attorney as to the form, sufficiency, and manner of execution as set forth in these regulations. 
(2)  Completion period. The period within which required improvements must be completed shall be specified by the council in the resolution approving the final plat and shall be incorporated by reference in the bond or its alternative surety, and shall not exceed one year from date of final approval; provided, however that expiration of the completion period shall not result in expiration of the bond or alternative surety. 
(3)  Extension of completion period. The performance bond shall be approved by the council as to the amount and surety and conditions satisfactory to the council. The commission may, upon proof of difficulty, recommend to the council extension of the completion date set forth in such bond or alternative surety for a maximum period of one additional year. The council may, at any time during the period of such bond or alternative surety, accept a substitution of principal or sureties on the bond or alternative surety. 
(4)  Temporary improvements. The applicant shall build and pay for all costs of temporary improvements required by the council and shall maintain same for the period specified by the council. Prior to construction of any temporary facility or improvement, the developer shall file with the city a separate suitable bond or alternative surety for the temporary facilities, which bond or alternative surety shall ensure that the temporary facilities will be properly constructed, maintained and removed. 
(5)  Failure to complete improvement. For subdivisions for which no performance bond or alternative surety have been posted, if the improvements are not completed within the period specified by the council in the resolution approving the plat, the approval shall be deemed to have expired. In those cases where a performance bond or alternative surety have been posted and required improvements have not been installed within the terms of such performance bond or alternative surety, the city may declare the bond or alternative surety to be in default and require that all improvements be installed regardless of the extent of the building development at the time the bond or alternative surety is declared to be in default. 
(Code 1996, § 127.02) 
Sec. 44-197. - Inspection of improvements. 
    The council shall provide for inspection of required improvements during construction and ensure their satisfactory completion. The applicant shall pay to the city an inspection fee equal to the actual cost of inspection. These fees shall be due and payable upon demand of the city and no building permits or certificates of occupancy shall be issued until all fees are paid. The subdivider shall furnish the engineering department with a construction schedule prior to the commencement of any and all construction, and notify the city not less than 24 hours in advance of readiness for required inspections. 
(Code 1996, § 127.03) 
Sec. 44-198. - Release or reduction of performance bond or alternative surety. 
    The performance bond or alternative surety may not be released or reduced except as follows: 
(1)  Certificate of satisfactory completion. The council will not accept dedication of required improvements, or release or reduce a performance bond or alternative surety, until the city engineer has submitted a certificate stating that all required improvements have been satisfactorily completed and until the applicant's engineer has certified to the city through submission of detailed "as-built" plans of the subdivision indicating location, dimensions, materials, and other information required by the city, that all public improvements are in accordance with construction plans for the subdivision. 
(2)  Reduction of performance bond or alternative surety. A performance bond or alternative surety may be reduced upon actual dedication of public improvements and then only to the ratio that public improvements dedicated bears to the total public improvements for the plat. 
(Code 1996, § 127.04) 
Sec. 44-199. - Maintenance of improvements. 
    Improvements shall be maintained and a maintenance bond or alternative surety provided as follows: 
(1)  Maintenance of improvement before acceptance. The applicant shall be required to maintain all improvements on the individual subdivided lots and provide for snow removal on streets and sidewalks, if required, until acceptance of the improvements by the council. If there are any certificates of occupancy on a street not dedicated to the city, the city may on 12 hours' notice plow the street or effect emergency repairs and charge same to applicant. 
(2)  Maintenance bond or alternative surety. The applicant shall be required to file a maintenance bond or alternative surety with the governing body, prior to dedication, in an amount considered adequate by the council and in a form satisfactory to the city attorney, in order to ensure the satisfactory condition of the required improvements for a period of two years after the date of their acceptance by the governing body and dedication of same to the local government. 
(Code 1996, § 127.05) 
Sec. 44-200. - Deferral or waiver of required improvements. 
    Required improvements may be deferred or waived as follows: 
(1)  Waiver of required improvements. The council may defer or waive at the time of final approval, subject to appropriate conditions, the provision of any or all such improvements as in its judgment are not requisite in the interests of the public health, safety, and general welfare, or which are inappropriate because of inadequacy or lack of connecting facilities. 
(2)  Deferral of required improvements. Whenever it is deemed necessary by the council to defer the construction of any improvement required herein because of incompatible grades, future planning, inadequate or lack of connecting facilities, or for other reasons, the applicant shall pay his share of the costs of the future improvements to the city prior to the approval of the final plat, or the applicant may post a bond insuring completion of the improvements upon demand of the city. 
(Code 1996, § 127.06) 
Sec. 44-201. - Issuance of certificates of occupancy. 
    No certificate of occupancy shall be issued until the extent of street improvement is adequate for vehicular access by the prospective occupant and by police and fire equipment. 
(Code 1996, § 127.07) 
Sec. 44-202. - Improvements required. 
    The subdivider shall install and construct all improvements required by these regulations in accordance with the specifications and under the supervision of the council and to its satisfaction. 
(Code 1996, § 127.08) 
Secs. 44-203-44-227. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - DESIGN STANDARDS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 44-228. - Design standards are minimum. 
    The standards and details of design herein contained are intended only as minimum requirements so that the general arrangement and layout of a subdivision may be adjusted to a wide variety of circumstances. However, in the design and development of the subdivision, the subdivider shall use standards consistent with the site conditions so as to ensure an economical, pleasant and durable neighborhood. 
(Code 1996, § 127.09) 
Sec. 44-229. - Conformance to applicable rules and regulations. 
    In addition to the requirements established herein, all subdividers shall comply with the following laws, rules, and regulations. 
(1)  State statutes. All applicable statutes of the state. 
(2)  City plans. Any comprehensive plan, public utilities plan, and capital improvements program of the city. 
(3)  State agency rules. The requirements and rules of state agencies such as the state department of environmental quality, state department of health, and the state department of transportation, where applicable. 
(4)  County standards and regulations. The standards and regulations of the county board of supervisors and county commissions, boards, and agencies where applicable. 
(5)  City standards and regulations. The standards and regulations adopted by the council, boards, commissions, and agencies of the city. 
(6)  Plat approval and conformity. Plat approval may be withheld if a subdivision is not in conformance with the above guides, or policy and purposes of these regulations. 
(Code 1996, § 127.10) 
Sec. 44-230. - Subdivision name. 
    The proposed name of the subdivision shall not duplicate, or too closely approximate phonetically, the name of any other subdivision in the area covered by these regulations. The council, after consultation with the commission, shall have the final authority to designate the name of the subdivision which shall be determined at preliminary plat approval. 
(Code 1996, § 127.11) 
Sec. 44-231. - Monumentation. 
    Monuments shall be in conformance with the following requirements: 
(1)  Establishment of permanent control monuments. Prior to the offering of the plat of any subdivision for record, the surveyor shall confirm the prior establishment of permanent control monuments at each controlling corner on the boundaries of the parcel or tract of land being subdivided. If no permanent control monuments exist, the surveyor shall establish at least two permanent control monuments for each block created, or if the area subdivided into lots is less than a block in size, at least two permanent control monuments shall be established for the subdivision. Permanent control monuments shall be constructed of reasonably permanent material solidly embedded in the ground and capable of being detected by commonly used magnetic or electronic equipment. The surveyor shall affix a cap of reasonably inert material bearing an embossed or stencil-cut marking of the Iowa registration number of the surveyor to the top of the monument. 
(2)  Other monuments of record. Other monuments established prior to the recording of the plat of the subdivision and described on the plat shall be considered monuments of record and shall be given the same weight as original permanent control monuments if the monuments remain undisturbed in their original positions. The additional monuments shall be constructed and embedded according to the provisions for permanent control monuments prescribed in subsection (1) of this section. 
(3)  Establishment and recording of other monuments. Monuments other than the permanent control monuments required in subsection (1) of this section shall not be required to be established before the recording of the plat or the conveyancing of lands by reference to the plat if the registered land surveyor includes in the surveyor's statement on the plat that the additional monuments required by these regulations shall be established before a specified future date. 
(4)  Additional monuments required. Additional monuments shall be constructed and embedded according to the provisions for permanent control monuments prescribed in subsection (1) of this section, and shall be set all of the following locations whether set prior to the recording of the plat, or subsequent to such recording: 
a.  At every corner and angle point of every lot, block or parcel of land created. 
b.  At every point of intersection of the outer boundary of the subdivision with an existing or created right-of-way line of any street, railroad, or other way. 
c.  At every point of curve, tangency, reversed curve, or compounded curve on every right-of-way line established. 
(5)  Placement of monument. When the placement of a monument required by this article at the prescribed location is impractical, it is permissible to establish a reference monument in close proximity to the prescribed location. If the reference monument is established prior to the recording of the plat and its location properly shown on the plat, the reference monument shall have the same status as other monuments of record. Where any point requiring monumentation has been previously monumented, the existence of the monument shall be confirmed by the surveyor. The existing monument shall be considered a monument of record when properly shown and described on the recorded plat. 
(Code 1996, § 127.12) 
Sec. 44-232. - Character of the land. 
    Land which the city finds to be unsuitable for subdivision or development due to flooding, improper drainage, steep slopes, rock formations, adverse earth formations or topography, utility easements, or other features which will reasonably be harmful to the safety, health, and general welfare of the present or future inhabitants of the subdivision or its surrounding areas or both, shall not be subdivided or developed unless adequate methods are formulated by the subdivider and approved by the council, upon recommendation of the commission, to solve the problems created by the unsuitable land conditions. Such land shall be set aside for uses as shall not involve such a danger. 
(Code 1996, § 127.13) 
Sec. 44-233. - Lots. 
    The lot size, width, depth, shape and orientation shall be appropriate for the location of the subdivision and for the type of development and use contemplated. 
(1)  Lot size. Minimum lot dimensions and sizes shall conform to the requirements of the zoning regulations. 
a.  Residential lots where not served by public sewer shall be of sufficient size, as determined by the city and subject to any applicable state or county rules or regulations, to accommodate the type of private sewage disposal system proposed by the developer. 
b.  Depth and width of properties reserved or laid out for commercial and industrial purposes shall be adequate to provide for the off-street service and parking facilities required by the type of use and development contemplated. 
c.  Corner lots shall have a minimum width of 60 feet in order to permit adequate building setbacks on both front and side streets. 
(2)  Street access. Each lot shall be provided with satisfactory access to a public street. 
(3)  Double frontage and reverse frontage lots. Double frontage and reverse frontage lots shall be avoided except where essential to provide separation of residential development from traffic arteries or to overcome specific disadvantages of topography and orientation. A planting screen easement of at least ten feet, and across which there shall be no right of access, shall be provided along the line of lots abutting such a traffic artery or other disadvantageous use. 
(4)  Side lot lines. Side lot lines shall be substantially at right angles to straight street lines or radial to curved street lines. 
(5)  Lot drainage. Lots shall be laid out so as to provide positive drainage away from all buildings, and individual lot drainage shall be coordinated with the general storm drainage pattern for the area. Drainage shall be designed so as to avoid concentration of storm drainage water from each lot to adjacent lots. 
(6)  Building lines. Building lines conforming with zoning standards shall be shown on all lots within the platted area. Where the subdivided area is not under zoning control, the council may require building lines in accordance with the needs of each subdivision. 
(Code 1996, § 127.14) 
Sec. 44-234. - Blocks. 
    Blocks shall conform to the following requirements: 
(1)  Provision for lots. Blocks shall have sufficient width to provide for two tiers of lots of appropriate depths. Exceptions shall be permitted in blocks adjacent to arterial streets, railroads, or waterways. 
(2)  Design considerations. The lengths, widths and shapes of blocks shall be determined with due regard to: 
a.  Provision for adequate building sites. 
b.  Zoning requirements where applicable. 
c.  Topography. 
d.  Needs for convenient access, circulation, control, and safety of street traffic. 
(3)  Block lengths. The lengths of blocks shall be appropriate to the type of development contemplated, but block lengths in residential developments shall not exceed 1,000 feet or be less than 300 feet. Wherever practicable, blocks along arterials and collector streets shall not be less than 1,000 feet in length. 
(4)  Easement reservation. In blocks over 800 feet in length, the council may require the reservation of an easement to accommodate utilities, drainage facilities, or pedestrian traffic. 
(5)  Pedestrian crosswalks. Pedestrian crosswalks, not less than ten feet wide, may be required by the council through the center of blocks more than 800 feet in length. Pedestrian crosswalks shall not exceed 12 percent in grade unless steps of an approved design are to be constructed. 
(6)  Sidewalks. Sidewalks shall be provided in all new subdivisions. A minimum of a four feet wide concrete sidewalk shall be installed in the public right-of-way along each side of the street being dedicated for public use. Sidewalks shall be constructed in accordance with standard specifications of the city. Sidewalks shall be placed parallel to the street right-of-way line ten feet from back of curb. 
(Code 1996, § 127.15) 
Sec. 44-235. - Preservation of natural features and amenities. 
    Existing features which would add value to residential development or to the city as a whole, such as trees, watercourses and falls, beaches, historic spots, and similar irreplaceable assets, shall be preserved in the design of the subdivision. No trees shall be removed from any subdivision or any change of grade of the land effected until approval of the preliminary plat has been granted. All trees on the plat required to be retained shall be preserved, and all trees, where required, shall be protected against change of grade. 
(Code 1996, § 127.22) 
Sec. 44-236. - Nonresidential subdivisions. 
    The following provisions shall apply to nonresidential subdivisions: 
(1)  General. If a proposed subdivision includes land that is used for commercial or industrial purposes, the layout of the subdivision with respect to such land shall make such provision as the council may require. A nonresidential subdivision shall be subject to all the requirements of these regulations, as well as such additional standards required by the council, and shall conform to the proposed land use and standards established in city plans and regulations. 
(2)  Standards. In addition to the principles and standards in these regulations, which are appropriate to the planning of all subdivisions, the applicant shall demonstrate to the satisfaction of the city that the street, parcel, and block pattern proposed is specifically adapted to the uses anticipated and takes into account other uses in the vicinity. The following principles and standards shall be observed: 
a.  Proposed industrial parcels shall be suitable in area and dimensions to the types of industrial development anticipated. 
b.  Street rights-of-way and pavement shall be adequate to accommodate the type and volume of traffic anticipated to be generated thereupon. 
c.  Special requirements may be imposed by the city with respect to street, curb, gutter, and sidewalk design and construction. 
d.  Special requirements may be imposed by the city with respect to the installation of public utilities, including water, sewer, and stormwater drainage. 
e.  Every effort shall be made to protect adjacent residential areas from potential nuisance from a proposed commercial or industrial subdivision, including the provision of extra depth in parcels backing up on existing or potential residential development and provisions for a permanently landscaped buffer strip when necessary. 
f.  Streets carrying nonresidential traffic, especially truck traffic, shall not normally be extended to the boundaries of adjacent existing or potential residential areas. 
(Code 1996, § 127.23) 
Sec. 44-237. - School and park reservations. 
    If land to be subdivided contains sites that are designated in city plans or plans of other public bodies to be used for schools or parks, the developer shall reserve such site for such use. If sites which have been reserved are not acquired by the city or other public body within two years of the date of the preliminary plat approval, then such sites may be subdivided by the developer. The appropriate public body may release the reserved site sooner by certifying to the council that it does not intend to acquire such site within the two-year period. 
(Code 1996, § 127.24) 
Sec. 44-238. - Improvements within unincorporated jurisdiction. 
    Improvements in the two mile unincorporated area under the jurisdiction of these regulations shall be the same as required herein, provided they are not less than that required by the applicable county subdivision regulations, and provided further that all construction plans shall be approved by the county, and completed public roads shall be accepted by the board of supervisors for public maintenance. 
(Code 1996, § 127.25) 
Secs. 44-239-44-269. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - STREETS 

Sec. 44-270. - Streets, general requirements. 
    Streets shall conform with the following general requirements: 
(1)  Frontage on improved roads. No subdivision shall be approved unless the area to be subdivided shall have frontage on and access from an existing street. 
(2)  Grading and improvement plan. Streets shall be graded and improved and conform to the city construction standards and specifications and shall be approved as to design and specifications by the city engineer, in accordance with the construction plans required to be submitted. 
(3)  Topography and arrangement. Streets shall be in conformance with the following requirements related to topography and arrangement: 
a.  Streets shall be related appropriately to the topography. All streets shall be arranged so as to obtain as many as possible of the building sites at, or above, the grades of the streets. Grades of streets shall conform as closely as possible to the original topography. A combination of steep grades and curves shall be avoided. Specific standards are contained in the design standards of these regulations. 
b.  All streets shall be properly integrated with the existing and proposed system of streets and dedicated right-of-way. 
c.  All arterials shall be properly related to special traffic generators such as industries, business districts, schools, churches, and shopping centers; to population densities; and to the pattern of existing and proposed land uses. 
d.  Municipal service streets shall be laid out to conform as much as possible to the topography to discourage use by through-traffic, to permit efficient drainage and utility systems, and to require the minimum number of streets necessary to provide convenient and safe access to property. 
e.  Proposed streets shall be extended to the boundary lines of the tract to be subdivided, unless prevented by topography or other physical conditions, or unless in the opinion of the council such extension is not necessary or desirable for the coordination of the layout of the subdivision with the existing layout or the most advantageous future development of adjacent tracts. 
f.  In business and industrial developments, the streets and other accessways shall be planned in connection with the grouping of buildings, location of rail facilities, and the provision of alleys, truck loading and maneuvering areas, and walks and parking areas so as to minimize conflict of movement between the various types of traffic, including pedestrian. 
(4)  Access to state or county jurisdictional roads. Whenever any part of a subdivision is designed with access to a road under state or county jurisdiction, permission for access to such roads shall be obtained from the appropriate jurisdiction and such access shall be designed according to the standards of the appropriate jurisdiction. 
(5)  Access to arterial streets. Where a subdivision borders on or contains an existing or proposed arterial street, the council may require that lot access to such streets be limited by one of the following means: 
a.  Lots shall be designed so as to back onto the primary arterial and front onto a parallel municipal service street; no access shall be provided from the arterial street, and screening shall be provided in a strip of land along the rear property line of such lots. 
b.  A series of cul-de-sacs entered from and designed generally at right angles to such a parallel street, with the rear lines of their terminal lots backing onto the arterial street. 
c.  A frontage or service road, separated from the primary arterial by a planting or grass strip and having access thereto at suitable points. 
(6)  Street names. Streets that are in alignment with others already existing shall bear the name of the existing streets. The proposed names of new streets shall not duplicate or sound similar to existing street names. Street names shall be subject to the approval of the council and commission. 
(7)  Street name signs. Street name signs are to be placed at all intersections within or abutting the subdivision, the type and location of which to be approved by the council. The city shall install all street name signs. The applicant shall deposit with the city at the time of final subdivision approval, the estimated cost of installation of each street sign required by the council. 
(8)  Street lights. Installation of street lights shall be required in accordance with design and specification standards approved by the council. The type and location of all street lighting shall be approved by the council. The city shall install all street lights. The applicant shall deposit with the city, at the time of final subdivision approval, the estimated cost of installation of each street light required by the council. 
(9)  Construction of streets and dead-end streets. Streets and dead-end streets shall be in conformance with the following requirements: 
a.  Construction of streets. The arrangement of streets shall provide for the continuation of principal streets between adjacent properties when such continuation is necessary for convenient movement of traffic, effective fire protection, and for efficient provision of utilities. If the adjacent property is undeveloped and the street must be a dead-end street temporarily, the right-of-way shall be extended to the property line. A temporary "T-" or "L-" shaped turnabout shall be provided on all temporary dead-end streets, with the notation on the subdivision plat that land outside the normal street right-of-way shall revert to abuttors whenever the street is continued. The council may limit the length of temporary dead-end streets in accordance with the design standards of these regulations. 
b.  Permanent dead-end streets. Where a road does not extend to the boundary of the subdivision and its continuation is not required by the council for access to adjoining property, its terminus shall normally not be nearer to such boundary than 150 feet. However, the council may require the reservation of an appropriate easement to accommodate drainage facilities, pedestrian traffic, or utilities. A cul-de-sac turnaround shall be provided at the end of a permanent dead-end street in accordance with city construction standards and specifications. For greater convenience to traffic and more effective police and fire protection, permanent dead-end streets shall, in general, be limited in length in accordance with the design standards of these regulations. 
(Code 1996, § 127.16) 
Sec. 44-271. - Street design specifications. 
    The following design standards shall apply to the design of streets: 
(1)  General. In order to provide for streets of suitable location, width, and improvement to accommodate prospective traffic and afford satisfactory access to police, firefighting, snow removal, sanitation, and street maintenance equipment, and to coordinate streets so as to compose a convenient system and avoid undue hardships to adjoining properties the following design standards for streets are required: 
a.  A tangent at least 100 feet long shall be introduced between reverse curves on municipal arterial and municipal collector streets, and 75 feet on municipal service streets. 
b.  When connecting street lines deflect from each other at any one point by more than ten degrees, they shall be connected by a curve with a radius adequate to ensure a sight distance of not less than 100 feet for municipal service and municipal collector streets, and of such greater radii as the council shall determine for special cases. 
c.  Minimum roadway and right-of-way standards: 
1.  Municipal arterial streets shall have a right-of-way width of not less than 80 feet and a roadway width of not less than 48 feet. 
2.  Municipal collector streets shall have a right-of-way width of not less than 60 feet and a roadway width of not less than 36 feet. 
3.  Municipal service and frontage streets shall have a right-of-way of not less than 60 feet and a roadway width of not less than 30 feet. 
4.  Cul-de-sacs shall meet all the requirements for a municipal service street and, in addition, shall provide a turnaround with a right-of-way radius of 50 feet and a roadway radius of 40 feet. No cul-de-sac shall exceed 500 feet in length. 
5.  The width and thickness of paving in commercial and industrial districts shall be approved by the city engineer and council. The expense of extra pavement width and thickness necessary to provide access to a subdivision in a commercial or industrial district shall be paid by the subdivider. 
d.  Street grades, wherever feasible shall not exceed the following: 
1.  Municipal arterial streets: six percent. 
2.  Municipal collector streets: eight percent. 
3.  Municipal service streets: ten percent. 
4.  Frontage streets: six percent. 
e.  All changes in street grade shall be connected by vertical curves of minimum length in feet equal to 20 times the algebraic difference in percentages of grade. 
f.  No street grade shall be less than one-half of one percent. 
(2)  Street surfacing and improvements. After sewer, water and other utilities to be located underground within the right-of-way have been installed by the applicant, the applicant shall construct curbs and gutters and shall surface or cause to be surfaced roadways to the widths prescribed in these regulations. The surfacing shall be as set out in the city construction standards and specifications. Adequate provision shall be made for culverts, drains, and bridges. All road pavement, shoulders, drainage improvements and structures, curbs, turnarounds, and sidewalks shall conform to all construction standards and specifications adopted by the city and shall be incorporated into the construction plans required to be submitted by the developer for plat approval. 
(3)  Excess right-of-way. Right-of-way widths in excess of the standards designated in these regulations shall be required whenever, due to topography, additional width is necessary to provide adequate earth slopes. Such slopes shall not be in excess of three to one. 
(4)  Railroads and limited access highways. Railroad rights-of-way and limited access highways where so located as to affect the subdivision of adjoining lands shall be treated as follows: 
a.  In residential districts a buffer strip at least 25 feet in depth in addition to the normal depth of the lot required in the district shall be provided adjacent to the railroad right-of-way or limited access highway. This strip shall be part of the platted lots and shall be designated on the plat: "This strip is reserved for screening. The placement of structures hereon is prohibited." 
b.  In districts zoned for business, commercial, or industrial uses the nearest street extending parallel or approximately parallel to the railroad shall, wherever practicable, be at a sufficient distance therefrom to ensure suitable depth for commercial or industrial sites. 
c.  Streets parallel to the railroad when intersecting a street which crosses the railroad at grade shall, to the extent practicable, be at a distance of at least 150 feet from the railroad right-of-way. Such distance shall be determined with due consideration of the minimum distance required for future separation of grades by means of appropriate approach gradients. 
(5)  Intersections. The following standards shall apply to the design of intersections: 
a.  Streets shall be laid out so as to intersect as nearly as possible at right angles. A proposed intersection of two new streets at an angle of less than 75 degrees shall not be acceptable. An oblique street should be curved approaching an intersection and should be approximately at right angles for at least 100 feet therefrom. Not more than two streets shall intersect at any one point unless specifically approved by the council. 
b.  Proposed new intersections along one side of an existing street shall, wherever practicable, coincide with any existing intersections on the opposite side of such street. Street jogs with centerline offsets of less than 150 feet shall not be permitted, except where the intersected street has separated dual drives without median breaks at either intersection. Where streets intersect major streets, their alignment shall be continuous. Intersection of major streets shall be at least 800 feet apart. 
c.  Minimum curb radius at the intersection of two municipal service streets shall be at least 20 feet; and minimum curb radius at an intersection involving a municipal collector street shall be at least 25 feet. Abrupt changes in alignment within a block shall have the corners cut off in accordance with standard engineering practice to permit safe vehicular movement. 
d.  Intersections shall be designed with a flat grade wherever practical. In hilly or rolling areas, at the approach to an intersection, a leveling area shall be provided having not greater than a two percent rate at a distance of 60 feet, measured from the nearest right-of-way line of the intersecting street. 
e.  Where any street intersection will involve earth banks or existing vegetation inside any lot corner that would create a traffic hazard by limiting visibility, the developer shall cut such ground or vegetation, including trees, in connection with the grading of the public right-of-way to the extent deemed necessary to provide an adequate sight distance. 
f.  The cross-slopes on all streets, including intersections, shall be three percent or less. 
g.  Curbs constructed along any public street in the state, when the street is paralleled or intersected by sidewalks, or when city ordinances or other lawful regulations will require the construction of sidewalks in parallel to or intersecting the street, shall be constructed with not less than two curb cuts or ramps per linear block which shall be located on or near the crosswalks at intersections. Each curb cut or ramp shall be at least 30 inches wide, shall be sloped at not greater than one inch of rise per 12 inches linear distance, except that a slope no greater than one-inch rise per eight inches linear distance may be used where necessary, shall have a non-skid surface, and shall otherwise be constructed as to allow reasonable access to the crosswalk for physically handicapped persons using the sidewalk. 
(6)  Bridges. Bridges of primary benefit to the applicant, as determined by the council, shall be constructed at the full expense of the applicant without reimbursement from the city. The sharing expense for the construction of bridges not of primary benefit to the applicant as determined by the council, will be fixed by special agreement between the council and the applicant. The cost shall be charged to the applicant pro rata as the percentage of the applicant's land developed and so served. 
(7)  Alleys. The following design standards for alleys shall be required of all subdividers: 
a.  Alleys shall be prohibited in residential districts. 
b.  Alleys shall be provided in commercial and industrial districts, except that the council may waive this requirement where other definite and ensured provision is made for service access, such as off-street loading, unloading and parking consistent with and adequate for the uses proposed. 
c.  Alleys shall have a right-of-way of not less than 30 feet and a roadway width of not less than 20 feet. 
d.  Alley intersections and sharp changes in alignment shall be avoided, but where necessary, corners shall be cut off sufficiently to permit safe vehicular movement. 
e.  Dead-end alleys shall be avoided where possible, but if unavoidable, shall be provided with adequate turn-around facilities at the dead end, as determined by the council. 
(8)  Street dedications and reservations. The following provisions shall apply to street dedications and reservations: 
a.  Street systems in new subdivisions shall be laid out so as to eliminate or avoid new perimeter half streets. Where an existing half street is adjacent to a new subdivision, the other half of the street shall be improved and dedicated by the subdivider. The council may authorize a new perimeter street where the subdivider improves and dedicates the entire required street right-of-way width within the subdivider's own subdivision boundaries. 
b.  Where a subdivision borders an existing narrow street or when city plans or zoning setback regulations indicate plans for realignment or widening a road that would require use of some of the land in the subdivision, the applicant shall be required to improve and dedicate at his expense such areas for widening or realignment of such roads. Such frontage roads and streets shall be improved and dedicated by the applicant at the applicant's own expense to the full width as required by these subdivision regulations. Land reserved for any street purposes may not be counted in satisfying yard or area requirements of the zoning regulations whether the land is to be dedicated to the city in fee simple or an easement is granted to the city. 
(Code 1996, § 127.17) 
Secs. 44-272-44-290. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - STORMWATER AND SEWER FACILITIES 

Sec. 44-291. - Storm sewers and drainage. 
    The following requirements shall apply to the provision of storm sewers and drainage: 
(1)  General requirements. The commission shall not recommend for approval any plat of a subdivision which does not make adequate provision for storm or flood water run-off channels or basins. The stormwater drainage system shall be separate and independent of any sanitary sewer system. Storm sewers, where required, shall be designed by methods as approved by the council, and a copy of design computations shall be submitted along with plans. Inlets shall be provided so that surface water is not carried across or around any intersection, or for a distance of more than 600 feet in the gutter. When calculations indicate that curb capacities are exceeded at a point, no further allowance shall be made for flow beyond that point, and basins shall be used to intercept flow at that point. Surface water drainage patterns shall be shown for each and every lot and block. 
(2)  Nature of stormwater facilities. The applicant may be required by the council to carry away by pipe or open ditch any spring or surface water that may exist either previously to, or as a result of the subdivision. Such drainage facilities shall be located in the road right-of-way where feasible, or in perpetual unobstructed easements of appropriate width, and shall be constructed in accordance with the construction standards and specifications. 
a.  Where a public storm sewer is accessible, the applicant shall install storm sewer facilities, or if no outlets are within a reasonable distance, adequate provision shall be made for the disposal of stormwaters, subject to the specifications of the council. However, in subdivisions containing lots less than 15,000 square feet in area and in business and industrial districts, underground storm sewer systems shall be constructed throughout the subdivisions and be conducted to an approved out-fall. 
b.  If a connection to a public storm sewer will be provided eventually, as determined by the council, the subdivider shall make arrangements for future stormwater disposal by a public storm sewer system at the time the plat receives final approval. Provision for such connection shall be incorporated by inclusion in the performance bond required for the subdivision plat. 
c.  A culvert or other drainage facility shall in each case be large enough to accommodate potential runoff from its entire upstream drainage area, whether inside or outside the subdivision. The council shall determine the necessary size of the facility, based on the provisions of the construction standards and specifications assuming conditions of maximum potential watershed development permitted by applicable zoning regulations. All storm sewer pipes shall be at least 15 inches in diameter. If the city deems it necessary to install storm sewers larger than required to provide adequate drainage from the subdivision, the increased cost will be paid by the city. 
d.  The council shall also study the effect of each subdivision on existing downstream drainage facilities outside the area of the subdivision. City drainage studies together with such other studies as shall be appropriate shall serve as a guide to needed improvements. Where it is anticipated that the additional runoff incident to the development of the subdivision will overload an existing downstream drainage facility, the council may withhold approval of the subdivision until provision has been made for the recovery of the cost for the improvement of the potential condition in such sum as the council shall determine. No subdivision shall be approved unless adequate drainage will be provided to a watercourse or facility. 
e.  The council may, when it deems it necessary for the health, safety, or welfare of the present and future population of the area and necessary to the conservation of water, drainage, and sanitary facilities, prohibit the subdivision of any portion of the property which lies within the floodplain of any stream or drainage course. 
f.  Field tiles that are in use and found damaged or damaged during construction shall be repaired at no expense to the city. 
(3)  Dedication of drainage easements. The following shall apply to the dedication of drainage easements. 
a.  Where a subdivision is traversed by a watercourse, drainageway, channel, or stream, there shall be provided a stormwater easement or drainage right-of-way conforming substantially to the lines of such watercourse, and of such width and construction or both as will be adequate for the purpose. Wherever possible, it is desirable that the drainage be maintained by an open channel with landscaped banks and adequate width for maximum potential volume of flow. 
b.  Drainage easements: 
1.  Where topography or other conditions are such as to make impractical the inclusion of drainage facilities within street rights-of-way, perpetual unobstructed easements at least 15 feet in width for such drainage facilities shall be provided across property outside the street lines and with satisfactory access to the road. Easements shall be indicated on the plat. Drainage easements shall be carried from the street to a natural watercourse or to other drainage facilities. 
2.  When a proposed drainage system will carry water across private land outside the subdivision, appropriate drainage rights must be secured and indicated on the plat. 
3.  The applicant shall dedicate, either in fee or by drainage or conservation easement of land on both sides of existing watercourses, to a distance to be determined by the council. 
4.  Low-lying lands along watercourses subject to flooding or overflowing during storm periods, whether or not included in areas for dedication, shall be preserved and retained in their natural state as drainage ways. Such land or lands subject to periodic flooding shall not be computed in determining the area requirement of any lot. 
(Code 1996, § 127.18) 
Sec. 44-292. - Water facilities. 
    Water facilities shall be provided as follows: 
(1)  General requirements. The following general requirements shall apply to the provision of water facilities: 
a.  Where a public water main is accessible the subdivider shall install adequate water facilities, including fire hydrants, subject to city specifications. All water mains shall be at least eight inches in diameter. 
b.  Water main extensions shall be approved by the city. 
c.  To facilitate the above, the location of all fire hydrants will be determined by the city. Hydrants, hydrant fees, and hydrant valves to be furnished by the city and installed by the subdivider. 
(2)  Individual wells and central water systems. The following requirements shall apply to the provision of individual wells and central water systems. 
a.  In the discretion of the council, if a public water system is not available, individual wells may be used or a central water system provided in such a manner that an adequate supply of potable water will be available to every lot in the subdivision. Water samples shall be submitted to the appropriate county or state agency for testing, and individual wells and central water systems shall be approved by the appropriate county or state health authorities. Orders of approval shall be submitted to the council. 
b.  If the council requires that a connection to a public water main be eventually provided as a condition to approval of an individual well or central water system, the applicant shall make arrangements for future water service at the time the plat receives final approval. Performance or cash bonds may be required to ensure compliance. 
(3)  Fire hydrants. Fire hydrants shall be required for all subdivisions except those coming under subsection (2) of this section. Fire hydrants shall be located at every street intersection and no more than 600 feet apart. 
(Code 1996, § 127.19) 
Sec. 44-293. - Sewerage facilities. 
    Sewerage facilities shall be provided as follows: 
(1)  General requirements. The applicant shall install sanitary sewer facilities in a manner prescribed by the city construction standards and specifications. All plans shall be designed in accordance with the rules, regulations, and standards of the city and the state department of natural resources or state department of health. Plans shall be approved by the above agencies. 
(2)  Construction of sanitary sewerage systems. Sanitary sewerage systems shall be constructed as follows: 
a.  Where a public sanitary sewerage system is reasonably accessible the applicant shall connect with same and provide sewers accessible to each lot in the subdivision. 
b.  Where public sanitary sewerage systems are not reasonably accessible but will become available within a reasonable time, not to exceed 15 years, the applicant may choose one of the following alternatives: 
1.  Install a central sewerage system, operated and maintained by the benefited property owners. Where plans for future public sanitary sewerage systems exist, the applicant shall install the sewer lines, laterals, and mains to be in permanent conformance with such plans and ready for connection to such public sewer mains. 
2.  Individual disposal systems, provided the applicant shall install sanitary sewer lines, laterals, and mains from the street curb to a point in the subdivision boundary where a future connection with the public sewer main shall be made. Sewer lines shall be lain from the house to the street line, and a connection shall be available in the home to connect from the individual disposal system to the sewer system when the public sewers become available. Such sewer systems shall be capped until ready for use and shall conform to all plans for installation of the public sewer system, where such exist, and shall be ready for connection to such public sewer main. 
c.  Where sanitary sewer systems are not reasonably accessible and will not become available for a period in excess of 15 years, the applicant shall install individual disposal systems or central sewerage systems. 
d.  All sanitary sewer mains shall be at least eight inches in diameter. 
(3)  Individual disposal system requirements. If public sewer facilities are not available and individual disposal systems are proposed, minimum lot areas shall conform to the requirements of applicable zoning regulations and these regulations. Percolation tests and test holes shall be made as directed by the city and the results submitted to the local board of health. 
(4)  Water supply interconnections. There shall be no physical connection between a public or private potable water supply system and a sewer which will permit the passage of any sewage or polluted water into the potable supply. Sewers shall be kept removed from water supply wells or other water supply sources and structures. 
(Code 1996, § 127.20) 
Sec. 44-294. - Location; easements. 
    The following shall apply to the provision of utilities: 
(1)  Location. All utility facilities, including, but not limited to, gas, electric power, telephone, and CATV cables shall be located underground throughout the subdivision. Underground service connections to the street property line of each platted lot shall be installed at the subdivider's expense. The rate for installation charges will be established by the council. 
(2)  Easements. Easements shall be provided as follows: 
a.  Easements shall be provided for utilities and indicated on the plat. Such easements shall be at least 15 feet wide and located in the front of the properties adjacent to street right-of-way. Proper coordination shall be established between the subdivider and the applicable utility company for the establishment of utility easements established in adjoining properties. 
b.  Where topographical or other conditions are such as to make impractical the inclusion of utilities within the front lot lines, perpetual unobstructed easements at least 15 feet in width shall be provided along side lot lines with satisfactory access to the street or rear lot lines. 
(Code 1996, § 127.21) 
Chapter 46 - TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 46-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Business district means the territory contiguous to and including the following designated streets: 
(1)  Second Street from Superior Street to Broadway Street; 
(2)  Des Moines Street from Bank Street to the Illinois Central Railroad tracks; 
(3)  Willson Avenue from Bank Street to Second Street; 
(4)  Seneca Street from Bank Street to the Chicago and Northwestern Railroad right-of-way; 
(5)  Prospect Street from First Street to the Chicago and Northwestern Railroad right-of-way. 
    Park or parking means the standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, otherwise than temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading merchandise or passengers. 
    Peace officer means every officer authorized to direct or regulate traffic or to make arrests for violations of traffic regulations. 
    Residence district means the territory contiguous to and including a highway not comprising a business, suburban or school district, where 40 percent or more of the frontage on such a highway for a distance of 300 feet or more is occupied by dwellings or by dwellings and buildings in use for business. 
    School district means the territory contiguous to and including a highway for a distance of 200 feet in either direction from a school house. 
    Stand or standing means the halting of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, otherwise than for the purpose of and while actually engaged in receiving or discharging passengers. 
    Stop or stopping: 
(1)  When prohibited, means any halting of a vehicle, even momentarily, whether occupied or not, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a peace officer or traffic control sign or signal. 
(2)  When required, means the complete cessation of movement. 
    Suburban district means all other parts of the city not included in the business, school or residence districts. 
    Traffic control device means all signs, signals, markings, and devices not inconsistent with this chapter, lawfully placed or erected for the purpose of regulating, warning, or guiding traffic. 
    Vehicle means every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a public highway, street, or alley. 
(Code 1996, § 60.02) 
State Law reference- Similar definitions, Code of Iowa § 321.1. 
Sec. 46-2. - Adoption of state statutes by reference. 
    Any person who willfully fails or refuses to comply with any lawful order of a peace officer or direction of a fire department officer during a fire, or who fails to abide by the applicable provisions of the following state statutes relating to motor vehicles and the statutory law of the road is in violation of this section. The following statutory sections are adopted as though fully set forth in this section: 
Statute Section Code of Iowa 
Section Registration, certificate of title, etc. Proof of security against liability; driving without liability coverage 321.20B Registration card carried and exhibited; exception 321.32 Display of plates 321.37 Plates; method of attaching; imitations prohibited 321.38 Special antitheft law Injuring or tampering with vehicle 321.78 Eluding or attempting to elude pursuing law enforcement vehicle 321.79 Limitation on liability; penalty for abandonment 321.91 Offenses againt registration laws, suspension or revocation of registration Operation without registration 321.98 Fraudulent use of registration 321.99 Drivers' licenses Operators licensed; operation of commercial motor vehicles 321.174 Operation of motor vehicle with license expired 321.174A Instruction permits, commercial learner's permits, and chauffeur's instruction permits 321.180 Graduated driver's licenses for persons aged 14 through 17 321.180B Restrictions on licenses; penalty 321.193 Special minors' licenses 321.194 Licenses and nonoperator's identification cards Unlawful use of license or nonoperator's identification card; penalty 321.216 Use of driver's license or nonoperator's identification card by underage person to obtain alcohol 321.216B Use of driver's license or nonoperator's identification card by underage person to obtain tobacco, tobacco products, alternative nicotine products, vapor products, or cigarettes 321.216C Permitting unauthorized minor to drive 321.219 Permitting unauthorized person to drive 321.220 Employing unlicensed chauffeur 321.221 Renting motor vehicle to another 321.222 Driver's license inspection for motor vehicle rental 321.223 Record kept 321.224 Obedience to and effect of traffic laws Speed detection jamming devices; penalty 321.232 Road workers exempted 321.233 Bicycles, animals or animal-drawn vehicles 321.234 All-terrain vehicles; highway use 321.234A Powers of local authorities Golf cart operation on city streets 321.247 Traffic signs, signals and markings Unauthorized signs, signals, or markings 321.259 Interference with devices, signs, or signals; unlawful possession; traffic signal preemption devices 321.260 Accidents Leaving scene of traffic accident prohibited; vehicle damage only; removal of vehicles 321.262 Information and aid; leaving scene of personal injury accident 321.263 Striking unattended vehicle 321.264 Striking fixtures upon a highway 321.265 Operation of motorcycles and motorized bicycles Operation of motorcycles and motorized bicycles 321.275 Criminal offenses Reckless driving 321.277 Careless driving 321.277A Drag racing prohibited 321.278 Speed restrictions Speed restrictions 321.285 Control of vehicle; reduced speed 321.288 Limitation on bridge or elevated structures 321.295 Driving on right-hand side of roadway; exceptions 321.297 Meeting and turning to right 321.298 Overtaking a vehicle 321.299 Overtaking and passing 321.302 Limitations on overtaking on the left 321.303 Prohibited passing 321.304 One-way roadways and rotary traffic islands 321.305 Roadways laned for traffic 321.306 Following too closely 321.307 Motor trucks and towed vehicles; distance requirements 321.308 Towing; convoys 321.309 Towing four-wheeled trailers 321.310 Turning and starting and signals Turning on curve or crest of grade 321.312 Starting parked vehicle 321.313 When signal required 321.314 Signal continuous 321.315 Stopping 321.316 Signals by hand and arm or signal device 321.317 Right-of-way Entering intersections from different highways 321.319 Left turns; yielding 321.320 Entering through highways 321.321 Vehicles entering stop or yield intersection 321.322 Moving vehicle backward on highway 321.323 Approaching certain stationary vehicles 321.323A Cooperation on approach of emergency vehicles 321.324 Funeral processions 321.324A Pedestrians' rights and duties Yielding to pedestrians in crosswalk 321.327 Duty of driver; pedestrians crossing or working on highways 321.329 Use of crosswalks 321.330 White canes restricted to blind persons 321.332 Duty of drivers 321.333 Driving through safety zone 321.340 Special stops required Obedience to signal indicating approach of railroad train or railroad track equipment 321.341 Stop at certain railroad crossings; posting warning 321.342 Certain vehicles must stop 321.343 Employer violations; penalty 321.343A Heavy equipment at crossing 321.344 Immediate safety threat; penalty 321.344B Stopping, standing and parking Stopping before crossing sidewalk 321.353 Stopping on a traveled way 321.354 Disabled vehicle 321.355 Officers authorized to remove 321.356 Removal from bridge 321.357 Stopping, standing or parking 321.358 Moving other vehicle 321.359 Miscellaneous rules Unattended motor vehicle 321.362 Obstruction to driver's view 321.363 Preventing contamination of food by hazardous material 321.364 Coasting prohibited 321.365 Acts prohibited on fully controlled-access facilities 321.366 Following fire apparatus 321.367 Crossing fire hose 321.368 Putting debris on highway 321.369 Removing injurious material 321.370 Clearing up wrecks 321.371 School buses Discharging pupils; stopping requirements; penalties 321.372 Safety standards Movement of unsafe or improperly equipped vehicles 321.381 Operation of low-speed vehicles 321.381A Upgrade pulls; minimum speed 321.382 Exceptions; low vehicles identified 321.383 Lighting equipment When lighted lamps required 321.384 Headlamps on motor vehicles 321.385 Citation for unlighted headlamp, rear lamp, or rear registration plate light 321.385A Headlamps on motorcycles and motorized bicycles 321.386 Rear lamps 321.387 Illuminating plates 321.388 Reflector required 321.389 Reflector requirements 321.390 Clearance and identification lights 321.392 Color and mounting 321.393 Lamp or flag on projecting load 321.394 Lamps on parked vehicles 321.395 Lamps on other vehicles and equipment 321.398 Spot lamps 321.402 Auxiliary driving lamps 321.403 Signal lamps and signal devices 321.404 Light-restricting devices prohibited 321.404A Self-illumination 321.405 Back-up lamps 321.408 Mandatory lighting equipment 321.409 Required usage of lighting devices 321.415 Single-beam road-lighting equipment 321.417 Alternate road-lighting equipment 321.418 Number of driving lamps required or permitted 321.419 Number of lamps lighted 321.420 Special restrictions on lamps 321.421 Red light in front; rear lights 321.422 Brakes, hitches and sway control Brake, hitch and control requirements 321.430 Performance ability 321.431 Miscellaneous equipment and driver safety provisions Horns and warning devices 321.432 Sirens, whistles and bells prohibited 321.433 Bicycle sirens or whistles 321.434 Mufflers; prevention of noise 321.436 Mirrors 321.437 Windshields and windows 321.438 Windshield wipers 321.439 Restrictions as to tire equipment 321.440 Metal tires prohibited 321.441 Projections on wheels 321.442 Safety glass 321.444 Safety belts and safety harnesses; use required 321.445 Child restraint devices 321.446 Motor carrier safety rules 321.449 Hazardous materials transportation regulations 321.450 Size, weight and load Width of vehicles 321.454 Projecting loads on passenger vehicles 321.455 Height of vehicles 321.456 Maximum length 321.457 Loading beyond front 321.458 Spilling loads on highways 321.460 Trailers and towed vehicles 321.461 Drawbars and safety chains 321.462 Maximum gross weight; exceptions; penalties 321.463 Weighing vehicles and removal of excess 321.465 Increased loading capacity; reregistration 321.466 Parking for persons with disabilities Definitions 321L.1 Persons with disabilities parking spaces; location and requirements 321L.5 Person with disabilities parking sign 321L.7  
(Code 1996, § 62.01) 
Secs. 46-3-46-22. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Local traffic control devices, Code of Iowa § 321.255; obedience to official traffic control devices, Code of Iowa § 321.256. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 46-23. - Standards. 
    Traffic control devices shall comply with standards established by The Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices for Streets and Highways. 
(Code 1996, § 61.04) 
Sec. 46-24. - Compliance. 
    No driver of a vehicle shall disobey the instructions of any official traffic control device placed in accordance with the provisions of this article, unless at the time otherwise directed by a peace officer. 
(Code 1996, § 61.05) 
Sec. 46-25. - Installation. 
    The city manager shall cause to be placed and maintained traffic control devices when and as required by this article to make effective its provisions; emergency or temporary traffic control devices for the duration of an emergency or temporary condition as traffic conditions may require to regulate traffic under the traffic code of the city or under state law, or to guide or warn traffic. The city manager shall keep a record of all such traffic control devices. 
(Code 1996, § 61.01) 
Sec. 46-26. - Crosswalks. 
    The city manager is authorized, subject to approval of the council by resolution, to designate and maintain crosswalks by appropriate traffic control devices at intersections where, due to traffic conditions, there is particular danger to pedestrians crossing the street or roadway, and at such other places as traffic conditions require. 
(Code 1996, § 61.02) 
Sec. 46-27. - Traffic lanes. 
    The city manager is authorized to mark lanes for traffic on street pavements at such places as traffic conditions require, consistent with the traffic code of the city. Where such traffic lanes have been marked, it is unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to fail or refuse to keep such vehicle within the boundaries of any such lane except when lawfully passing another vehicle or preparatory to making a lawful turning movement. 
(Code 1996, § 61.03) 
Sec. 46-28. - Drivers to obey official traffic control signals at specific intersections. 
    Every driver shall observe and comply with the directions provided by official traffic control signals at the following intersections: 
(1)  Second Street and Superior Street. 
(2)  Superior Street and Bank Street. 
(3)  Superior Street and Ohio Street. 
(4)  Superior Street and Fairmeadow Drive. 
(Code 1996, § 65.10) 
Sec. 46-29. - One-way traffic streets, alleys and bridges. 
(a)  Streets and alleys. Upon the following streets and alleys, vehicular traffic, other than permitted cross traffic, shall move only in the indicated direction when appropriate signs are in place: 
(1)  Water Street shall be west bound from Des Moines Street to Willson Avenue; 
(2)  Fourth Street shall be west bound from Union Street to River Street; 
(3)  Bank Street shall be west bound from Superior Street to Beach Street; 
(4)  Division Street shall be east bound from Beach Street to Superior Street; 
(5)  First Street shall be west bound from Superior Street to Beach Street; 
(6)  Alley parallel to and immediately south of Second Street shall be west bound from Seneca Street to Des Moines Street; 
(7)  Alley parallel to and immediately north of Second Street shall be east bound from Broadway Street to Seneca Street. 
(b)  Bridges. When signs have been erected giving notice thereof, the following bridges are restricted to one lane traffic: East Ohio Street Bridge. 
(Code 1996, §§ 68.01, 68.02) 
Sec. 46-30. - Possession of traffic control device. 
    It is unlawful for any person to have in that person's possession any official traffic control device except by reason of that person's employment. 
(Code 1996, § 49.12) 
Secs. 46-31-46-48. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - STOP OR YIELD REQUIRED[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Stop or yield at highways, Code of Iowa § 321.345; special stops, Code of Iowa §§ 321.347-321.349. 

Sec. 46-49. - Stopping or yielding at through streets. 
    Every driver of a vehicle shall stop, unless a yield is permitted by this division, before entering an intersection with the following designated through streets: 
(1)  Bank Street from Superior Street to Bell Avenue. 
(2)  Bank Street from Superior Street to West Avenue, except the intersection at Broadway Street, Des Moines Street and Beach Street. 
(3)  Beach Street from Second Street to south city limit. 
(4)  Bell Avenue from Buxton Drive to High Street. 
(5)  Broadway Street from Second Street to Ohio Street. 
(6)  Buxton Drive from Bell Avenue to east city limit. 
(7)  Des Moines Street from Bank Street to Ohio Street. 
(8)  Des Moines Street from north city limit to Bank Street. 
(9)  Des Moines Street from Ohio Street to Fairmeadow Drive. 
(10)  Division Street from Beach Street to Superior Street, except the intersection at Broadway Street and Des Moines Street. 
(11)  Dubuque Street from Superior Street to Bell Avenue. 
(12)  First Street from Superior Street to Beach Street, except the intersection at Des Moines Street and Broadway Street. 
(13)  High Street from Bell Avenue to Second Street. 
(14)  James Street from the Union Pacific Railroad tracks to Overpass Drive. 
(15)  Ohio Street from Des Moines Street to Beach Street. 
(16)  Ohio Street from Superior Street to Des Moines Street. 
(17)  Second Street from west city limit to east city limit. 
(18)  Stockdale Street from Prospect Street to the Union Pacific Railroad tracks. 
(19)  Superior Street from Second Street to south city limit. 
(20)  Walnut Street from Beach Street to Broadway Street. 
(21)  Walnut Street from Broadway Street to Des Moines Street. 
(22)  Walnut Street from Willson Avenue to Superior Street. 
(23)  Willson Avenue from Bank Street to Ohio Street. 
(24)  White Fox Road from Second Street to north city limit. 
(Code 1996, § 65.01) 
Sec. 46-50. - Stop requirement at certain streets. 
    Every driver of a vehicle shall stop in accordance with the following: 
(1)  Aldrich Drive. Vehicles traveling south on Aldrich Drive between Highway 20 and Closz Drive shall stop at Closz Drive. 
(2)  Bank Street. Vehicles traveling on Bank Street shall stop at Broadway Street. 
(3)  Beach Street. Vehicles traveling on Beach Street shall stop at Second Street. 
(4)  Collins Street. Vehicles traveling on Collins Street shall stop at Lynx Avenue. 
(5)  Commerce Drive. Vehicles traveling east on Commerce Drive shall stop at Millards Lane. 
(6)  Commerce Drive. Vehicles traveling south on Commerce Drive shall stop at Closz Drive. 
(7)  Division Street. Vehicles traveling on Division Street shall stop at Broadway Street. 
(8)  Division Street. Vehicles traveling on Division Street shall stop at Des Moines Street. 
(9)  Division Street. Vehicles traveling west on Division Street shall stop at West Avenue. 
(10)  First Street. Vehicles traveling west on First Street shall stop at West Street. 
(11)  First Street. Vehicles traveling on First Street shall stop at Broadway Street. 
(12)  First Street. Vehicles traveling on First Street shall stop at Des Moines Street. 
(13)  Grand Street. Vehicles traveling on Grand Street shall stop at Lynx Avenue. 
(14)  Grove Street. Vehicles traveling on Grove Street shall stop at Boone Street. 
(15)  Lisa Drive. Vehicles traveling on Lisa Drive shall stop at South Street. 
(16)  Locust Street. Vehicles traveling on Locust Street shall stop at Lynx Avenue. 
(17)  Mary Lane. Vehicles traveling east on Mary Lane shall stop at Sunset Drive. 
(18)  Marvel Street. Vehicles traveling east on Marvel Street shall stop at Second Street. 
(19)  Second Street. Vehicles traveling east on Second Street shall stop at Overpass Drive. 
(20)  Seneca Street. Vehicles traveling on Seneca Street shall stop at Elm Street. 
(21)  Seneca Street. Vehicles traveling on Seneca Street shall stop at Third Street. 
(22)  Stockdale Street. Vehicles traveling east on Stockdale Street shall stop at Prospect Street. 
(23)  Third Street. Vehicles traveling on Third Street shall stop at Grove Street. 
(24)  Third Street. Vehicles traveling on Third Street shall stop at Superior Street. 
(25)  Third Street. Vehicles traveling west on Third Street shall stop at Des Moines Street. 
(26)  Third Street. Vehicles traveling east on Third Street shall stop at Broadway Street. 
(27)  Water Street. Vehicles traveling east on Water Street shall stop at Prospect Street. 
(28)  Fair Avenue. Vehicles traveling on Fair Avenue shall stop at First Street. 
(29)  Fair Avenue. Vehicles traveling on Fair Avenue shall stop at Division Street. 
(30)  Elm Street. Vehicles traveling on Elm Street shall stop at Lynx Avenue. 
(31)  Fairmeadow Drive. Vehicles traveling west on Fairmeadow Drive shall stop at Hospital Drive. 
(32)  Fairmeadow Drive. Vehicles traveling on Fairmeadow Drive shall stop at Beach Street. 
(Code 1996, § 65.02) 
Sec. 46-51. - Four-way stop intersections. 
    Every driver of a vehicle shall stop before entering the following designated four-way stop intersections: 
(1)  Des Moines Street at Ohio Street. 
(2)  Elm Street at Prospect Street. 
(3)  Second Street at Seneca Street. 
(4)  Second Street at Willson Avenue. 
(5)  Second Street at Des Moines Street. 
(6)  Second Street at Prospect Street. 
(7)  Willow Street at Oak Avenue. 
(8)  Des Moines Street at Elm Street. 
(9)  Fair Meadow Drive at Rodlyn Road. 
(10)  Fair Meadow Drive at Kamen Drive 
(Code 1996, § 65.03) 
Sec. 46-52. - Three-way stop intersections. 
    Every driver of a vehicle shall stop before entering the following designated three-way stop intersections: 
Des Moines Street and Bank Street. Vehicles approaching the intersection of Des Moines Street and Bank Street from the east, north and south shall stop before entering such intersection. 
(Code 1996, § 65.04) 
Sec. 46-53. - School stops. 
    At the following school crossing zones, every driver of a vehicle approaching the zone shall bring the vehicle to a full stop at a point ten feet from the approach side of the crosswalk marked by an authorized school stop sign and thereafter proceed in a careful and prudent manner until the vehicle shall have passed through such school crossing zone: 
(1)  Bank Street at Prospect Street. 
(2)  Des Moines Street at Elm Street. 
(3)  Des Moines Street at Middle Street. 
(4)  Walnut Street at a point 250 feet west of Funk Street. 
(Code 1996, § 65.06) 
Secs. 46-54-46-79. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SPEED RESTRICTIONS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Speed restrictions, Code of Iowa § 321.285; local authorities may alter speed limits, Code of Iowa § 321.293. 

Sec. 46-80. - Maximum and minimum speed generally. 
(a)  Every driver of a motor vehicle on a street shall drive the same at a careful and prudent speed not greater than or less than is reasonable and proper, having due regard to the traffic, surface and width of the street and of any other conditions then existing, and no person shall drive a vehicle on any street at a speed greater than will permit the driver to bring it to a stop within the ensured clear distance ahead, such driver having the right to assume, however, that all persons using the street will observe the law. 
(b)  No person shall drive a motor vehicle at such a slow speed as to impede or block the normal and reasonable movement of traffic, except when reduced speed is necessary for safe operation, or in compliance with law. 
(Code 1996, §§ 63.01, 63.06) 
State Law reference- Similar provision, Code of Iowa § 321.285. 
Sec. 46-81. - Speed limit in specific districts and public areas. 
(a)  Business districts. A speed in excess of 20 miles per hour in the business district, unless specifically designated otherwise in this article, is unlawful. 
(b)  Residence or school district. A speed in excess of 25 miles per hour in any school or residence district, unless specifically designated otherwise in this article, is unlawful. 
(c)  Suburban district. A speed in excess of 45 miles per hour in any suburban district, unless specifically designated otherwise in this article, is unlawful. 
(d)  Parks, cemeteries, public alleys and parking lots. A speed in excess of 15 miles per hour in any public park, public alley, cemetery or parking lot, unless specifically designated otherwise in this article, is unlawful. 
(Code 1996, § 63.02, 63.03, 63.04, 63.05) 
State Law reference- Similar provision, Code of Iowa § 321.285. 
Sec. 46-82. - Exception for emergency vehicles. 
    The speed limitations set forth in this article do not apply to authorized emergency vehicles when responding to emergency calls and the drivers thereof sound an audible signal by bell, siren or whistle. This provision does not relieve such driver from the duty to drive with due regard for the safety of others. 
(Code 1996, § 63.07) 
State Law reference- Similar provision, Code of Iowa § 321.231. 
Sec. 46-83. - Authority of city to alter speed limits. 
    In accordance with requirements of the state department of transportation, or whenever the council shall determine upon the basis of an engineering and traffic investigation that any speed limit herein set forth is greater or less than is reasonable or safe under the conditions found to exist at any intersection or other place or upon any part of the city street system, the council shall determine and adopt by ordinance such higher or lower speed limit as it deems reasonable and safe at such location. 
(Code 1996, § 63.08) 
State Law reference- Similar provision, Code of Iowa § 321.290. 
Secs. 46-84-46-109. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - SPECIAL SPEED ZONES 

Sec. 46-110. - Special 25 mph speed zones. 
    A speed in excess of 25 miles per hour is unlawful on any of the following designated streets or parts thereof. 
(1)  Beach Street from Second Street to Wall Street. 
(2)  Des Moines Street from Ohio Street to Lewis Drive. 
(3)  Des Moines Street from Second Street to Odell Street. 
(4)  Ohio Street from Beach Street to Superior Street. 
(5)  White Fox Road from Second Street to the Canadian National Railroad crossing. 
(Code 1996, § 63.09) 
Sec. 46-111. - Special 30 mph speed zones. 
    A speed in excess of 30 miles per hour is unlawful on any of the following designated streets or parts thereof: 
(1)  Des Moines Street from Odell Street to Hillcrest Drive. 
(2)  Kendall Young Road from Maple Street to the east city limit. 
(3)  Maple Street from a point 300 feet north of Cherry Street to Kendall Young Road. 
(4)  Second Street from Prospect Street to Fair Street. 
(5)  Second Street from River Street to a point 350 feet east of High Street. 
(6)  Superior Street from Second Street to a point 300 feet south of Elm Street. 
(7)  Third Street from Superior Street to Des Moines Street. 
(8)  Second Street from West Avenue to the Canadian National Railroad crossing. 
(Code 1996, § 63.10) 
Sec. 46-112. - Special 35 mph speed zones. 
    A speed in excess of 35 miles per hour is unlawful on any of the following designated streets or parts thereof: 
(1)  Beach Street from Wall Street to a point 2,130 feet south of Wall Street. 
(2)  Buxton Drive from Hamilton Road to the east city limit. 
(3)  Closz Drive from Aldrich Drive to Millards Lane. 
(4)  Des Moines Street from Hillcrest Drive to Oak Park Drive. 
(5)  Millards Lane from Closz Drive to south intersection with Highway 17. 
(6)  Overpass Drive from Fair Avenue to James Street. 
(7)  Superior Street from the U.S. Highway 20 and Iowa Highway 17 interchange north ramp terminal to a point 300 feet south of Elm Street. 
(8)  White Fox Road from the Canadian National Railroad crossing to the north corporate limit. 
(9)  Beach Street from a point 2,130 feet south of Wall Street north to Wall Street. 
(10)  Second Street from a point 350 feet east of High Street to Harris Drive. 
(Code 1996, § 63.11) 
Sec. 46-113. - Special 45 mph speed zones. 
    A speed in excess of 45 miles per hour is unlawful on any of the following designated streets or parts thereof: 
(1)  James Street from Overpass Drive to the west corporate limit. 
(2)  Second Street from High Street to Harris Drive. 
(3)  Beach Street from a point 3,400 feet south of Wall Street north to a point 2,130 feet south of Wall Street. 
(4)  Second Street from Harris Drive to Clark Mollenhoff Drive. 
(Code 1996, § 63.13) 
Secs. 46-114-46-139. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - DRIVING AND VEHICLE RESTRICTIONS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 46-140. - Duty of driver to exercise care on designated play streets. 
    The council shall have authority to declare any street or part thereof a play street and cause to be placed appropriate signs or devices in the roadway indicating and helping to protect the same. Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating any street or part thereof as a play street, no person shall drive a vehicle upon any such street or portion thereof except drivers of vehicles having business or whose residences are within such closed area, and then any the driver shall exercise the greatest care in driving upon any such street or portion thereof. 
(Code 1996, § 62.02) 
Sec. 46-141. - Use of horns and warning devices restricted in quiet zones. 
    Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating a quiet zone, no person operating a motor vehicle within any such zone shall sound the horn or other warning device of such vehicle except in an emergency. 
(Code 1996, § 62.05) 
Sec. 46-142. - Vehicles on sidewalks. 
    The driver of a vehicle shall not drive upon or within any sidewalk area except at a driveway. For purposes of snow removal or debris removal only, all-terrain vehicles, as defined in the Code of Iowa § 321.1, and lawn-type tractors are exempt from this prohibition: 
(Code 1996, § 62.03) 
Sec. 46-143. - Clinging to vehicle. 
    No person shall drive a motor vehicle on the streets of the city unless all passengers of the vehicle are inside the vehicle in the place intended for their accommodation. No person shall ride on the running board of a motor vehicle or in any other place not customarily used for carrying passengers. No person riding upon any bicycle, coaster, roller skates, sled or toy vehicle shall attach the same or himself to any vehicle upon a roadway. 
(Code 1996, § 62.04) 
Sec. 46-144. - Obstructing view at intersections. 
    It is unlawful to allow any tree, hedge, billboard or other object to obstruct the view of an intersection by preventing persons from having a clear view of traffic approaching the intersection from cross streets. Any such obstruction shall be deemed a nuisance and in addition to the standard penalty may be abated in the manner provided by article IV of chapter 32. 
(Code 1996, § 62.10) 
Sec. 46-145. - Excessive acceleration. 
    It is unlawful for any person in the operation of a motor vehicle, including motorcycles, to so accelerate such vehicle as to cause audible noise by the friction of the tires on the pavement or to cause the tires of the vehicle to leave skid marks on the pavement, or to cause the wheel of a motorcycle to leave the ground more than two inches, except when such acceleration is reasonably necessary to avoid a collision. 
(Code 1996, § 62.11) 
Sec. 46-146. - U-turns. 
    It is unlawful for a driver to make a U-turn except at an intersection, however, U-turns are prohibited within the business district and at intersections where there are automatic traffic signals. 
(Code 1996, § 64.02) 
Sec. 46-147. - Stop when traffic is obstructed. 
    Notwithstanding any traffic control signal indication to proceed, no driver shall enter an intersection or a marked crosswalk unless there is sufficient space on the other side of the intersection or crosswalk to accommodate the vehicle. 
(Code 1996, § 65.08) 
Sec. 46-148. - Funeral or other processions. 
    The following regulations shall apply to funeral or other processions within the city: 
(1)  Identified. A funeral or other procession composed of vehicles shall be identified as such by the display upon the outside of each vehicle of a pennant or other identifying insignia or by such other method as may be determined and designated by the police chief. 
(2)  Manner of driving. Each driver in a funeral or other procession shall drive as near to the right hand of the roadway as practical and shall follow the vehicle ahead as closely as is practical and safe. 
(3)  Interrupting procession. No driver of any vehicle shall drive between the vehicles comprising a funeral or other authorized procession while they are in motion and when such vehicles are conspicuously designated as required in this article. This provision shall not apply at intersections where traffic is controlled by traffic control signals or peace officers. 
(Code 1996, § 62.07) 
State Law reference- Funeral processions, Code of Iowa § 321.324A. 
Sec. 46-149. - Parades. 
(a)  Defined. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Parade means any march or procession of persons or vehicles organized for marching or moving on the streets in an organized fashion or manner or any march or procession of persons or vehicles represented or advertised to the public as a parade. 
(a)  Permit required. No parade shall be conducted without first obtaining a written permit from the mayor or police chief. Such permit shall state the time and date for the parade to be held and the streets or general route therefor. Such written permit granted to the person organizing or sponsoring the parade shall be permission for all participants therein to parade when such participants have been invited by the permittee to participate therein. No fee shall be required for such permit. 
(b)  Parade not a street obstruction. Any parade for which a permit has been issued as herein required, and the persons lawfully participating therein, shall not be deemed an obstruction of the streets notwithstanding the provisions of any other ordinance to the contrary. 
(c)  Control by police and firefighters. Persons participating in any parade shall at all times be subject to the lawful orders and directions in the performance of their duties of law enforcement personnel and members of the fire department. 
(Code 1996, § 60.13) 
Secs. 46-150-46-166. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LOADS, VEHICLE WEIGHT, AND TRUCK ROUTES[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- Authority of local authorities to restrict vehicles size, weight and load, Code of Iowa § 321.472; limitations on trucks by local authorities, Code of Iowa § 321.473. 

Sec. 46-167. - Temporary embargo. 
    If the council declares an embargo when it appears by reason of deterioration, rain, snow or other climatic conditions that certain streets will be seriously damaged or destroyed by vehicles weighing in excess of an amount specified by the signs, no such vehicles shall be operated on streets so designated by such signs. 
(Code 1996, § 66.01) 
Sec. 46-168. - Permits for excess size and weight. 
    The police chief may, upon application in writing and good cause being shown therefor, issue a special permit in writing authorizing the applicant to operate or move a vehicle or combination of vehicles of a size or weight or load exceeding the maximum specified by state law or city ordinance over those streets named in the permit which are under the jurisdiction of the city and for which the city is responsible for maintenance. 
(Code 1996, § 66.02) 
Sec. 46-169. - Load limits upon certain streets. 
    When signs are erected giving notice thereof, no person shall operate any vehicle with a gross weight in excess of the amounts specified on such signs at any time. 
(Code 1996, § 66.03) 
Sec. 46-170. - Load limits on bridges. 
    Where it has been determined that any city bridge has a capacity less than the maximum permitted on the streets of the city, or on the street serving the bridge, the police chief may cause to be posted and maintained signs on the bridge and at suitable distances ahead of the entrances thereof to warn drivers of such maximum load limits, and no person shall drive a vehicle weighing, loaded or unloaded, upon the bridge in excess of such posted limit. 
(Code 1996, § 66.04) 
Sec. 46-171. - Truck route. 
    Truck route regulations are established as follows: 
(1)  Truck routes designated. Every motor vehicle weighing five tons or more, when loaded or empty, having no fixed terminal within the city or making no scheduled or definite stops within the city for the purpose of loading or unloading shall travel over or upon the following streets within the city and none other: 
a.  The 700 block north alley parking lot. 
b.  Beach Street from Second Street to the south city limit. 
c.  Des Moines Street from Second Street to Odell Street. 
d.  James Street from Overpass Drive to the west city limit. 
e.  MacKinlay Kantor Drive (County Road R-27) from James Street to the north city limit. 
f.  Overpass Drive from Second Street to James Street. 
g.  Prospect Street from Second Street to Stockdale Street. 
h.  Second Street from the east city limit to James Street, except the area on Second Street between Superior Street and Prospect Street, known as the 400-700 blocks. 
i.  Superior Street from Third Street to the U.S. 20-Iowa 17 interchange. 
j.  Third Street from Superior Street to Des Moines Street. 
k.  White Fox Road (County Road R-33) from Second Street to the north city limit. 
(2)  Routes for scheduled stops. Any motor vehicle weighing five tons or more, when loaded or empty, having a fixed terminal, making a scheduled or definite stop within the city for the purpose of loading or unloading shall proceed over or upon the designated routes set out in this section to the nearest point of its scheduled or definite stop and shall proceed thereto, load or unload and return, by the most direct route to its point of departure from the designated route. 
(3)  Owner's responsibility. The owner, or any other person, employing or otherwise directing the driver of any vehicle shall not require or knowingly permit the operation of such vehicle upon a street in any manner contrary to this section. 
(Code 1996, § 66.05) 
Secs. 46-172-46-195. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - PARKING 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 46-196. - Parking signs required. 
    Whenever by this article or any other section of this Code any parking time limit is imposed or parking is prohibited on designated streets or portions of streets it shall be the duty of the city manager to erect or cause to be erected appropriate signs giving notice thereof and no such regulations shall be effective unless signs are erected and in place at the time of any alleged offense. When the signs are so erected giving notice thereof, no person shall disobey the restrictions stated on such signs. 
(Code 1996, § 69.23) 
Sec. 46-197. - Parking adjacent to curb. 
(a)  No person shall stand or park a vehicle in a roadway other than parallel with the edge of the roadway headed in the direction of lawful traffic movement and with the right-hand wheels of the vehicle within 18 inches of the curb or edge of the roadway except as hereinafter provided in the case of angle parking and vehicles parked on the left-hand side of one-way streets. 
(b)  No person shall stand or park a vehicle on the left-hand side of a one-way street other than parallel with the edge of the roadway headed in the direction of lawful traffic movement and with the left-hand wheels of the vehicle within 18 inches of the curb or edge of the roadway except as hereinafter provided in the case of angle parking. 
(Code 1996, §§ 69.01, 69.02) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions and local authority for additional regulations, Code of Iowa § 321.361. 
Sec. 46-198. - Parking in fire lanes. 
    No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle in a fire lane as provided herein. 
(1)  Fire lanes established. The fire chief may designate fire lanes on any private road or driveway where deemed necessary to ensure access to property or premises by authorized emergency vehicles. 
(2)  Signs and markings. Wherever a fire lane has been designated, the city manager shall cause appropriate signs and markings to be placed identifying such fire lanes and the parking prohibition established by this section. 
(3)  Exception. The provisions of this section shall not apply to authorized emergency vehicles. 
(Code 1996, § 69.18) 
Sec. 46-199. - Parking for certain purposes illegal. 
    No person shall park a vehicle upon public property for any of the following principal purposes: 
(1)  Sale. Displaying such vehicle for sale; 
(2)  Repairing. For lubricating, repairing or for commercial washing of such vehicle except such repairs as are necessitated by an emergency; 
(3)  Advertising. Displaying advertising; 
(4)  Merchandise sales. Selling merchandise from such vehicle except in a duly established market place or when so authorized or licensed under this Code; 
(5)  Storage. Storage for more than 72 hours; 
(6)  Conversation. Upon the traveled portion of the highway for visiting or conversing with the occupant of another vehicle. 
(Code 1996, § 69.05) 
Sec. 46-200. - Parking during snow removal. 
    No person shall park, abandon or leave unattended any vehicle on any public street, alley, or city-owned off-street parking area except in accordance with this section. During snow removal operations in the business district, no vehicles shall be parked on the public streets or public parking lots in the vicinity of such operations, as the same may be posted with emergency "no parking" signs by order of the city manager. 
(Code 1996, § 69.17) 
Sec. 46-201. - Parking in certain restricted areas. 
    No one shall stop, stand or park a vehicle except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a peace officer or traffic control device, in any of the following places: 
(1)  Crosswalk. On a crosswalk at an intersection. 
(2)  Center parkway. On the center parkway or dividing area of any divided street. 
(3)  Mailboxes. Within 20 feet on either side of a mailbox which is so placed and so equipped as to permit the depositing of mail from vehicles on the roadway. 
(4)  Sidewalks. On or across a sidewalk. 
(5)  Driveway. In front of a public or private driveway. 
(6)  Intersection. Within an intersection of any street or alley or within 30 feet of any intersection except for the following: 
a.  Intersections in the C-2 area; 
b.  Northeast and southeast corners of one-way streets going east; 
c.  Northwest and southwest corners of one-way streets going west. 
(7)  Fire hydrant. Within five feet of a fire hydrant. 
(8)  Stop sign or signal. Within ten feet upon the approach to any flashing beacon, stop or yield sign, or traffic control signal located at the side of a roadway. 
(9)  Railroad crossing. Within 50 feet of the nearest rail of a railroad crossing, except when parked parallel with such rail and not exhibiting a red light. 
(10)  Fire station. Within 20 feet of the driveway entrance to any fire station and on the side of a street opposite the entrance to any fire station within 75 feet of the entrance when properly sign posted. 
(11)  Excavations. Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when such stopping, standing or parking would obstruct traffic. 
(12)  Double parking. On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge or curb of a street. 
(13)  Hazardous locations. When, because of restricted visibility or when standing or parked vehicles would constitute a hazard to moving traffic, or when other traffic conditions require, the city manager may cause curbs to be painted with a yellow color and erect no parking or standing signs. 
(14)  Theatres, hotels and auditoriums. A space of 50 feet is reserved at the side of the street in front of any theatre, auditorium, hotel having more than 25 sleeping rooms, hospital, nursing home, taxicab stand, bus depot, church, or other building where large assemblages of people are being held, within which space, when clearly marked as such, no motor vehicle shall be left standing, parked or stopped except in taking on or discharging passengers or freight, and then only for such length of time as is necessary for such purpose. 
(15)  Alleys. No person shall park a vehicle within an alley except for such time as is reasonably necessary to load or unload freight or cargo, and in any event no such vehicle shall be parked for such purpose more than ten minutes unless a permit therefor is first obtained from the police chief. 
(16)  Adjacent to schools. When official signs are erected indicating no parking upon that side of a street adjacent to any school property as authorized by resolution of the council, no person shall park a vehicle in any such designated place. 
(17)  Ramps. In front of a curb cut or ramp which is located on public or private property in a manner which blocks access to the curb cut or ramp. 
(Code 1996, § 69.06) 
Sec. 46-202. - Parking on the parking. 
    No person shall stand or park a vehicle upon the parking or terrace, designated as that area between the curb line and the sidewalk line, unless such person has a special permit authorizing such parking. Application for a special parking permit shall be made to the police chief, who shall issue the permit if, in the chief's opinion, such parking will not endanger or hinder traffic or seriously affect the condition of the parking. The police chief may at any time revoke such permit by notice thereof by certified mail to the permit holder and such revocation shall be final. 
(Code 1996, § 69.19) 
Sec. 46-203. - Emergency parking. 
    At the discretion of the police chief, special emergency parking permits may be issued for periods of time not to exceed 24 hours. Such permits shall be renewable so long as the emergency continues upon daily application to the police chief. 
(Code 1996, § 69.20) 
Sec. 46-204. - Angle parking procedure. 
    Upon those streets or portions of streets which have been signed or marked for angle parking, no person shall park or stand a vehicle other than at an angle to the curb or edge of the roadway or in the center of the roadway as indicated by such signs and markings. No part of any vehicle, or the load thereon, when parked within a diagonal parking district, shall extend into the roadway more than a distance of 16 feet when measured at right angles to the adjacent curb or edge of roadway. 
(Code 1996, § 69.04) 
Sec. 46-205. - Diagonal parking on certain streets. 
    Angle or diagonal parking is permitted only in the following locations: 
(1)  Bank Street, on the north side of the 500 block, from Seneca Street west 94 feet. 
(2)  Bank Street on the north side of the 400 block. 
(3)  Boone Street, on the north side, from a point 40 feet west of the west line of Superior Street to a point 128 feet west of the west line of Superior Street. 
(4)  Cedar Street, on the north side from 30 feet west of the west line of Superior Street to 105 feet west of the west line of Superior Street. 
(5)  Des Moines Street, on the west side, from Bank Street to 220.3 feet south of Bank Street. 
(6)  Division Street, on the north side, from Des Moines Street west 75 feet. 
(7)  First Street, on the south side, from 264 feet west of Willson Avenue to Prospect Street. 
(8)  Second Street, on the north and south sides, between Seneca Street and Prospect Street, known as the 500 through 700 blocks. 
(9)  Seneca Street, on the east side of the 900 block, from Bank Street to the alley north. 
(10)  Water Street, on the north side, from a point 135 feet east of Des Moines Street to a point 240 feet east of Des Moines Street. 
(11)  West Avenue on the east side of the 700 block. 
(12)  High Street, on the east side, from a point 36 feet south of the south right-of-way line of Second Street to a point 81 feet south of the south right-of-way line of Second Street. 
(13)  Willson Avenue, on the west side from the south right-of-way line of Pleasant Street to a point 159 feet south of the south right-of-way line of Pleasant Street. 
(Code 1996, § 69.03) 
Sec. 46-206. - No parking zones. 
    No one shall stop, stand or park a vehicle in any of the following specifically designated no parking zones except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the direction of a peace officer or traffic control signal: 
(1)  Bank Street on the north side from Beach Street to West Avenue. 
(2)  Bank Street on the north side from 80 feet east of Des Moines Street to 145 feet east of Des Moines Street. 
(3)  Bank Street on the south side from Prospect Street to Beach Street. 
(4)  Bank Street on the south side from Seneca Street east 75 feet. 
(5)  Beach Street on both sides from Second Street to south city limit. 
(6)  Boone Street on the north side from Mary Lane to Broadway Street. 
(7)  Brewer Street on the south side from Des Moines Street to Willson Avenue. 
(8)  Broadway Street on both sides from Second Street to 35 feet south of Second Street. 
(9)  Broadway Street on both sides from Second Street to Third Street. 
(10)  Broadway Street on the west side from Second Street to Ohio Street. 
(11)  Clark Street on the north side from Funk Street to Grove Street. 
(12)  Closz Drive on both sides from Millards Lane to Aldrich Drive. 
(13)  Collins Street on both sides from College Street to Shashi Drive. 
(14)  Des Moines Street on both sides from I.C. Railroad to Hillcrest Drive. 
(15)  Des Moines Street on the east side from Bank Street to 40 feet north of Bank Street. 
(16)  Des Moines Street on the east side from Brewer Street to Brewer Creek Bridge. 
(17)  Des Moines Street on the east side from First Street to 75 feet south of First Street. 
(18)  Des Moines Street on the east side from Ohio Street to 230 feet south of Ohio Street. 
(19)  Des Moines Street on the west side from Elm Street to 50 feet north of Elm Street. 
(20)  Des Moines Street on the west side from Elm Street to Brewer Street. 
(21)  Division Street on the north side from Superior Street to Beach Street. 
(22)  Division Street on the south side from Superior Street to a point 115 feet west. 
(23)  Division Street on the south side from Des Moines Street west 131 feet. 
(24)  Division Street on the south side from Seneca Street west 130 feet. 
(25)  Dubuque Street on the north side from the west line of the 600 block, as vacated, to a point 100 feet east. 
(26)  Dubuque Street on the south side from the west line of the 600 block, as vacated, to Seneca Street. 
(27)  Elm Street on the north side from Lynx Avenue to 30 feet east of Lynx Avenue. 
(28)  Elm Street on the south side from Lynx Avenue to River Street. 
(29)  Fair Avenue on both sides from Division Street to Bank Street. 
(30)  Fairmeadow Drive on the north side from Des Moines Street to North Terrace Drive. 
(31)  First Street on the south side from Prospect Street to West Avenue. 
(32)  First Street on the south side from Seneca Street to Union Street. 
(33)  Funk Street on both sides from Second Street to 35 feet north of Second Street. 
(34)  Funk Street on the east side from James Street to John Street. 
(35)  Funk Street on the west side from Second Street to Clark Street. 
(36)  Grand Street on the north side from Beach Street to 150 feet west of Beach Street. 
(37)  Grove Street on both sides from Second Street to 35 feet south of Second Street. 
(38)  Grove Street on both sides from Second Street north to the alley. 
(39)  Grove Street on the east side from Ohio Street to Second Street. 
(40)  Highland Drive on the west side. 
(41)  Hillcrest Drive on both sides from Des Moines Street to Lincoln Drive. 
(42)  Industrial Park Road on both sides from 120 feet west of Ivan Hargrave Drive east. 
(43)  Ivan Hargrave Drive on both sides from Industrial Park Road to James Street. 
(44)  James Street on both sides from Overpass Drive to west corporate limit. 
(45)  John Street on the north side from Funk Street to Wood Street. 
(46)  Locust Street on the north side from Beach Street to 100 feet west of Beach Street. 
(47)  Maple Avenue on the east side from Willow Street to north end of concrete. 
(48)  Marvel Street on both sides from Second Street west. 
(49)  Mary Lane on the north side from Sunset Drive to Easy Street with an area from Sunset Drive to 270 feet west of Sunset Drive to be designated for school bus parking only. 
(50)  Mary Lane on the south side from Sunset Drive to 265 feet west of Sunset Drive. 
(51)  Oak Avenue on the west side from Willow Street to Second Street. 
(52)  Odell Street on the south side from Prospect Street to Des Moines Street. 
(53)  Ohio Street on the south side from Beach Street to Superior Street. 
(54)  Overpass Drive on both sides from Fair Avenue to James Street. 
(55)  Park Avenue on the east side from Lyons Creek Bridge to Second Street. 
(56)  Prospect Street on both sides from Second Street to 35 feet south of Second Street. 
(57)  Prospect Street on the east side from Ohio Street to Walnut Street. 
(58)  Prospect Street on the east side from the Canadian National Railroad to Odell Street. 
(59)  Prospect Street on the east side of the 700 block from the north line of the alley north twelve feet. 
(60)  Prospect Street on the west side from Second Street north 120 feet and on the east side from Second Street to 35 feet north of Second Street. 
(61)  Second Street on both sides from the west line of Park Avenue to the east corporate limit; from the west line of Union Street to the east line of River Street and on the Boone River Bridge. 
(62)  Second Street on both sides from the west line of Prospect Street to the west corporate limits, except that parking on the south side of Second Street from 300 feet west of Fair Street to West Avenue shall be permitted. 
(63)  Seneca Street on both sides from Union Pacific Railroad to alley north of Union Pacific Railroad. 
(64)  Seneca Street on the east side from Bank Street to 20 feet south of Bank Street. 
(65)  Seneca Street on the east side from Union Pacific Railroad tracks to the Canadian National Railroad tracks. 
(66)  Seneca Street on the west side from Bank Street to Water Street. 
(67)  Shashi Drive from Collins Street south. 
(68)  South Street on the north side from Des Moines Street to North Terrace Drive. 
(69)  Sparboe Court on the west side from Ohio Street to Cedar Street. 
(70)  Sunset Drive on the west side from Ohio Street to Mary Lane. 
(71)  Superior Street on both sides from Third Street to south city limit. 
(72)  Superior Street on the east side from Third Street north to the alley. 
(73)  Tasler Drive on the north side from Clark Mollenhoff east. 
(74)  Third Street on both sides from Superior Street to Des Moines Street. 
(75)  Third Street on the north side from Broadway Street to Fair Avenue. 
(76)  Third Street on the north side from White Fox Road to Superior Street. 
(77)  Wall Street on the north side from Beach Street to west end of concrete. 
(78)  Walnut Street on the north and south sides from Lynx Avenue to 30 feet east of Lynx Avenue. 
(79)  Walnut Street on the south side from Beach Street to Superior Street. 
(80)  Water Street on the north side from Des Moines Street to Superior Street. 
(81)  Water Street on the south side from Prospect Street to Beach Street. 
(82)  Water Street on the south side from Union Street to River Street. 
(83)  Wauneta Court on the west side from Ohio Street to Street. 
(84)  Street on the south side from Superior Street to Seneca Street. 
(85)  West Avenue on both sides from Bank Street to First Street. 
(86)  White Fox Road on both sides from the Canadian National Railroad underpass to the north corporate limit. 
(87)  Willson Avenue on the east side from Elm Street to 25 feet north of Elm Street. 
(88)  Willson Avenue on the east side from Elm Street to 25 feet south of Elm Street. 
(89)  Willson Avenue on the east side from Water Street to Ohio Street. 
(90)  Willson Avenue on the west side from Ohio Street to Brewer Street. 
(91)  Wood Street on both sides from Second Street to 35 feet north of Second Street. 
(92)  Wood Street on both sides from Second Street to 35 feet south of Second Street. 
(93)  Wood Street on the west side from John Street to James Street. 
(94)  Woolsey Avenue on the east side from Second Street to Bank Street. 
(95)  Fairmeadow Drive (east of Superior Street) on both sides from the east end of the concrete paving west 226 feet. 
(96)  Des Moines Street on the west side from Division Street to 50 feet south of Division Street. 
(97)  Des Moines Street on the west side from Division Street to 50 feet north of Division Street. 
(98)  Lynx Avenue on the west side from a point 540 feet south of Bank Street to Collins Street. 
(99)  East side of Lynx Avenue at the Elm Street-Lynx Avenue intersection from the intersection to the first driveway on the north and south. 
(100)  Lewis Drive on the north side from the gutter line of Des Moines Street 123 feet west to the point of beginning and continuing 58 feet; and from the gutter line of Des Moines Street 234 feet west to the point of beginning and continuing 58 feet. 
(Code 1996, § 69.08) 
Sec. 46-207. - All night parking prohibited. 
    No person, except physicians or other persons on emergency calls, shall park a vehicle on any of the following named streets for a period of time longer than 30 minutes between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. of any day: 
(1)  400 Block Bank Street Parking Lot except the west row of the off street diagonal parking. 
(2)  500 Block North Alley Parking Lot except the north row of diagonal parking from Des Moines Street to 300 feet west of Seneca Street. 
(3)  500 Block First Street Parking Lot except along the south single row (south 25 feet) and the area lying southeasterly from the south-east property corner of the lot at 714 Wilson Avenue (65 feet east by 30 feet south). 
(4)  600 Block North Alley parking lot except along the north single row (north 25 feet). 
(5)  600 Block First Street Parking Lot except the west half. 
(6)  700 Block North Alley Parking Lot except the north row of diagonal parking from Prospect Street to 100 feet west of Des Moines Street. 
(7)  700 Block First Street parking lot except along the south and west sides. 
(8)  Bank Street on both sides from Seneca Street to Union Street. 
(9)  Des Moines Street on both sides from Union Pacific Railroad to Division Street. 
(10)  First Street on both sides from Prospect Street to Superior Street. 
(11)  Prospect Street on both sides from First Street to Second Street. 
(12)  Second Street on both sides from Union to Prospect Street. 
(13)  Seneca Street on both sides from Union Pacific Railroad to Bank Street. 
(14)  Willson Avenue on both sides from Union Pacific Railroad to Bank Street. 
(Code 1996, § 69.09) 
Sec. 46-208. - Truck parking limited. 
    No person shall park a motor truck, semi-trailer, or other motor vehicle with trailer attached in violation of the following regulations. The provisions of this section shall not apply to pickup, light delivery or panel delivery trucks. 
(1)  Residential streets. Excepting only when such vehicles are actually engaged in the delivery or receiving of merchandise or cargo, no person shall park or leave unattended such vehicle having a gross weight in excess of five tons, on any of the following designated streets. When actually receiving or delivering merchandise or cargo such vehicle shall be stopped or parked in a manner which will not interfere with other traffic. 
a.  Bank Street, from Beach Street to Seneca Street. 
b.  Division Street, from Beach Street to Seneca Street. 
c.  Elm Street, from Beach Street to Seneca Street. 
d.  First Street, from Beach Street to Seneca Street. 
e.  Ohio Street, from Beach Street to Seneca Street. 
f.  Walnut Street, from Beach Street to Seneca Street. 
(2)  Excess width. When signs are erected in each block giving notice thereof no person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle over seven feet wide within the following districts or upon the following streets: 
a.  All public parking lots except as otherwise posted. 
b.  Division Street, from Seneca Street to Prospect Street. 
c.  First Street, from Seneca Street to Prospect Street. 
d.  Prospect Street, from Division Street to Second Street. 
e.  Second Street, from Union Street to Prospect Street. 
(3)  Over four tons. No person shall park a truck which has a gross weight in excess of four tons on any city street, except for the purpose of making a delivery. 
(Code 1996, § 69.10) 
Sec. 46-209. - Parking limited to five minutes. 
    It is unlawful to park any vehicle for a continuous period of more than five minutes between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on each weekday except holidays upon the following designated streets: 
(1)  Des Moines Street, on the east side, from the alley between First Street and Division Street to 50 feet north of the alley. 
(2)  Second Street, on the south side, from a point 150 feet east of Superior Street to a point 175 feet east of Superior Street. 
(Code 1996, § 69.11) 
Sec. 46-210. - Parking limited to 15 minutes. 
    It is unlawful to park any vehicle for a continuous period of more than 15 minutes between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on each weekday except holidays upon the following designated streets: 
Second Street, on the south side of the 400 Block. 
(Code 1996, § 69.12) 
Sec. 46-211. - Parking limited to two hours. 
    It is unlawful to park any vehicle for a continuous period of more than two hours between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on each week day upon the following designated streets: 
(1)  Des Moines Street, on both sides, from the Union Pacific Railroad to Bank Street. 
(2)  First Street, on both sides, from Seneca Street to Des Moines Street. 
(3)  Second Street, on both sides, from Seneca Street to Prospect Street. 
(4)  Seneca Street, on both sides, from the Union Pacific Railroad to Bank Street. 
(5)  Willson Avenue, on both sides, from the Union Pacific Railroad to Bank Street. 
(Code 1996, § 69.13) 
Sec. 46-212. - Parking limited to four hours. 
    It is unlawful to park any vehicle for a continuous period of more than four hours between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. on each weekday except holidays in the following designated areas: 
(1)  Municipal parking located in the 600 block north parking lot; south two rows, commonly referred to as the center section. 
(2)  Municipal parking located in the 500 block north parking lot; south two rows, commonly referred to as the center section. 
(3)  Municipal parking located in the 700 block north parking lot; south two rows, commonly referred to as the center section. 
(4)  Municipal parking located in the 500 block north parking lot; the east 300 feet of the north row. 
(Code 1996, § 69.14) 
Sec. 46-213. - Parking limited to eight hours. 
    It is unlawful to park any vehicle for a continuous period of more than eight hours between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on each weekday except holidays in the following designated areas: 
(1)  400 Block Bank Street parking lot. 
(2)  500 Block First Street parking lot except along the south single row (south 25 feet). 
(3)  600 Block First Street parking lot except the west half. 
(4)  700 Block First Street parking lot. 
(5)  Bank Street, on the north side, between Superior Street and Seneca Street. 
(6)  First Street from Des Moines Street to Prospect Street. 
(7)  Municipal parking located in the 400 First Street block. 
(Code 1996, § 69.15) 
Sec. 46-214. - Parking limited to 72 hours. 
    It is unlawful for any person or corporation to let stand, remain or park any motor vehicle or any nonmotorized vehicle, including trailers, whether capable of functioning or not, upon the public highways, streets, avenues, alleys, or city-owned parking lot for a continuous period exceeding 72 hours. Vehicles violating this section may be ticketed or towed at the owner's expense. It is the intent and purpose of this section to prevent congestion on the streets of the city due to the parking of vehicles for an unreasonable length of time. Mere transfer of position of the vehicle from one parking space to another in the vicinity shall not circumvent application to this section. 
(Code 1996, § 69.16.) 
Sec. 46-215. - Parking for special purposes in designated areas. 
    Parking for special purposes is provided in designated areas as follows: 
The east 100 feet of the municipal parking lot in the 400 Block First Street parking lot, for city employees only, from 7:30 a.m. to 5:30 p.m. Monday through Friday. 
(Code 1996, § 69.22) 
Sec. 46-216. - Recreational vehicles. 
    It is unlawful to park a camping trailer, boat trailer or utility trailer on any public street, alley or place for a period of time in excess of 24 hours. 
(Code 1996, § 69.21) 
Secs. 46-217-46-240. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PARKING DURING DECLARED EMERGENCIES 

Sec. 46-241. - When applicable. 
    The provision of this division prohibiting the standing or parking of vehicles on designated streets or parts of streets during an emergency shall apply when an emergency declaration has been issued by the mayor, city manager, police chief, street superintendent or designee. 
(Code 1996, § 70.01) 
Sec. 46-242. - Declaration of emergency. 
    Whenever snow, freezing rain, sleet, snowdrifts or other natural phenomena create or are likely to create hazardous road conditions or road conditions impeding or likely to impede the free movement of fire, health, police, emergency or other vehicular traffic vital to the health, safety and welfare of the community, the mayor, city manager, police chief or street superintendent shall have the authority to declare an emergency when needed. In the absence of the mayor, city manager, police chief or street superintendent, designee shall have the authority to declare an emergency. 
(Code 1996, § 70.02) 
Sec. 46-243. - Public notification. 
    The city manager shall request the cooperation of a local radio station to announce the declaration of an emergency. The provisions of this division prohibiting parking on streets except as noted in section 46-244 shall be effective at a specific time to be stated in the announcement not less than two hours after the initial announcement of the emergency by a local radio station, or upon publication of the declaration in a daily newspaper published in the city, or displayed on government access television (known as Cable Channel 12), and such notice shall constitute notice to the general public of the declaration of the emergency. 
(Code 1996, § 70.03) 
Sec. 46-244. - Prohibited parking. 
    After the time specified in the declaration of an emergency, it is unlawful and a violation of this division for any person to park or otherwise leave unattended any vehicle upon any street or portion thereof, except the streets and parking lots located in the central business district described as the area between Prospect Street and Superior Street and between Bank Street and the Chicago and Northwestern Railroad Company tracks. Parking may be allowed on any city street after both sides of the street have been completely plowed or the declared emergency has been removed. 
(Code 1996, § 70.04) 
Sec. 46-245. - Signs to be posted. 
    The provisions of this division shall be in full force and effect throughout the city when signs are posted on primary or secondary roads at or near their points of intersection with the corporate boundaries of the city stating "no on-street parking during declared emergency." 
(Code 1996, § 70.05) 
Sec. 46-246. - Period in effect. 
    The provisions of this division shall be in effect and shall supersede all other parking regulations relating to parking on public streets until emergency declaration is terminated. 
(Code 1996, § 70.06) 
Sec. 46-247. - Removal of parked or unattended vehicles. 
    Any vehicle parked or otherwise left unattended in violation of any of the provisions of this division is declared to be a nuisance per se and will be ticketed and removed by the city by means of towing or otherwise. Any removal and resulting storage of such vehicle shall be at the expense of the owner or operator thereof. 
(Code 1996, § 70.07) 
Sec. 46-248. - Termination of declared emergency. 
    Whenever the mayor, city manager, police chief, street superintendent or designee shall find that the conditions which gave rise to the emergency no longer exist, he is authorized to declare the termination of the emergency, in whole or in part, effective immediately upon announcement. When the emergency is terminated it shall be lawful to park on those streets in accordance with the regular parking regulations of this division. The city manager shall request the cooperation of the local press and radio station to announce the termination of the emergency. 
(Code 1996, § 70.08 
Secs. 46-249-46-274. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLES AND SNOWMOBILES[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference- All-terrain vehicles, Code of Iowa ch. 321I; snowmobiles, Code of Iowa ch. 321G. 

Sec. 46-275. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    All-terrain vehicle or ATV means a motorized flotation-tire vehicle with not less than three low pressure tires, but not more than six low pressure tires, that is limited in engine displacement to less than 1,000 cubic centimeters and in total dry weight to less than 1,200 pounds and that has a seat or saddle designed to be straddled by the operator and handlebars for steering control. 
    Snowmobile means a motorized vehicle weighing less than 1,000 pounds which uses sled-type runners or skis, endless belt-type tread with a width of 48 inches or less, or any combination of runners, skis or tread, and is designed for travel on snow or ice. 
(Code 1996, § 80.02) 
State Law reference- Similar definitions, Code of Iowa §§ 321I.1, 321G.1. 
Sec. 46-276. - Rule compliance required. 
    No person shall operate an ATV or snowmobile within the city in violation of the provisions of the Code of Iowa ch. 321G or rules established by the natural resource commission of the department of natural resources governing their registration, numbering, equipment and manner of operation. 
(Code 1996, § 80.03) 
Sec. 46-277. - Places of operation. 
    The operators of ATVs and snowmobiles shall comply with the following restrictions as to where ATVs and snowmobiles may be operated within the city: 
(1)  Streets. 
a.  ATVs and snowmobiles shall be operated only upon streets which have not been plowed during the snow season and on such other streets as may be designated by resolution of the council. 
b.  Snowmobiles shall be operated only on such streets that provide the most direct access out of the city limits from the operator's place of dwelling. 
c.  No snowmobile or ATV may be operated on streets in the downtown business district as defined in section 46-1. 
(2)  Exceptions. ATVs and snowmobiles may be operated on prohibited streets only under the following circumstances: 
a.  Emergencies. ATVs and snowmobiles may be operated on any street in an emergency during the period of time when and at locations where snow upon the roadway renders travel by conventional motor vehicles impractical. 
b.  Direct crossing. ATVs and snowmobiles may make a direct crossing of a prohibited street, provided: 
1.  The crossing is made at an angle of approximately 90 degrees to the direction of the street and at a place where no obstruction prevents a quick and safe crossing; 
2.  The ATV or snowmobile is brought to a complete stop before crossing the street; 
3.  The driver yields the right-of-way to all on-coming traffic which constitutes an immediate hazard; and 
4.  In crossing a divided street, the crossing is made only at an intersection of such street with another street. 
(3)  Railroad right-of-way. ATVs and snowmobiles shall not be operated on an operating railroad right-of-way. An ATV or snowmobile may be driven directly across a railroad right-of-way only at an established crossing and notwithstanding any other provisions of law may, if necessary, use the improved portion of the established crossing after yielding to all oncoming traffic. 
(4)  Trails. ATVs shall not be operated on snowmobile trails and snowmobiles shall not be operated on all-terrain vehicle trails except where so designated. 
(5)  Parks and other city land. ATV's and snowmobiles shall not be operated in any park, playground or upon any other city-owned property without the express permission of the city. A snowmobile shall not be operated on any city land without a snow cover of at least one-tenth of one inch. 
(6)  Sidewalk or parking. ATV's and snowmobiles shall not be operated upon the public sidewalk or that portion of the street located between the curb line and the sidewalk or property line commonly referred to as the "parking" except for purposes of crossing the same to a public street upon which operation is authorized by this article. 
(Code 1996, § 80.04) 
Sec. 46-278. - Hours of operation. 
    No snowmobile shall be operated in the city between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. except for emergency situations or when used as a supplement force of a police department, fire department, hospital or other agency for the purpose of providing assistance. 
(Code 1996, § 80.05) 
Sec. 46-279. - Negligence. 
    The owner and operator of an ATV or snowmobile is liable for any injury or damage occasioned by the negligent operation of the ATV or snowmobile. 
(Code 1996, § 80.06) 
Sec. 46-280. - Accident reports. 
    Whenever an ATV or snowmobile is involved in an accident resulting in injury or death to anyone or property damage amounting to $200.00 or more, either the operator or someone acting for the operator shall immediately notify a law enforcement officer and shall file an accident report within 48 hours, in accordance with state law. 
(Code 1996, § 80.07) 
Secs. 46-281-46-308. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - BICYCLES 

Sec. 46-309. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Bicycle includes every device propelled by human power upon which any person may ride, having two or more wheels of 16 inches or more in diameter. 
    Child includes all persons 16 years of age or less. 
    Owner includes minors who have the use and control of a bicycle with the knowledge and consent of their parents or guardians. 
    Rollerblades/roller skates and skateboards includes every device propelled by human power upon which any person may ride, having two or more wheels of less than 16 inches in diameter. 
(Code 1996, § 75.01) 
Sec. 46-310. - Applicability. 
    The provisions of this article applicable to bicycles apply whenever a bicycle is operated upon any street, sidewalk or public way or path set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles, subject to those exceptions stated herein. 
(Code 1996, § 75.02) 
Sec. 46-311. - Applicability of traffic laws. 
    Every person riding a bicycle upon a roadway is granted all the rights and is subject to all the duties applicable to the driver of a vehicle by state law declaring rules of the road applicable to vehicles or by the traffic ordinances of the city applicable to the driver of a vehicle, except as to special regulations in this article and except as to those provisions of laws and ordinances which by their nature can have no application. 
(Code 1996, § 75.05) 
State Law reference- Bicycles to obey traffic regulations, Code of Iowa § 321.234. 
Sec. 46-312. - Parents, guardians authorizing violations prohibited. 
    It is unlawful for the parent of any child or the guardian of any ward to authorize or knowingly permit any child or ward to violate any of the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1996, § 75.03) 
Sec. 46-313. - Compliance by operators. 
    Every person operating a bicycle other than his own shall conform to all provisions of this article and shall be punished as provided herein for any violation thereof. 
(Code 1996, § 75.04) 
Sec. 46-314. - Obedience to traffic control devices. 
    Any person operating a bicycle shall obey the instructions of official traffic control signals, signs, and other control devices applicable to vehicles, unless otherwise directed by a peace officer. 
(Code 1996, § 75.06) 
Sec. 46-315. - Turning regulations. 
    Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating that no right or left or U-turn is permitted, no person operating a bicycle shall disobey the direction of any such sign, except where such person dismounts from the bicycle to make any such turn, in which event, such person shall then obey the regulations applicable to pedestrians. 
(Code 1996, § 75.07) 
Sec. 46-316. - Operator to be on seat. 
    A person propelling a bicycle shall not ride other than astride a permanent and regular seat attached thereto. 
(Code 1996, § 75.08) 
Sec. 46-317. - Number of passengers. 
    No bicycle shall be used to carry more than one person unless equipped with a seat for each person carried. 
(Code 1996, § 75.09) 
Sec. 46-318. - Ride to right. 
    Every person operating a bicycle upon a roadway shall ride as near to the right-hand side of the roadway as practicable, exercising due care when passing a standing vehicle or one proceeding in the same direction. 
(Code 1996, § 75.10) 
Sec. 46-319. - Single file. 
    Persons riding bicycles upon a roadway shall not ride more than two abreast except on paths or parts of roadways set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles and should ride single file when traffic is heavy. 
(Code 1996, § 75.11) 
Sec. 46-320. - Motor vehicles restricted. 
    No persons shall operate any motor vehicle, including a motorcycle, motor scooter or a moped or motorized bicycle when under power, upon any sidewalk, bike path or bike path painted on a roadway. 
(Code 1996, § 75.12) 
Sec. 46-321. - Speed, operation to be reasonable. 
    No person shall operate a bicycle at a speed greater than or in a manner other than is reasonable and prudent under the conditions then existing. 
(Code 1996, § 75.13) 
Sec. 46-322. - Emerging from alley, driveway, building. 
    The operator of a bicycle emerging from an alley, driveway or building shall, upon approaching a sidewalk or the sidewalk area extending across any alleyway, yield the right-of-way to all pedestrians approaching on the sidewalk or sidewalk area, and upon entering the roadway shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles approaching on the roadway. 
(Code 1996, § 75.14) 
Sec. 46-323. - Clinging to vehicles. 
    No person riding upon any bicycle shall attach the same or himself to any vehicle upon a roadway. 
(Code 1996, § 75.15) 
Sec. 46-324. - Carrying articles. 
    No person operating a bicycle shall carry any package, bundle, or article which prevents the rider from keeping at least one hand upon the handlebars. 
(Code 1996, § 75.16) 
Sec. 46-325. - Riding on sidewalks. 
    It is unlawful for any person to ride or operate a bicycle, skateboard or rollerblades/rollerskates upon any sidewalk on the following streets: 
(1)  Second Street from Superior Street to Prospect Street; 
(2)  Des Moines Street from Second Street to Division Street; 
(3)  Willson Avenue from Second Street to Division Street; 
(4)  Seneca Street from Second Street to Division Street. 
(Code 1996, § 75.17) 
Sec. 46-326. - Right-of-way of pedestrians on sidewalks. 
    Whenever any person is riding a bicycle, skateboard, rollerblades or roller skates upon a sidewalk, such person shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian and shall give audible signal before overtaking and passing any such pedestrian. 
(Code 1996, § 75.18) 
Sec. 46-327. - Equipment. 
    The following equipment shall be required: 
(1)  Lamps and reflectors. Every bicycle when in use during the hours from sunset to sunrise shall be equipped with a lamp on the front which shall emit a white light visible from a distance of at least 500 feet to the front and with a red reflector or lamp on the rear which shall be visible 300 feet to the rear when directly in front of lawful upper beams of head lamps on motor vehicles. 
(2)  Signal device. No person shall operate a bicycle unless it is equipped with a bell or other device capable of giving a signal audible for a distance of at least 100 feet, except that a bicycle shall not be equipped with nor shall any persons use upon a bicycle any siren or whistle. 
(3)  Brakes. Every bicycle shall be equipped with a brake which will enable the operator to make the braked wheel skid on dry, level and clean pavement. 
(Code 1996, § 75.19) 
State Law reference- Lamps on bicycles, Code of Iowa § 321.397. 
Sec. 46-328. - Scheduled fine. 
    The scheduled fine for bicyclists violating these regulations is $10.00. 
(Code 1996, § 75.20) 
Secs. 46-329-46-359. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - PEDESTRIANS[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference- Pedestrians' rights and duties, Code of Iowa § 321.325 et seq. 

Sec. 46-360. - Walking in street. 
    Where sidewalks are not provided, pedestrians shall at all times, when walking on or along a street, walk on the left side of the street. 
(Code 1996, § 67.01) 
State Law reference- Similar provision, Code of Iowa § 321.326. 
Sec. 46-361. - Hitch hiking. 
    No person shall stand in the traveled portion of a street for the purpose of soliciting a ride from the driver of any private vehicle. 
(Code 1996, § 67.02) 
State Law reference- Soliciting rides, Code of Iowa § 321.331. 
Sec. 46-362. - Pedestrian crossing. 
    Every pedestrian crossing a roadway at any point other than within a marked crosswalk or within an unmarked crosswalk at an intersection shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles upon the roadway. 
(Code 1996, § 67.03) 
State Law reference- Use of crosswalks, Code of Iowa § 321.330; crossing at other than crosswalk, Code of Iowa § 321.328. 
Sec. 46-363. - Use sidewalks. 
    Where sidewalks are provided it is unlawful for any pedestrian to walk along and upon an adjacent street. 
(Code 1996, § 67.04) 
Secs. 46-364-46-384. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 46-385. - Police chief to enforce; duties. 
(a)  Enforcement generally. Provisions of this article and state law relating to motor vehicles and laws of the road are enforced by the police chief. 
(b)  Records maintenance. The police chief shall maintain a suitable record of all traffic accidents, warnings, arrests, convictions and complaints reported for each driver during the most recent three-year period. Such reports shall be filed alphabetically under the name of the driver concerned. 
(c)  Annual report. The police chief shall prepare annually a traffic report which shall be filed with the mayor and council. Such report shall contain information on the number of traffic accidents, the number of persons killed and injured, the number and nature of violations, and other pertinent traffic data including plans and recommendations for future traffic safety activities. 
(d)  Accident investigation and study. The police chief shall investigate all accidents reported and, if sufficient evidence of a violation is found, proper action will be taken to punish the violator. Whenever the accidents at any particular location become numerous, the police chief shall conduct studies of such accidents and propose remedial measures. 
(e)  Habitual traffic offender study. The police chief shall study the cases of all drivers charged with frequent or serious violations of the traffic laws or involved in frequent traffic accidents or any serious accident, and shall attempt to discover the reasons therefor, and shall take whatever steps are lawful and reasonable to prevent the same, or to have the license of such persons suspended or revoked as provided by state law. 
(f)  Authority to place traffic markers, buttons or signs. The police chief may cause markers, buttons or signs to be placed within or adjacent to intersections and thereby require and direct, as traffic conditions require, that a different course from that specified by the state law be traveled by vehicles turning at intersections, and when markers, buttons or signs are so placed, no driver of a vehicle shall turn a vehicle at an intersection other than as directed and required by such markers, buttons or signs. 
(Code 1996, §§ 60.03, 60.06, 60.07, 60.08, 60.09, 60.10, 64.01) 
Sec. 46-386. - Traffic study committee. 
    A traffic study committee is established in accordance with the following to act in an advisory capacity to the council in regard to vehicular traffic: 
(1)  Appointment and term. Members to be appointed by city council for four-year terms to commence on June 1. 
(2)  Qualifications. The committee shall be composed of five members who shall be residents of the city, none of whom shall hold an elective position in the city. 
(3)  Compensation. All members of the committee shall serve without compensation except for their actual expenses which shall be subject to the approval of the council. 
(4)  Powers. The committee shall have the power to make recommendations to the council from time to time, as conditions require, amendments, changes or modifications with existing traffic laws within the city. 
(Code 1996, § 60.14) 
Sec. 46-387. - Power of peace officers to direct traffic. 
    A peace officer, and, in the absence of a peace officer, any officer of the fire department when at the scene of a fire, is authorized to direct all traffic by voice, hand or signal in conformance with traffic laws. In the event of an emergency, traffic may be directed as conditions require, notwithstanding the provisions of the traffic laws. 
(Code 1996, § 60.04) 
Sec. 46-388. - Peace officer's authority to stop and inspect vehicle. 
    Any peace officer is authorized to stop any vehicle to require exhibition of the driver's motor vehicle license, to serve a summons or memorandum of traffic violation, to inspect the condition of the vehicle, to inspect the vehicle with reference to size, weight, cargo, bills of lading or other manifest of employment, tires and safety equipment, or to inspect the registration certificate, the compensation certificate, travel order, or permit of such vehicle. 
(Code 1996, § 60.11) 
State Law reference- Similar provision, Code of Iowa § 321.492. 
Sec. 46-389. - Obedience to peace officers. 
    No person shall willfully fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order or direction of any peace officer invested by law with authority to direct, control, or regulate traffic. 
(Code 1996, § 60.12) 
State Law reference- Similar provision, Code of Iowa § 321.229. 
Sec. 46-390. - Duty of drivers to submit accident reports. 
    The driver of a vehicle involved in an accident within the limits of the city shall file a report as and when required by the state department of public safety. A copy of this report shall be filed with the city for the confidential use of peace officers and shall be subject to the provisions of the Code of Iowa § 321.271. 
(Code 1996, § 60.05) 
State Law reference- Confidential reports, Code of Iowa § 321.271; authority of city to require reports, Code of Iowa § 321.273. 
Secs. 46-391-46-408. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PROCEDURE 

Sec. 46-409. - Arrest or citation. 
    Whenever a peace officer has reasonable cause to believe that a person has violated any provision of this division, such officer may: 
(1)  Immediate arrest. Immediately arrest such person and take such person before a local magistrate, or 
(2)  Issue citation. Without arresting the person, prepare in quintuplicate a combined traffic citation and complaint as adopted by the state commissioner of public safety and deliver the original and a copy to the court where the defendant is to appear, two copies to the defendant and retain the fifth copy for the records of the city. 
(Code 1996, § 71.01) 
State Law reference- Uniform citation and complaint, Code of Iowa § 805.6; notice and promise to appear, Code of Iowa § 321.485. 
Sec. 46-410. - Scheduled violations. 
    For violations of this division which are designated by the Code of Iowa § 805.8 to be scheduled violations, the scheduled fine for each of those violations shall be as specified in the Code of Iowa § 805.8. 
(Code 1996, § 71.02) 
State Law reference- Scheduled violations, Code of Iowa § 805.8; motor vehicle and transportation scheduled violations, Code of Iowa § 805.8A. 
Sec. 46-411. - Parking violations-Alternate. 
    Admitted violations of parking restrictions imposed by this Code may be charged upon a simple notice of a fine payable at the office of the city clerk. The simple notice of a fine shall be in the amount of $15.00 for all violations except parking violations during a declared emergency and improper use of a persons with disabilities parking permit. The simple notice of a fine for parking violations during a declared emergency is $25.00, and the simple notice of a fine for improper use of a persons with disabilities parking permit is $100.00. Failure to pay the simple notice of a fine shall be grounds for the filing of a complaint in district court. 
(Code 1996, § 71.03) 
Sec. 46-412. - Parking violations-Vehicle unattended. 
    When a vehicle is parked in violation of any provision of this division, and the driver is not present, the notice of fine or citation as herein provided shall be attached to the vehicle in a conspicuous place. 
(Code 1996, § 71.04) 
Sec. 46-413. - Presumption in reference to illegal parking. 
    In any proceeding charging a standing or parking violation, a prima facie presumption that the registered owner was the person who parked or placed such vehicle at the point where, and for the time during which, such violation occurred, shall be raised by proof that the particular vehicle described in the information was parked in violation of this division, and the defendant named in the information was the registered owner at the time in question. 
(Code 1996, § 71.05) 
Sec. 46-414. - Impounding vehicles. 
    A peace officer is authorized to remove, or cause to be removed, a vehicle from a street, public alley, public parking lot or highway to the nearest garage or other place of safety, or to a garage designated or maintained by the city, under the circumstances hereinafter enumerated: 
(1)  Disabled vehicle. When a vehicle is so disabled as to constitute an obstruction to traffic and the persons in charge of the vehicle are by reason of physical injury incapacitated to such an extent as to be unable to provide for its custody or removal. 
(2)  Illegally parked vehicle. When any vehicle is left unattended and is so illegally parked as to constitute a definite hazard or obstruction to the normal movement of traffic. 
(3)  Snow removal. When any vehicle is left parked in violation of a ban on parking during snow removal operations. 
(4)  Parked over 72-hour period. When any vehicle is left parked for a continuous period of 72 hours or more. A diligent effort shall first be made to locate the owner. If the owner is found, the owner shall be given an opportunity to remove the vehicle. 
(5)  Costs. In addition to the standard penalties provided, the owner or driver of any vehicle impounded for the violation of any of the provisions of this division shall be required to pay the reasonable cost of towing and storage. 
(Code 1996, § 71.06) 
Chapter 48 - UTILITIES 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 48-1. - Communications utility. 
    The purpose of this section is to provide for the operation of the municipally-owned communications utility. The mayor and city council shall establish appropriate rules and regulations governing the operation and maintenance of the communications utility. The city manager shall be responsible for execution of policies governing the system as established by the city council. 
(Code 1996, §§ 114.01-114.03) 
Sec. 48-2. - NIMECA agreement reaffirmed. 
(a)  The purpose of this section is to authorize the city to enter into and amend an agreement with other agencies, pursuant to the Code of Iowa ch. 28E for joint and cooperative action including the creation of a separate entity. 
(b)  The city is authorized to enter into a certain amended agreement relating to North Iowa Municipal Electric Cooperative Association (NIMECA) as presented to the council and reaffirms its action in becoming an incorporator and member of the North Iowa Municipal Electric Cooperative Association. 
(c)  The mayor is authorized and directed to execute such agreement to establish the North Iowa Municipal Electric Cooperative Association for, on behalf of, and in the name of the city, and the clerk is authorized and directed to affix the seal and attest to such an agreement. 
(Code 1996, §§ 112.01-112.04) 
Sec. 48-3. - Utility commission for franchised utilities. 
(a)  Established. The city has established the utility commission consisting of five members who serve as an advisory board to the city council of the city to assist the city with cable television, natural gas and any other utility franchise not owned and operated by the city. 
(b)  Membership; terms; vacancies; compensation. Four members of the commission shall be residents of the city and one member shall be a managerial person of the city municipal electric utility or designee. The members of the commission shall be appointed by the city council. The term of office of the members of the commission shall be five years to commence on June 1. If any vacancy exists on the commission caused by resignation or otherwise, a successor for the remainder of the term shall be appointed in the same manner as the original appointee. All members of the commission shall serve without compensation except their actual expenses, which shall be subject to the approval of the council. 
(c)  Powers and duties. The commission shall have and exercise the following powers and duties: 
(1)  Selection of officers. The commission shall choose annually, at its first regular meeting, one of its members to act as chairperson and another as vice-chairperson, who shall perform all the duties of the chairperson during the chairperson's absence or disability. 
(2)  Adopt rules and regulations. The commission shall adopt such rules and regulations governing its organization and procedures as it may deem necessary. 
(3)  Review complaints. The commission shall periodically meet, as established by its rules and regulations, to review complaints made by customers of franchised city utilities. The commission shall attempt to resolve complaints, both technical and programming and franchise compliance oversight. 
(4)  Recommendations. The commission shall make recommendations to the council as to any actions required to ensure full compliance of the franchise ordinances. The commission shall also make recommendations on changes or potential termination of natural gas franchise and lease agreements to the council. 
(5)  Report. The commission shall advise the council on a periodic basis, as to the nature of all complaints and as to any franchise compliance oversights. 
(Code 1996, §§ 152.01-152.05) 
Secs. 48-4-48-24. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ELECTRIC UTILITY 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 48-25. - Purpose; rules and regulations; city manager oversight. 
    The purpose of this article is to provide for the operation of the municipally owned electric system. The mayor and council shall establish appropriate rules and regulations governing the operation and maintenance of the electric system. The city manager shall be responsible for execution of policies governing the system as established by the council. 
(Code 1996, §§ 111.01-111.03) 
Sec. 48-26. - Service rules and regulations. 
(a)  The rules and regulations for electric service are contained in the city's Municipal Utilities Electric Service Rules, a copy of which is on file in the office of the clerk. Rules established under the authority of the Code of Iowa § 476.1B, and the rules established by the state utilities board that are applicable to the city utilities, are not contained in the rules and regulations but are nevertheless applicable within the city. 
(b)  The city municipal utilities electric service rules adopted in this section replace the city Municipal Light and Power Electric Tariff No. 4, amended by Ord. No. 96-1466. 
(Code 1996, § 111.04; Ord. No. 2017-1804) 
Secs. 48-27-48-55. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - RATES AND BILLING 

Sec. 48-56. - Rates established; increases. 
    The rates for electric service shall be as provided in this division and are subject to provisions of this section. In the event of increases in the wholesale rate charged to the city, consumer rates will be adjusted by the cost increase plus line loss. For all rate classes, beginning August 1, 2019, power supply base demand, transmission demand and energy charges shall be increased one percent annually. 
(Code 1996, § 111.05) 
Sec. 48-57. - Multiple meters and transformer banks. 
    Generally, the customer's wiring will be so arranged that all service hereunder may be supplied through a single transformer and metering installation. However, where two or more meters are existing or required from one transformer bank, the metered quantities will be combined for billing purposes. Meter readings at two or more premises or from more than one transformer bank will not be combined for billing purposes. 
(Code 1996, § 111.05) 
Sec. 48-58. - Combined uses and rates. 
(a)  Combining of meter readings at several premises for billing purposes will not be permitted; each transformer installment will be treated as a separate customer for billing purposes. 
(b)  When a residence and a business are combined on one premises, service for the combined use will be considered residential only if the predominant use is for residential purposes. If the use is predominately for business purposes, the customer is required to take all service under the applicable general service or large power rate. 
(c)  For commercial and industrial uses, in no event will a customer on one premises be billed on both the general service and large power or industrial rates. For customers choosing between the industrial and general service rates the city shall accept requests to transfer rates one time per year in October. To determine the customer's maximum monthly demand for purposes of transferring to a different rate, the city shall make the determination by averaging the highest three months of demand out of the customer's last 12 months. 
(Code 1996, § 111.05) 
Sec. 48-59. - Commercial or industrial premises defined. 
    For purposes of this division, the term "commercial or industrial premises" means the main building of a commercial or industrial establishment and includes the outlying or adjacent buildings, provided the use of service in the outlying buildings is supplemental and similar to the service used in the main building. 
(Code 1996, § 111.05) 
Sec. 48-60. - Personal use exemption for commercial buildings. 
    Commercial building accounts that are used strictly for personal storage or other acceptable personal uses are eligible to apply for an exemption to qualify for a reduced electric base charge. The exemption form certifies that the building is used for personal use and is eligible for a 50 percent reduction in the base charge. The customer is required to file an exemption form at the utility office. The customer must reapply each year in order to continue receiving the exemption and there will be no retroactive credit applied. All exemptions are subject to approval by the city. Any commercial uses will not be eligible for the exemption. 
(Code 1996, § 111.05) 
Sec. 48-61. - Annual rate determination review. 
    For purposes of determining the customer charge, the city shall once per year in October, upon receiving a request from a customer, review the customer's total annual kWh used during the preceding 12-month period and establish the appropriate customer charge that shall be then charged to that customer beginning with the first bill in the next calendar year. 
(Code 1996, § 111.05) 
Sec. 48-62. - Residential service rates. 
(a)  Generally. City residential service rates apply to residential customers for single-phase uses in single-family homes or separately metered single-family apartments. The net rate is: 
(1)  Customer charge: $23.70 per month. 
(2)  Energy charge: all kWh at 9.35 cents per kWh. 
(3)  Minimum bill: $23.70 per month. 
(b)  Electric heating and cooling incentive rate applicability. It is the intent of the city to participate in the incentive rates offered by the city's electrical supplier, Corn Belt Power Cooperative, as established in its marketing and economic development plan. To be eligible for the heating and cooling incentive rates, the customer must meet the requirement established by this plan, as determined by the city manager. The city manager is authorized and directed to enter into any agreement with a utility customer who requests a program or rate incentive outlined in the Corn Belt Power Cooperative Marketing and Economic Development Plan. A copy of the plan is on file with the city manager. 
(c)  Electric heat rate. Residential electric heating rates shall apply when the customer has installed and makes regular use of approved electric space heating and cooling equipment of 100 percent of the home's space heating and cooling. The net rate is: 
(1)  Customer charge: $23.70 per month. 
(2)  Energy charge: all kWh at 8.87 cents per kWh. 
(Code 1996, § 111.05) 
Sec. 48-63. - Rural residential and farm service rates. 
    Rural residential and farm service is subject to the following: 
(1)  Rate applicability. Rural residential and farm service rates shall apply to customers located outside the city limits using residential and farm service that can be adequately served from one transformer provided that the customer's monthly maximum demands do not exceed 50 kW. The net rate is: 
a.  Customer charge: 
1.  Single phase $43.60 per month. 
2.  Three phases $127.50 per month. 
b.  Energy charge: All kWh at 9.46 cents per kWh. 
c.  Minimum bill: $43.60 per month. 
(2)  Electric heat rate applicability. The electric heat rate for rural residential farm service shall apply when the customer has installed and in regular use approved electric space heating and cooling equipment for 100 percent of the home's space heating and cooling. The net rate is: 
a.  Customer charge: $43.60 per month. 
b.  Energy charge: all kWh at 9.03 cents per kWh. 
(3)  Grain bin rate applicability. The grain bin rate shall apply to customers located outside the city limits for farm grain bin sites with 240/480 volt three-phase service served from one transformer. The net rate is: 
a.  Customer charge: $127.50 per month. 
b.  Energy charge: all kWh at 9.46 cents per kWh. 
(Code 1996, § 111.05) 
Sec. 48-64. - Commercial and small industry rate. 
(a)  Generally. The general service rate is available to commercial and industrial customers, taking single-phase or three-phase electrical service for general commercial usage and for miscellaneous power uses, with monthly maximum demands exceeding 50 kW, but less than 250 kW have the option of billing on the industrial rate. However, upon selection of a rate, the customer will be billed on that rate for at least a 12-month period before transferring to the other rate. 
(b)  Rural general service rate for commercial and small industry. This service rate is available to commercial and industrial customers located outside the city limits taking single-phase or three-phase electrical service for general commercial usage and for miscellaneous power uses. Customers with monthly maximum demands exceeding 50 kW, but less than 250 kW have the option of billing on the industrial rate. However, upon selection of a rate, the customer will be billed on that rate for at least a 12-month period before transferring to the other rate. The net rate is: 
(1)  Customer charge: 
a.  Single phase-$105.00 per month. 
b.  Three phase-$147.50 per month. 
(2)  Energy charge: all kWh at 9.46 cents per kWh. 
(3)  Minimum bill: 
a.  Single phase-$105.00 per month. 
b.  Three phase-$147.50 per month. 
(c)  Rural commercial space heat rate. The rural commercial space heat rate is available to commercial and small industry customers located outside of city limits taking single-phase or three-phase electrical service for general commercial usage and for miscellaneous power uses when the customer has installed in regular use approved electric space heating and cooling equipment for 100 percent of the business's space heating and cooling. The net rates are as follows: 
(1)  Customer charge: 
a.  Single phase-$105.00 per month. 
b.  Three phase-$147.50 per month. 
(2)  Energy charge: All kWh at 8.98 cents per kWh. 
(Code 1996, § 111.05) 
Sec. 48-65. - Industrial rates. 
(a)  Generally. The industrial rate shall apply to any commercial and industrial customer for all light and power purposes when the maximum monthly demand is 50 kW or more. Customers with maximum monthly demands exceeding 50 kW but less than 250 kW have the option of billing on the general service rate. However, upon selection of a rate, the customer will be billed on that rate for at least a 12-month period before requesting a transfer to the other rate. Net rates are as follows: 
(1)  Customer charge: 
a.  Less than 1,000,000 kWh/yr: $2,178.13 per month. 
b.  1,000,000-3,000,000 kWh/yr: $3,134.38 per month. 
c.  3,000,000-10,000,000 kWh/yr: $4,223.44 per month. 
d.  More than 10,000,000 kWh/yr: $8,446.88 per month. 
(2)  Power supply base demand: $21.04 per coincident kW. 
(3)  Transmission demand: $0.85 per coincident kW. 
(4)  Energy charge: All kWh: 3.84 cents per kWh. 
(b)  Determination of billing and transmission demands. The power supply base demand shall be equal to customer's contribution to Corn Belt's monthly coincident system peak kW demand. The transmission demand shall be equal to customer's contribution to Corn Belt's monthly coincident system peak kW demand. All demand shall be measured on a 30-minute interval, clock-hour basis. All demand and energy shall be determined by utility provided suitable metering instruments. 
(c)  Service facilities. The city will furnish, as a standard installation, facilities adequate to supply service for the customer. Each standard installation will include, where necessary, facilities adequate to measure the demand and energy consumption of the entire premises. Such service facilities will be the property of the municipal electric department. The type, extent and location of such service facilities will be determined by agreement between the city and the customer. 
(d)  Multiple metering. Where two or more demand-metering installations are provided, the maximum 30-minute demand will be determined by adding together the separate 30-minute demands coincidental with each other to determine a maximum coincidental demand to be used for billing purposes. However, primary metering may be installed to measure the total demand at one point, if feasible. Where two or more watt-hour-metering installations are provided, the total kWh used for billing purposes will be determined by adding together with kWh metered at each installation. However, the demand and kWh supplied at two or more premises will not be combined for billing purposes hereunder. 
(e)  Method of metering. The city shall have the option of metering on the primary or secondary side of the transformer. When power and energy is metered at the primary voltage, 11/2 percent will be deducted from the kW and kWh. 
(Code 1996, § 111.05) 
Sec. 48-66. - Wholesale rate. 
(a)  Generally. The wholesale rate shall be available to all customers located outside the city limits who purchase power and energy for the purpose of selling at retail to others. Delivery will normally be at the city limits of the city at the available transmission voltage of the city. The base wholesale rate covers the cost of providing electric service to the city limits at the available transmission voltage. In the event the wholesale customer requests that facilities be furnished by the city beyond the city limits, or at a different voltage, the city will furnish, install and maintain such facilities subject to the following considerations and the net rate specified: 
(1)  Customer charge: $3,044.00 per month. 
(2)  Demand charge: $22.30 per kW. 
(3)  Energy charge: 3.84 cents per kWh. 
(4)  Minimum monthly bill: $3,044.00 per month. 
(5)  The type, extent and location of such facilities will be determined by agreement of the city and customer. 
(6)  Such facilities will be the property of the municipal electric department. 
(7)  The wholesale customer shall pay a monthly rental charge on those facilities provided beyond the city limits or transformation to another voltage. 
(8)  If the facilities provided by the city beyond the city limits are used for other customers also, the rental payable by the wholesale customer will be that portion of the total rental which is reasonably assignable to the customer. 
(b)  Wheeling rate. The wheeling rate is available to a wholesale rate customer using city municipal utilities electrical system to obtain electrical energy supplied by other than city municipal utilities. Wheeling rates are subject to include costs the city municipal utilities incurs for equipment/materials applicable to the individual meter service when not purchasing energy from the city municipal utilities. A ten-year payback shall be used from date equipment/materials are energized. The net rate is: 
Wholesale: $34.00 per meter plus 3.76 cents per kWh. 
(Code 1996, § 111.05) 
Sec. 48-67. - Security light rental charges. 
    Whenever possible security lighting should be installed by the customer on the customer's side of the meter. However, when a lighting installation on the utility side of the meter is determined by the utility to be necessary or prudent, the utility shall install and maintain a lighting fixture in accordance with this section. Charges shall be $12.25 per month, per light. If the lighting fixture cannot be installed on an existing pole, the cost of installing the pole and wiring shall be charged to the customer. 
(Code 1996, § 111.05) 
Sec. 48-68. - Street lighting rate. 
    The street lighting rate shall apply to all energy associated with furnishing of street lighting by the city's electrical distribution system. The net rate is: 
Energy charge: All kWh at 9.0 cents per kWh. 
(Code 1996, § 111.05) 
Sec. 48-69. - Public authority rate. 
(a)  Generally. The public authority rate shall apply to all customers under the jurisdiction of city government within the municipal electric service territory. This includes customers receiving single-phase and three-phase service. Customers exceeding monthly maximum demand of 50 kW will be charged on a large power rate. The net rate is: 
(1)  Customer charge: 
a.  Single phase-$85.00 per month. 
b.  Three phase-$127.50 per month. 
(2)  Energy charge: All kWh at 9.35 cents per kWh. 
(3)  Minimum bill: 
a.  Single phase-$85.00 per month. 
b.  Three phase-$127.50 per month. 
(b)  Electric heat rate. When the customer has installed and in regular use approved electric space heating and cooling equipment of 100 percent of the home's space heating and cooling, the electric heat rate shall apply, as follows: 
(1)  Customer charge: 
a.  Single phase-$85.00 per month. 
b.  Three phase-$127.50 per month. 
(2)  Energy charge: All kWh at 8.87 cents per kWh. 
(c)  Large power rate. The large power rate shall apply when the customer's monthly maximum demand exceeds 50 kW. The net rates are as follows: 
(1)  Customer charge: $3,134.38 per month. 
(2)  Power supply base demand: $21.04 per kW. 
(3)  Transmission demand: $0.85 per kW. 
(4)  Energy charge: All kWh 3.84 cents per kWh. 
(Code 1996, § 111.05) 
Secs. 48-70-48-96. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - WATER SYSTEM 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 48-97. - Superintendent. 
    The city manager shall appoint a superintendent who shall be responsible for execution of policies governing the municipal water system as established by the council. 
(Code 1996, § 90.03) 
Sec. 48-98. - Service rules and regulations. 
    The rules and regulations for water service are as contained in the city's service rules for the city water system a copy of which is on file in the office of the clerk. The rules and regulations contained therein shall apply to all users of the municipal water system. 
(Code 1996, § 90.04) 
Sec. 48-99. - Water connection required. 
(a)  The owners of any houses, buildings, or properties used for human occupancy, employment, recreation or other purposes, situated within the city and abutting any street, alley or right-of-way are prohibited from drilling any type of well for the provision of supplying potable or non-potable water to the property when a public water supply is located within 300 feet. Any well that exists prior to November 7, 2016, is exempt. 
(b)  This section shall not apply when well water is to be used in the raising of livestock, provided that the owner of the property obtains written approval form the city council to drill the wells. For purposes of this section only, the term "livestock" includes aquaculture as defined by the Code of Iowa ch. 481A. The city council has complete discretion in the granting or denial of livestock well requests. 
(c)  If the city council approves a livestock well drilling request, any resulting well shall be used exclusively for raising livestock on the property. If at any time the raising of livestock on the property shall cease, the wells in question must be disconnected and no longer used, in compliance with any and all state or federal laws. 
(Code 1996, § 90.07) 
Sec. 48-100. - Rates. 
(a)  Applicability. The city and Xenia Rural Water have mutually agreed upon seven areas reserved for water service by the city. The rates established by the city for water service shall apply to those seven areas and any other areas outside the corporate limits of the city desiring water services. 
(b)  Service rates. The rates for water service including purchase of water shall be as provided in this article. The effective date shall be the first billing cycle after Ordinance No. 2015-1781 is adopted and remain in full force and effect until such time as amended by law. The rates may be amended periodically by city council action and adoption by ordinance. 
(c)  Determining volume and usage; billing period. The volume used for billing purposes shall be equal to the volume measured by the water supply meter. The billing period shall be approximately 30 days. Usage used to determine the base rates for commercial users shall be based on a yearly average for the previous calendar year and shall take effect at the first billing cycle after July 1 of each year. A unit of water is equal to 100 cubic feet. 
(Code 1996, § 90.05A) 
Sec. 48-101. - Applicants' responsibilities. 
(a)  All applicants who wish to connect to city water must sign up for applicable water service in utility office and: 
(1)  Submit a written application for water service to the public works department, together with a site map of proposed buildings to be served (showing footprint of property, including buildings and street/road) and the desired date for service to start. 
(2)  Submit the applicable connection fee prior to start of work. 
(3)  Obtain plumbing permit for service line connection and provide positive disconnection between city water system and applicant's well system. 
(b)  The monthly water base rate is double current base rate in this article and user rate per gallon is the current user rate plus 20 percent (plus tax). 
(Code 1996, § 90.05B) 
Sec. 48-102. - Denial and termination of service. 
    The city may terminate any water service in violation of the water service rules set forth by the city. In addition and notwithstanding any other provision of this article, the city reserves the right to deny, for any reason, the connection of service to any applicant. 
(Code 1996, § 90.05D-E) 
Sec. 48-103. - Charges for connections to city water mains. 
(a)  Should a property owner within the corporate limits desire to hook onto a water main, the connection fee will be based on time and materials. The connection fee to the water main installed as part of the 2002 Water Distribution Improvement Project shall be $3,750.00 per connection. The water main is located along Millards Lane, west across Highway 17, south to include Gourley's Subdivision. 
(1)  Monthly fixed base cost: 
Residential customers $10.00 Small commercial users (under 50 units/month) $10.00 Medium commercial users (50 to 199 units/month) $50.00 Large commercial users (200 or more units/month) $200.00  
Effective July 1, 2013: 
(2)  Monthly fixed base cost: 
Residential customers and commercial users under (25 units/month) $10.00 Small commercial users (25 to 49 units/month) $20.00 Medium commercial users (50 to 199 units/month) $50.00 Large commercial users (200 or more units/month) $200.00  
(3)  Volume: 
First 20 units $5.17 per unit Next 20 units $4.27 per unit Over 40 units $3.07 per unit  
(4)  Volume for non-potable raw water: 
First 20 units $5.17 per unit Units 21 thru 40 $4.27 per unit Units 41 thru 60 $3.07 per unit Units 61 thru 3,500 $1.15 per unit Units 3,501 thru 7,000 $0.73 per unit Units 7,001 and above $0.60 per unit  
(b)  Connection fee information. 
(1)  If a property owner within an area reserved from Xenia wishes to have city water service, the water connection fee will be $7,000.00 for a standard residential water line. 
(2)  Other connection fees are: 
a.  Three-fourths-inch line: $7,000.00. 
b.  One-inch line: $10,500.00. 
c.  11/4-inch line: $14,000.00. 
d.  11/2-inch line: $17,500.00. 
e.  Two-inch line: $21,000.00. 
(3)  Connection to existing water service (i.e., already has water service into the lot): 
a.  Three-fourths-inch line: $3,500.00. 
b.  One-inch line: $8,750.00. 
c.  11/4-inch line: $10,500.00. 
d.  11/2-inch line: $12,250.00. 
e.  Two-inch line: $14,000.00. 
(4)  For each nominal pipe size, the rate shall increase by 50 percent of the base rate of each rate category. 
(Code 1996, § 90.05) 
Sec. 48-104. - Areas in two-mile jurisdiction reserved from rural water districts. 
    Areas reserved from the creation of a rural water district within the city's two-mile jurisdiction include the following: 
(1)  Area 1: Beginning at the SE corner of SE1/4 NW1/4 of section 32-89-25; thence north to the NW corner of the SW1/4 NE1/4 of section 32-89-25; thence east to the NE corner of the SW1/4 NE1/4 of section 32-89-25; thence south to the SE corner of the SW1/4 NE1/4 of section 32-89-25; thence east to the SW corner of the SE1/4 SE1/4 NE1/4 of section 32-89-25; thence north to the NW corner of the S1/2 SE1/4 SE1/4 NE1/4 of section 32-89-25; thence east to the east line of section 32-89-25; thence north to the NW corner of the SW1/4 SW1/4 NW1/4 of section 33-89-25; thence east to the west line of SE1/4 NW1/4 of section 33-89-25; thence north along the west line of the E1/2 NW1/4 to NW corner NE1/4 NW1/4 section 33-89-25; thence north along the west line of the SE1/4 SW1/4 of section 28-89-25 to the NW corner of the SE1/4 SW1/4 of section 28-89-25; thence west along the north line of the SW1/4 SW1/4 of section 28-89-25 to the NW corner of the SW1/4 SW1/4 of section 28-89-25; thence west along the north line of the S1/2 S1/2 of section 29-89-25 to the east right-of-way line of the Union Pacific railroad; thence south along the east right-of-way line of the Union Pacific railroad to the south line of SE1/4 NW1/4 of section 32-89-25; thence east along the south line of the SE1/4 NW1/4 of section 32-89-25 to the SE corner of the SE1/4 NW1/4 of section 32-89-25; to the point being the point of beginning. 
(2)  Area 2: Beginning at the SW corner of the SE1/4 SE1/4 of section 36-89-26; thence north to the NW corner of the NE1/4 SE1/4 of section 36-89-26; thence west along the north line of the SE1/4 of section 36-89-26 to the NW corner of the SE1/4 of section 36-89-26; thence west along the north line of the SW1/4 of section 36-89-26 to the NW corner of the SW1/4 of section 36-89-26; thence west along the north line of the SE1/4 of section 35-89-26 to the NW corner of the SE1/4 of section 35-89-26; thence west along the north line of the SW1/4 of section 35-89-26 to the NW corner of the SW1/4 of section 35-89-26; thence west along the north line of the NE1/4 SE1/4 of section 34-89-26 to the NW corner of the NE1/4 SE1/4 of section 34-89-26; thence south along the west line of the E1/2 SE1/4 of section 34-89-26 to the SW corner of SE1/4 SE1/4 of section 34-89-26; thence east along the south line of the SE1/4 of section 34-89-26 to the NW corner of the NW1/4 of section 4-88-26; thence south along the west line of the NW1/4 of section 4-88-26 to the SW corner of the NW1/4 of section 4-88-26; thence east along the south line of the NW1/4 of section 4-88-26 to the SE corner of the NW1/4 of section 4-88-26; thence east along the south line of the NE1/4 of section 4-88-26 to the SE corner of the NE1/4 of section 4-88-26; thence east along the south line of the NW1/4 of section 3-88-26 to the SE corner of the NW1/4 of section 3-88-26; thence east along the south line of the NE1/4 of section 3-88-26 to a point directly south of the point of beginning; thence north to the point of beginning. 
(3)  Area 3: Beginning at the center of section 2-88-26; thence west on the centerline to the west line of section 2-88-26; thence south along the west line of section 2-88-26 to the SW corner of section 2-88-26; thence east to the SE corner of the SW1/4 SW1/4 of section 2-88-26; thence south along the west line of the NE1/4 NW1/4 of section 11-88-26 to the SW corner of the NE1/4 NW1/4 of section 11-88-26; thence cast along the south line of the NE1/4 NW1/4 of section 11-88-26 to the SE corner of the NE1/4 NW1/4 of section 11-88-26; thence north to the center of section 2-88-26 (the point of beginning). 
(4)  Area 4: Beginning at the SE corner of the NE1/4 NE1/4 of section 6-88-25; thence south along the east line of section 6-88-25 to the SE corner of the NE1/4 SE1/4 of section 6-88-25; thence east to the SE corner of the NE1/4 SW1/4 of section 5-88-25; thence north to the NE corner of the SE1/4 NW1/4 of section 5-88-25; thence west to the SE corner of the NE1/4 NE1/4 of section 6-88-25 (the point of beginning). 
(5)  Area 5: Beginning at a point 319.13 feet north of the NE corner of the SE1/4 NE1/4 of section 11-88-26; thence west 383 feet to a point 319.13 feet north of the north line of the SE1/4 NE1/4 section 11-88-26; thence south to a point 165 feet south and 383 feet west of the NE corner of the SE1/4 NE1/4 of section 11-88-26; thence west to a point on the west line of the SE1/4 NE1/4 section 11-88-26; thence south to the SE corner of the SW1/4 NE1/4 of section 11-88-26; thence east to the SE corner of the SE1/4 NE1/4 of section 11-88-26; thence north along the east line of the SE1/4 NE1/4 of section 11-88-26 to the point of beginning. 
(6)  Area 6: Beginning at a point on the westerly right-of-way of Iowa Highway 17, the point 140 feet north of the south line of the SE1/4 NW1/4 of section 18-88-25; thence west along a line parallel with and 140 feet north of the south line of SE1/4 NW1/4 of section 18-88-25 to the west line of the SE1/4 NW1/4 of section 18-88-25; thence south along the west line of the SE1/4 NW1/4 of section 18-88-25 to the south line of the SE1/4 NW1/4 of section 18-88-25; thence west along the south line of the SW1/4 NW1/4 of section 18-88-25 to the SW corner of the NW1/4 of section 18-88-25; thence south along the west line of the NW1/4 SW1/4 of section 18-88-25 to the SW corner of the NW1/4 SW1/4 of section 18-88-25; thence east to the center line of the Boone River; thence northeasterly along the centerline of the Boone River to the west right-of-way line of Iowa Highway 17; thence northwesterly along the westerly right-of-way line of Iowa Highway 17 to the point of beginning. 
(7)  Area 7: Beginning at the NE corner of the NW1/4 of section 19-88-25; thence north along the east line of the SW1/4 of section 18-88-25 to a point 100 feet north of the south line of section 18-88-25; thence west along a line parallel with and 100 feet north of the south line of the SE1/4 SW1/4 of section 18-88-25 a distance of 675 feet; thence south to the south line of the SE1/4 SW1/4 of section 18-88-25; thence west along the south line of the SE1/4 SW1/4 of section 18-88-25 to the SW corner of the SE1/4 SW1/4 of section 18-88-25; thence south along the west line of the NE1/4 NW1/4 of section 19-88-25 to the SW corner of the NE1/4 NW1/4 of section 19-88-25; thence east to the SE corner of the NE1/4 NW1/4 of section 19-88-25; thence north along the east line of the NE1/4 NW1/4 of section 19-88-25 to the point of beginning. 
(Code 1996, § 90.06) 
Secs. 48-105-48-121. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - WATER CONSERVATION EMERGENCY 

Sec. 48-122. - Declaration of emergency. 
    The council may declare a water conservation emergency whenever water supply or water system facilities are found to be inadequate or whenever there appears to be a substantial and imminent danger of such inadequacy. A resolution declaring such emergency shall be published for one publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the city and upon publication shall require compliance with this division by all persons using water from the water system until, by resolution of the council, the emergency shall be declared to be terminated. 
(Code 1996, § 91.01) 
Sec. 48-123. - Prohibited and restricted uses. 
(a)  The following uses of potable processed water from the municipal water system during a water conservation emergency are prohibited: 
(1)  The use of water-consuming air conditioning equipment which consumes in excess of five percent of the water circulating in such equipment. 
(2)  Watering or irrigation of lawns and all other outside vegetation except that direct applications of water not exceeding one inch per week are permitted between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on flower and vegetable gardens, trees and shrubs less than four years old, and areas which were newly seeded or sodded prior to issuance of the emergency resolution. 
(3)  The washing of cars, trucks, trailers, and other mobile vehicles or equipment except at commercial establishments which provide that service. 
(4)  The cleaning of outdoor surfaces including buildings, sidewalks, driveways, and porches. 
(5)  The nonessential cleaning of commercial and industrial equipment, machinery, and interior spaces. 
(6)  The filling of private swimming pools, wading pools, reflecting pools, ornamental fountains, or any other structure making similar use of water. 
(7)  Permitting the loss of water through defective plumbing or fixtures, except where the customer can provide proof of prompt repair of the defect. 
(8)  Use by a business or industry of an amount of water exceeding the amount used during the corresponding month of the preceding year except where the business or industry is declared by resolution of the council to be necessary for the public health, safety, and welfare. When there is no corresponding period of use or where review is directed by the council, the city manager shall hold a public hearing to determine the allowable use. 
(b)  Nothing in this section shall prohibit the use of water which has been reclaimed or recycled after an essential primary use. 
(Code 1996, § 91.02) 
Sec. 48-124. - Rate for water used in violation of conservation emergency. 
    Any person found to be using city water in violation of this division shall be charged twice the rate which would otherwise apply. This rate shall apply to all metered service through the service connection used in the violation during any month that a water conservation emergency is declared by the council to exist and during which the violation has occurred or continued. 
(Code 1996, § 91.03) 
Secs. 48-125-48-146. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - SEWER UTILITY 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 48-147. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    BOD (biochemical oxygen demand) means the quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure in five days at 20 degrees Celsius, expressed in milligrams per liter or parts per million. 
    Building drain means that part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system which receives the discharge from soil, waste, and other drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer, beginning five feet (1.5 meters) outside the inner face of the building wall. 
    Building sewer means the extension from the building drain to the public sewer or other place of disposal. 
    Combined sewer means a sewer receiving both surface run-off and sewage. 
    Customer means any person responsible for the production of domestic, commercial or industrial waste which is directly or indirectly discharged into the public sewer system. 
    Garbage means solid wastes from the domestic and commercial preparation, cooking, and dispensing of food, and from the handling, storage and sale of produce. 
    Industrial wastes means the liquid wastes from industrial manufacturing processes, trade, or business as distinct from sanitary sewage. 
    Inspector means the person duly authorized by the council to inspect and approve the installation of building sewers and their connections to the public sewer system; and to inspect such sewage as may be discharged therefrom. 
    Natural outlet means any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake, or other body of surface or groundwater. 
    pH means the logarithm of the reciprocal of the weight of hydrogen ions in grams per liter of solution. 
    Private sewer system means a system which provides for the treatment or disposal of domestic sewage from four or fewer dwelling units or the equivalent of less than 16 individuals on a continuing basis. 
    Properly shredded garbage means the wastes from the preparation, cooking, and dispensing of food that have been shredded to such a degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than one-half inch (1.27 centimeters) in any dimension. 
    Public sewer means a sewer in which all owners of abutting properties have equal rights and is controlled by public authority. 
    Sanitary sewage means sewage discharging from the sanitary conveniences of dwellings (including apartment houses and hotels), office buildings, factories or institutions, and free from stormwater, surface water, and industrial waste. 
    Sanitary sewer means a sewer which carries sewage and to which stormwater, surface, and groundwaters are not intentionally admitted. 
    Semi-public sewage disposal system means a system for the treatment or disposal of domestic sewage which is not a private sewage disposal system and which is not owned by a city, a sanitary sewer district, or a designated and approved management agency under section 208 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act. 
    Sewage means a combination of the water-carried wastes from residences, business buildings, institutions, and industrial establishments, together with such ground, surface, and stormwaters as may be present. 
    Sewage treatment plant means any arrangement of devices and structures used for treating sewage. 
    Sewage works or sewage system means all facilities for collecting, pumping, treating, and disposing of sewage. 
    Sewer means a pipe or conduit for carrying sewage. 
    Sewer rental means any and all charges, rates, fees, or rentals levied against and payable by customers, as consideration for the servicing of the customers by the sewer system. 
    Slug means any discharge of water, sewage, or industrial waste which, in concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow, exceeds for any period of duration longer than 15 minutes more than five times the average 24-hour concentration of flows during normal operation. 
    Storm drain or storm sewer means a sewer which carries stormwater and surface waters and drainage but excludes sewage and industrial wastes, other than unpolluted cooling water. 
    Superintendent means the superintendent of sewage works or of water pollution control of the city or any authorized deputy, agent, or representative. 
    Suspended solids means solids that either float on the surface of, or are in suspension in water, sewage, or other liquids, and which are removable by laboratory filtering. 
    Watercourse means a channel in which a flow of water occurs, either continuously or intermittently. 
(Code 1996, § 95.02) 
Sec. 48-148. - Superintendent. 
    The superintendent of the city sewage system shall be appointed by the city manager and exercise the following powers and duties: 
(1)  Operation and maintenance. Operate and maintain the city sewage system. 
(2)  Inspection and tests. Conduct necessary inspections and tests to ensure compliance with the provisions of these sanitary sewers chapters. 
(3)  Records. Maintain a complete and accurate record of all sewers, sewage connections and manholes constructed showing the location and grades thereof. 
(Code 1996, § 95.03) 
Sec. 48-149. - Prohibited acts. 
    No person shall do, or allow, any of the following: 
(1)  Damage sewer system. Maliciously, willfully, or negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any structure, appurtenance or equipment which is a part of the sewer system. 
(2)  Downspouts. Connect a roof downspout, exterior foundation drain, areaway drain, or other source of surface runoff or groundwater to a building sewer or building drain which, in turn, is connected directly or indirectly to a public sanitary sewer. 
(3)  Manholes. Open or enter any manhole of the sewer system, except by authority of the superintendent. 
(4)  Objectionable wastes. Place or deposit in any unsanitary manner on public or private property within the city, or in any area under the jurisdiction of the city, any human or animal excrement, garbage, or other objectionable waste. 
(5)  Septic tanks. Construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool, or other facility intended or used for the disposal of sewage except as provided in these chapters. 
(6)  Untreated discharge. Discharge to any natural outlet within the city, or in any area under its jurisdiction, any sanitary sewage, industrial wastes, or other polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with subsequent provisions of these chapters. 
(Code 1996, § 95.04) 
Sec. 48-150. - Sewer connection required. 
    The owners of any houses, buildings, or properties used for human occupancy, employment, recreation or other purposes, situated within the city and abutting on any street, alley or right-of-way in which there is now located, or may in the future be located, a public sanitary or combined sewer, are required to install, at such owner's expense, suitable toilet facilities there and a building sewer connecting such facilities directly with the proper public sewer, and to maintain the same all in accordance with the provisions of these sanitary sewer chapters; such compliance to be completed within 90 days after the date of official notice from the city to do so, provided that the public sewer is located within 300 feet of the property line of such owner and is of such design as to receive and convey by gravity or other mechanical means such sewage as may be conveyed to it. Billing for sanitary sewer service will begin on the date of official notice to connect to the public sewer. 
(Code 1996, § 95.05) 
Sec. 48-151. - Service outside the city. 
    The owners of property outside the corporate limits of the city so situated that it may be served by the city sewer system may apply to the council for permission to connect to the public sewer upon the terms and conditions stipulated by resolution of the council. 
(Code 1996, § 95.06) 
Sec. 48-152. - Right of entry. 
    The superintendent and other duly authorized employees of the city bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all properties for the purposes of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling and testing in accordance with the provisions of this article. The superintendent or representatives shall have no authority to inquire into any processes including metallurgical, chemical, oil, refining, ceramic, paper, or other industries beyond that point having a direct bearing on the kind and source of discharge to the sewers or waterways or facilities for waste treatment. 
(Code 1996, § 95.07) 
Sec. 48-153. - Owner's liability limited. 
    While performing the necessary work on private property, the superintendent or duly authorized employees of the city shall observe all safety rules applicable to the premises established by the owner or occupant and the owner or occupant shall be held harmless for injury or death to city employees and the city shall indemnify the owner or occupant against loss or damage to its property by city employees and against liability claims and demands for personal injury or property damage asserted against the owner or occupant and growing out of any gauging and sampling operation, except as such may be caused by negligence or failure of the owner or occupant to maintain safe conditions. 
(Code 1996, § 95.08) 
Sec. 48-154. - Use of easements. 
    The superintendent and other duly authorized employees of the city bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all private properties through which the city holds a duly negotiated easement for the purposes of, but not limited to, inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, repair, and maintenance of any portion of the sewage works lying within the easement. All entry and subsequent work, if any, on the easement, shall be done in full accordance with the terms of the duly negotiated easement pertaining to the private property involved. 
(Code 1996, § 95.09) 
Sec. 48-155. - Special penalties. 
    The following special penalty provisions shall apply to violations of these sanitary sewer chapters: 
(1)  Notice of violation. Any person found to be violating any provision of these chapters except section 48-149(1), (3) and (4), shall be served by the city with written notice stating the nature of the violation and providing a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory correction thereof. The offender shall, within the period of time stated in such notice, permanently cease all violations. 
(2)  Continuing violations. Any person who shall continue any violation beyond the time limit provided for in subsection (1) of this section, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and on conviction thereof shall be fined an amount not exceeding $100.00 for each violation. Each day in which any such violation shall continue shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(3)  Liability imposed. Any person violating any of the provisions of these chapters shall become liable to the city for any expense, loss, or damage occasioned the city by reason of such violation. 
(Code 1996, § 95.10) 
Secs. 48-156-48-178. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - BUILDING SEWERS AND CONNECTIONS 

Sec. 48-179. - Permit required. 
    No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connection with or opening into, use, alter or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof without first obtaining a written permit from the building official in accordance with article V of this chapter. 
(Code 1996, § 96.01) 
Sec. 48-180. - Plumber required. 
    Any connection to a public sewer shall be made by a licensed plumber. 
(Code 1996, § 96.02) 
Sec. 48-181. - Excavations. 
    All excavations for building sewer installations shall be made in accordance with the following and with the provisions of article II of chapter 42, where applicable: 
(1)  Barricades and lighting. Adequate barricades and warning lights shall be so placed as to protect the public from hazard. 
(2)  Public convenience. Streets and alleys shall be opened in the manner which will cause the least inconvenience to the public and admit the uninterrupted passage of water along the gutter on the street. 
(3)  Construction methods. All excavation required for the installation of a building sewer shall be open trench work unless otherwise approved by the city. Pipe laying and backfill shall be performed in accordance with A.S.T.M. Specification C-12, except that no backfill shall be placed until the work has been inspected. 
(4)  Restoration of public property. Streets, sidewalks, parkways and other public property disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the city, at the expense of the property owner. 
(5)  Completion by the city. Should any excavation in any street or alley be left open or unfinished for a period of 24 hours or should the work be improperly done, the superintendent shall have the right to finish or correct such work and the expense shall be charged to the property owner. 
(Code 1996, § 96.03) 
Sec. 48-182. - Connection requirements. 
    Any connection with a public sanitary sewer must be made under the direct supervision of the building official and in accordance with the Uniform Plumbing Code. 
(Code 1996, § 96.04) 
Sec. 48-183. - Sewer tap. 
    Connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall be made at the "Y" branch, if such branch is available at a suitable location. If the public sewer is 12 inches in diameter or less and no properly located "Y" branch is available, the owner shall at the owner's expense install a "Y" branch in the public sewer at the location specified by the city. Where the public sewer is greater than 12 inches and no properly located "Y" branch is available, a neat hole may be cut into the public sewer to receive the building sewer with entry in the downstream direction at an angle of approximately 45 degrees. A 45 degree "L" may be used to make such connection, with the spigot end cut so as not to extend past the inner surface of the public sewer. The invert of the private sewer at the point of connection shall be at the same, or at a higher elevation than the invert of the public sewer. A smooth, neat joint shall be made, and the connection made secure and watertight by encasement in concrete. Special fittings may be used for the connection only when approved by the city. At no time shall a building sewer be constructed so as to enter a manhole unless special written permission is received from the superintendent and in accordance with the superintendent's direction if such connection is approved. 
(Code 1996, § 96.06) 
Sec. 48-184. - Connection deadline. 
    All approved connection permits shall require the owner to complete construction and connection of the building sewer to the public sewer within 30 days from the approval of the permit, except that when, in the judgment of the superintendent, a property owner on application has made sufficient showing that due to conditions beyond the owner's control or peculiar hardship, the period of time set forth for the completion of the connection shall be inequitable or unfair, an extension of time within which to comply with the provisions herewith may be granted. 
(Code 1996, § 96.07) 
Sec. 48-185. - Inspection required. 
    All connections with the sanitary sewer system before being covered shall be inspected and approved, in writing, by the superintendent. As soon as all pipe work from the public sewer to inside the building has been completed, and before any backfilling is done, the superintendent shall be notified and the superintendent shall inspect and test the work as to workmanship and material; no sewer pipe laid underground shall be covered or trenches filled until after the sewer has been so inspected and approved. If the superintendent refuses to approve the work, the plumber or owner must proceed immediately to correct the work. 
(Code 1996, § 96.08) 
Sec. 48-186. - Property owner's responsibility. 
    All costs and expenses incident to the installation, connection and maintenance of the building sewer shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify the city from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the building sewer. 
(Code 1996, § 96.09) 
Sec. 48-187. - Abatement of violations. 
    Construction or maintenance of building sewer lines whether located upon the private property of any owner or in the public right-of-way, which construction or maintenance is in violation of any of the requirements of this division, shall be corrected, at the owner's expense, within 30 days after date of official notice from the council of such violation. If not made within such time the council shall, in addition to the other penalties herein provided, have the right to finish and correct the work and assess the cost thereof to the property owner. Such assessment shall be collected with and in the same manner as general property taxes. 
(Code 1996, § 96.10) 
Secs. 48-188-48-212. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS 

Sec. 48-213. - Stormwater. 
    No person or entity shall discharge or cause to be discharged any stormwater, surface water, groundwater, roof run-off, sub-surface drainage, such as a flowing well, sump-pumped water from an inside or outside drain, footing tile, uncontaminated cooling water, or unpolluted industrial process water by way of a drain or surface runoff, directly or indirectly, to any sanitary sewer. Such waters shall be discharged to sewers that are specifically designated as storm sewers, or to a natural outlet approved by the city. Any discharge tile or lines that are connected to a storm sewer shall include a check valve. 
(Code 1996, § 97.01) 
Sec. 48-214. - Compliance regarding water discharge. 
    The drainage systems of many tracts of real property within the city have caused stormwater and other water to be discharged into the public sanitary sewers. This often results in an overload of the city's sanitary sewer disposal system, which causes flooding of residential basements, sanitary sewage being discharged into local streams without being fully treated, substantially reducing the capacity of the waste water facilities, and the additional wear and tear that is placed on the city's wastewater treatment plant. 
(1)  Mandatory compliance for sump pump. 
a.  Duty to inspect. The owner of real property shall have the duty to inspect and test each and every tract of real property connected to the city's waste water facilities, except for mobile homes, located within the city and to determine whether the property complies with the sump pump, down spout and surface drainage provisions of this division. Inspections shall be certified by an inspector approved by the city for such purposes. 
b.  Responsibility of owners. It shall be the responsibility of the owner of a tract of real property located within the city and connected to the city's waste water plant to disconnect and remove from the city's sanitary sewer system all water drainage from the property by means of sump pumps, downspouts, surface drainage or hoses by June 1, 2012. It shall further be the responsibility of the owner to schedule an inspection of their property with the city or its designated contractor prior to June 1, 2012. 
c.  Certificate of compliance. If the tract of real property complies with the provisions of this division as determined by the city or its designated contractor, the owner shall receive from the approved inspector a certificate of compliance, which shall be provided to the city. The city reserves the right to reinspect any property believed to be out of compliance once a certificate has been provided to the city. Failure to allow the city to reinspect the property shall result in the costs under subsection (1)e2 of this section to be assessed. 
d.  Cost. The cost of inspecting and testing shall be established by resolution of the city council. Costs shall be paid by the owner of the property at the time of inspection. Owners determined not to have sump pumps during the inspection may request reimbursement of inspection costs from the city upon delivery of the certificate of inspection to the city. All costs of compliance are also the responsibility of the owner of the property. 
e.  Failure of compliance. 
1.  Failure on the part of the owner, tenant, or other person in possession of a tract of real property to allow the city or its designated contractor to inspect and test for compliance of this division will be considered in non-compliance after June 1, 2012. 
2.  Failure to comply with sections 48-213 and 48-214 by June 1, 2012, shall result in an increase in the monthly utility bill for that real estate. Such increase shall continue until compliance is achieved. The amount of the increase shall be $100.00 per month. 
3.  The city may also consider taking legal action against a property owner who has failed to comply with section 48-213 when such failure causes the city to incur expenses or damages resulting from water that is discharged into the sanitary sewer. 
(2)  Notices; property owners. Any notices given to owners of real property in regard to sections 48-213 and 48-214 shall be made in writing and may be delivered in person, posted on the front door, or by ordinary mail to the owner's last-known address. 
(3)  Sale of real property. All sales of real property after June 1, 2012, that are located within the limits of city and are connected to the city's sanitary sewer system, shall be inspected by the city or its designated contractor to determine whether the property complies with section 48-213. 
(4)  If the real property does comply, the city, or designated contractor, shall provide the seller with a verified permit that shows compliance. The cost of inspecting and testing shall be borne by the seller, unless the buyer agrees to pay the cost. If the real property does not comply, it shall be placed into compliance prior to the closing of the sale of the real property, and the city or designated contractor shall re-inspect or retest the discharge of water at that time. The costs associated with any corrections required to consider a property compliant will be paid by the seller, unless the buyer agrees to pay the cost, but shall not be the responsibility of the city. 
(5)  Once the property is found to be in compliance under this section, the city will issue the certificate of compliance. Failure to comply with sections 48-213 and 48-214 shall be dealt with as explained in subsection (1)e of this section, except that the increase in the monthly utility bill for that real property shall begin on the first day of the month after the closing of the sale. 
(6)  In the event that a property is not in compliance with sections 48-213 and 48-214, but if weather/availability of contractor does not permit the improvements to be made prior to the scheduled real estate closing, the following requirements shall be complied with before a certificate will be issued: 
a.  The city receives a copy of the failed inspection checklist (signed and dated) noting the items of non-compliance. 
b.  The seller shall submit to the city, a formal, written proposal from the contractor hired to complete the work to bring the property into compliance. This proposal will include a time frame in which the work will be completed, but shall not be longer than six months from the date of the non-compliance notice. 
c.  The seller and buyer agree to hold 125 percent of the amount of money set forth in the written proposal in escrow until the work is completed. With proof from the closing agent that sufficient funds have been escrowed, the transaction can close and a certificate of compliance will be issued. 
d.  The city receives a copy of a signed agreement between the contractor and the party taking responsibility for paying for the corrective work. 
e.  The city receives a written explanation of the work to be performed that will easily identify the proposed work to be done in order to bring the property into compliance. 
(7)  The city, or designated contractors, shall re-inspect or retest the discharge of water at its earliest convenience after the work is completed. The cost for this re-inspection shall be borne by the seller, unless the buyer agrees to pay the cost. If the property is found to be non-compliant after such a date, the new property owner will be subject to the penalty provisions in this division. 
(8)  Once a property has passed this inspection, the next time it changes ownership, the property shall either be reinspected for compliance, or the seller shall provide to the buyer a certification that the property is in compliance. 
(Code 1996, § 97.02) 
Sec. 48-215. - Prohibited discharges. 
    No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the following described waters or wastes to any public sewers: 
(1)  Flammable or explosive material. Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil, or other flammable or explosive liquid, solid, or gas. 
(2)  Toxic or poisonous materials. Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids or gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, create a public nuisance, or create any hazard in the receiving waters of the sewage treatment plant, including, but not limited to, cyanides in excess of two milligrams per liter as CN in the wastes as discharged to the public sewer. 
(3)  Corrosive wastes. Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.5 or having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment, and personnel of the sewage works. 
(4)  Solid or viscous substances. Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of such size capable of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers, or other interference with the proper operation of the sewage works such as, but not limited to, ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood, unground garbage, whole blood, paunch manure, hair and fleshings, entrails and paper dishes, cups, milk containers, etc., either whole or ground by garbage grinders. 
(5)  Excessive BOD, solids or flow. 
a.  Any waters or wastes having: 
1.  A five-day biochemical oxygen demand greater than 300 parts per million by weight; 
2.  Containing more than 350 parts per million by weight of suspended solids; or 
3.  Having an average daily flow greater than two percent of the average sewage flow of the city, shall be subject to the review of the superintendent. 
b.  Where necessary in the opinion of the superintendent, the owner shall provide, at the owner's expense, such preliminary treatment as may be necessary to: 
1.  Reduce the biochemical oxygen demand to 300 parts per million by weight; 
2.  Reduce the suspended solids to 350 parts per million by weight; or 
3.  Control the quantities and rates of discharge of such waters or wastes. 
c.  Plans, specifications, and any other pertinent information relating to proposed preliminary treatment facilities shall be submitted for the approval of the superintendent and no construction of such facilities shall be commenced until the approvals are obtained in writing. 
(Code 1996, § 97.03) 
Sec. 48-216. - Restricted discharges. 
    No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged the following described substances, materials, waters, or wastes if it appears likely in the opinion of the superintendent that such wastes can harm either the sewers, sewage treatment process, or equipment, have an adverse effect on the receiving stream or can otherwise endanger life, limb, public property, or constitute a nuisance. In forming an opinion as to the acceptability of these wastes, the superintendent will give consideration to such factors as the quantities of subject wastes in relation to flows and velocities in the sewers, materials of construction of the sewers, nature of the sewage treatment process, capacity of the sewage treatment plant, degree of treatability of wastes in the sewage treatment plant, and other pertinent factors. The substances restricted are: 
(1)  High temperature. Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than 150 degrees Fahrenheit (65 degrees Celsius). 
(2)  Fat, oil, grease. Any water or waste containing fats, wax, grease or oils, whether emulsified or not, in excess of 100 milligrams per liter or 600 milligrams per liter of dispersed or other soluble matter. 
(3)  Viscous substances. Water or wastes containing substances that may solidify or become viscous at temperatures between 32 degrees Fahrenheit and 150 degrees Fahrenheit (zero degrees to 65 degrees Celsius). 
(4)  Garbage. Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. The installation and operation of any garbage grinder equipped with a motor of three-fourths (3/4) horsepower (0.76 hp metric) or greater shall be subject to the review and approval of the superintendent. 
(5)  Acids. Any waters or wastes containing strong acid iron pickling wastes, or concentrated plating solution whether neutralized or not. 
(6)  Toxic or objectionable wastes. Any waters or wastes containing iron, chromium, copper, zinc, and similar objectionable or toxic substances; or wastes exerting an excessive chlorine requirement, to such degree that any such material received in the composite sewage at the sewage treatment works exceeds the limits established by the superintendent for such materials. 
(7)  Odor or taste. Any waters or wastes containing phenols or other taste or odor producing substances, in such concentrations exceeding limits that may be established by the superintendent as necessary, after treatment of the composite sewage, to meet the requirements of state, federal, or other public agencies of jurisdiction for such discharge to the receiving waters. 
(8)  Radioactive wastes. Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or concentration as may exceed limits established by the superintendent in compliance with applicable state or federal regulations. 
(9)  Excess alkalinity. Any waters or wastes having a pH in excess of 9.5. 
(10)  Unusual wastes. Materials that exert or cause: 
a.  Unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids (such as, but not limited to, Fuller's earth, lime slurries, and lime residues) or of dissolved solids (such as, but not limited to, sodium chloride and sodium sulfate). 
b.  Excessive discoloration (such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions). 
c.  Unusual BOD, chemical oxygen demand or chlorine requirements in such quantities as to constitute a significant load on the sewage treatment works. 
d.  Unusual volume of flow or concentration of wastes constituting slugs as defined herein. 
(11)  Noxious or malodorous gases. Any noxious or malodorous gas or other substance that, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, is capable of creating a public nuisance or hazard to life or of preventing entry into sewers for their maintenance and repair. 
(12)  Damaging substances. Any waters, wastes, materials, or substances that react with water or wastes in the sewer system to release noxious gases, develop color of undesirable intensity, form suspended solids in objectionable concentration or create any other condition deleterious to structures and treatment processes. 
(13)  Untreatable wastes. Waters or wastes containing substances that are not amenable to treatment or reduction by the sewage treatment processes employed, or are amenable to treatment only to such degree that the sewage treatment plant effluent cannot meet the requirements of other agencies having jurisdiction over discharge to the receiving waters. 
(Code 1996, § 97.04) 
Sec. 48-217. - Restricted discharges; powers. 
    If any waters or wastes are discharged or are proposed to be discharged to the public sewers, which waters contain the substances or possess the characteristics enumerated in section 48-216 and which in the judgment of the superintendent may have a deleterious effect upon the sewage works, processes, equipment, or receiving waters, or which otherwise create a hazard to life or constitute a public nuisance, the superintendent may: 
(1)  Rejection. Reject the wastes by requiring disconnection from the public sewage system; 
(2)  Pretreatment. Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to the public sewers; 
(3)  Controls imposed. Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge; or 
(4)  Special charges. Require payment to cover the added cost of handling and treating the wastes not covered by existing taxes or sewer charges under the provisions of division 5 of this article. 
(Code 1996, § 97.05) 
Sec. 48-218. - Special facilities. 
    If the superintendent permits the pretreatment or equalization of waste flows, the design and installation of the plants and equipment shall be subject to the review and approval of the superintendent and subject to the requirements of all applicable codes, ordinances, and laws. Where preliminary treatment or flow-equalizing facilities are provided for any waters or wastes, they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective operation by the owner at the owner's expense. 
(Code 1996, § 97.06) 
Sec. 48-219. - Control manholes. 
    When required by the superintendent, the owner of any property serviced by a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable control manhole together with such necessary meters and other appurtenances in the building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling, and measurement of the wastes. Such manhole, when required, shall be accessibly and safely located, and shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by the superintendent. The manhole shall be installed by the owner at the owner's expense and shall be maintained by the owner so as to be safe and accessible at all times. 
(Code 1996, § 97.07) 
Sec. 48-220. - Testing of wastes. 
    All measurements, tests, and analyses of the characteristics of waters and wastes to which reference is made in this division shall be determined in accordance with the latest edition of Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater , published by the American Public Health Association, and shall be determined at the control manhole provided, or upon suitable samples taken at the control manhole. In the event that no special manhole has been required, the control manhole shall be considered to be the nearest downstream manhole in the public sewer to the point at which the building sewer is connected. Sampling shall be carried out by customarily accepted methods to reflect the effect of constituents upon the sewage works and to determine the existence of hazards to life, limb, and property. (The particular analyses involved will determine whether a 24-hour composite of all outfalls of a premises is appropriate or whether a grab sample or samples should be taken. Normally, but not always, BOD and suspended solids analyses are obtained from 24-hour composites of all outfalls whereas pHs are determined from periodic grab samples). 
(Code 1996, § 97.08) 
Secs. 48-221-48-248. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - PRIVATE AND SEMI-PUBLIC SEWER SYSTEMS 

Sec. 48-249. - When prohibited. 
    Except as otherwise provided in this division, it is unlawful to construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool or other facility intended or used for the disposal of sewage. 
(Code 1996, § 98.01) 
Sec. 48-250. - When required. 
    Where a public sanitary or combined sewer is not available under the provisions of section 48-150, the building sewer shall be connected to a private or semi-public sewage system complying with the provisions of this division. 
(Code 1996, § 98.02) 
Sec. 48-251. - Compliance with state rules. 
    The type, capacity, location and layout of a private or semi-public sewage disposal system shall comply with all recommendations of the state department of natural resources. 
(Code 1996, § 98.03) 
Sec. 48-252. - Discharge to natural outlets prohibited. 
    No septic tank or cesspool shall be permitted to discharge to any natural outlet. 
(Code 1996, § 98.04) 
Sec. 48-253. - Maintenance of facilities. 
    The owner of private and semi-public sewage disposal facilities shall operate and maintain the facilities in a sanitary manner at all times and at no expense to the city. 
(Code 1996, § 98.05) 
Sec. 48-254. - Additional requirements. 
    No statement contained in this division shall be construed to interfere with any additional requirements that may be imposed by any health officer acting in an official capacity. 
(Code 1996, § 98.06) 
Sec. 48-255. - Private systems abandoned. 
    At such time as a public sewer becomes available to a property served by a private sewage disposal system, as provided in section 48-150, a direct connection shall be made to the public sewer in compliance with these sanitary sewers chapters and any septic tanks, cesspools and similar private sewage disposal facilities shall be abandoned and filled with suitable material. 
(Code 1996, § 98.07) 
Sec. 48-256. - Disposal of waste. 
    It is unlawful for any person to place any effluent or waste from cesspools, septic tanks or privy vaults in any other location in the city except in such location as may be designated by the superintendent. The rate or charge for receiving such waste shall be determined by resolution of the council. 
(Code 1996, § 98.08) 
Sec. 48-257. - Permit required. 
    Before commencing the construction of a private sewage disposal system, the owner shall first obtain a written permit from the building official in accordance with article V of this chapter. 
(Code 1996, § 98.09) 
Sec. 48-258. - Inspection required. 
    A permit for a private sewage disposal system shall not become effective until the installation is completed to the satisfaction of the superintendent. The superintendent shall be allowed to inspect the work at any stage of construction and, in any event, the applicant for the permit shall notify the superintendent when the work is ready for final inspection, which shall be before any underground portions are covered. The inspection shall be made within 24 hours of the receipt of notice by the superintendent. 
(Code 1996, § 98.10) 
Secs. 48-259-48-279. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - SEWER RENTAL AND EXCESS DISCHARGES 

Sec. 48-280. - Rental rates generally. 
(a)  The rates for use of the sanitary sewer including discharge of wastewater to the sanitary sewer system and treatment at the wastewater treatment facility shall be as provided in this division. The effective date shall be the July 2012 billing cycle and remain in full force and effect until such time as amended. The rates may be amended periodically by city council action and adoption by ordinance. 
(b)  For domestic, commercial and industrial users that do not monitor the flow or concentration of constituents in the wastewater discharged to the sanitary sewer system The volume used for billing purposes shall be equal to the volume of water used as measured by the water supply meter, less any metered water consumption such as metered yard water usage or as permitted in section 48-282. 
(c)  For major industrial users that monitor the flow and concentration of constituents discharged to the sanitary sewer system, the water usage as measured by the water supply meter may be used as the basis for industrial user discharge determination with approval of the city planning department. The mass discharge of each constituent shall be calculated by applying the average concentration of the constituent measured during the billing period to the total volume discharged during the billing period. 
CBOD 300 mg/l TSS 350 mg/l TKN 30 mg/l Oil and grease 100 mg/l  
Monthly fixed base cost: Residential customers $18.50 Small commercial users (under 50 units/month) $18.50 Medium commercial users (50 to 199 units/month) $50.00 Large commercial users (200 or more units/month) $200.00 Effective July 1, 2013 Monthly fixed base cost: Residential customers and commercial users under 25 units/month $18.50 Small commercial users (25 to 49 units/month) $25.00 Medium commercial users (50 to 199 units/month) $50.00 Large commercial users (200 or more units/month) $200.00 Effective July 1, 2014 Monthly fixed base cost: Residential customers and commercial users under 25 units/month $20.00 Small commercial users (25 to 49 units/month) $28.00 Medium commercial users (50 to 199 units/month) $55.00 Large commercial users (200 or more units/month) $220.00  
Volume: $3.10 per 100 cubic feet of water usage Effective July 1, 2012: Volume: $3.40 per 100 cubic feet of water usage Effective July 1, 2013: Volume: $3.75 per 100 cubic feet of water usage  
Monthly fixed base cost: $400.00 Effective July 1, 2014: Monthly fixed base cost: $450.00 Volume: $0.48 per 100 cubic feet CBOD: $0.48 per pound of CBOD TSS: $0.22 per pound of TSS TKN: $3.80 per pound of TKN Oil and grease $0.34 per pound of oil and grease Effective July 1, 2012: Volume: $0.53 per 100 cubic feet CBOD: $0.53 per pound of CBOD TSS: $0.25 per pound of TSS TKN: $4.20 per pound of TKN Oil and grease $0.38 per pound of oil and grease Effective July 1, 2013: Volume: $0.58 per 100 cubic feet CBOD: $0.58 per pound of CBOD TSS: $0.27 per pound of TSS TKN: $4.60 per pound of TKN Oil and grease $0.42 per pound of oil and grease  
(Code 1996, § 99.02) 
Sec. 48-281. - Penalty for excess discharges. 
(a)  An industrial user contributing wastewater to the city sanitary sewer in excess of the limitations contained within its wastewater discharge agreement or any user for violation of other discharge limitation established by city ordinance shall be assessed a penalty charge, based on the schedule below, which shall be in addition to the rates and charges ordinarily billed to such user for sewer rental: 
(1)  $2.50 per 1,000 gallons for flow in excess of a 30-day average discharge limit. 
(2)  $2.50 per 1,000 gallons for flow in excess of a daily maximum discharge limit. 
(3)  $0.50 per pound of CBOD in excess of a 30-day average discharge limit. 
(4)  $0.50 per pound of CBOD in excess of a daily maximum discharge limit. 
(5)  $0.50 per pound of TSS in excess of a 30-day average discharge limit. 
(6)  $0.50 per pound of TSS in excess of a daily maximum discharge limit. 
(7)  $1.00 per pound of TKN in excess of a 30-day average discharge limit. 
(8)  $1.00 per pound of TKN in excess of a daily maximum discharge limit. 
(9)  $250.00 per occurrence for oil and grease discharge in excess of a daily maximum discharge limit based upon data from a compliance sampling event. 
(10)  $750.00 per occurrence for oil and grease discharge in excess of a 30-day average discharge limit. 
(11)  $250.00 per occurrence for discharges with a pH in violation of a discharge limit. 
(b)  Example of penalty for 30 day average violation: 
(1)  If 30-day average limit was exceeded for CBOD by 25 lbs/day, then the penalty for the month could be calculated as follows: 
(2)  Penalty = 25 lbs/day x $0.50/lb x 30 days = $375.00. 
(c)  Example of penalty for daily maximum violations: 
(1)  If maximum daily limits were exceeded for CBOD by 325 lbs/day on day five of the month and TKN maximum daily limits were exceeded by 55 lbs/day on day 23 of the month, then the penalty for the month could be calculated as follows: 
(2)  Penalty = (325 lbs x $0.50/lb) + (55 lbs x $1.00/lb) = $217.50. 
(Code 1996, § 99.02.01; Ord. No. 2018-1817, § 1, 10-1-2018) 
Sec. 48-282. - Special rates. 
    Where, in the judgment of the superintendent and the council, special conditions exist to the extent that the application of the sewer rental provided in section 48-280 would be inequitable or unfair to either the city or the customer, a special rate shall be proposed by the superintendent and submitted to the council for approval by resolution. 
(Code 1996, § 99.03) 
Sec. 48-283. - Private water systems. 
    Customers whose premises are served by a private water system shall pay sewer rentals based upon the water used as determined by the superintendent either by an estimate agreed to by the customer or by metering the water system at the customer's expense. Any negotiated or agreed upon sales or rentals shall be subject to approval of the council. 
(Code 1996, § 99.04) 
Sec. 48-284. - Payment of bills. 
    All sewer rentals shall be due and payable under the same terms and conditions as payment for water service. The provision of section 48-285 shall be used to enforce collection of delinquent sewer charge. 
(Code 1996, § 99.05) 
Sec. 48-285. - Lien for nonpayment. 
    Sewer rental charges remaining unpaid and delinquent shall constitute a lien upon the premises served and shall be certified by the clerk to the county treasurer for collection in the same manner as property taxes. 
(Code 1996, § 99.06) 
Sec. 48-286. - Special agreements permitted. 
    No statement in this division shall be construed as preventing a special agreement, arrangement or contract between the council and any industrial concern whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or character may be accepted subject to special conditions, rate and cost as established by the council. 
(Code 1996, § 99.07) 
Sec. 48-287. - Lien notice. 
    A lien for delinquent sewer service charges shall not be certified to the county treasurer unless prior written notice of intent to certify a lien is given to the customer. If the customer is a tenant and if the owner or landlord of the property has made a written request for notice, the notice shall also be given to the owner or landlord. The notice shall be sent to the appropriate persons by ordinary mail not less than 30 days prior to certification of the lien to the county treasurer. 
(Code 1996, § 99.08) 
Sec. 48-288. - Payment of increased costs. 
    Any user which discharges any toxic pollutants which cause an increase in the cost of managing the effluent or the sludge from the city's treatment works or any user which discharges any substance which singly or by interaction with other substances caused identifiable increases in the cost of operation, maintenance or replacement of the treatment works shall pay for such increased costs. The charge to each such user shall be as determined by the responsible plant operating personnel and approved by the city manager. 
(Code 1996, § 99.09; Ord. No. 2018-1817, § 2, 10-1-2018) 
Secs. 48-289-48-307. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - CONNECTIONS AND CONNECTION CHARGES 

Sec. 48-308. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this division is to provide procedures for reimbursing the city for the costs of the construction of facilities for the collection and treatment of sanitary sewage which is of special benefit to the property served thereby. 
(Code 1996, § 100.01) 
Sec. 48-309. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Interceptor sewer means a sewer that receives dry-weather flow from a number of transverse sewers or outlets, and conducts such waters to a point for treatment or disposal. 
    Lateral sewer means a sewer that discharges into a branch or other sewer and has no other common sewer tributary to it. 
    Plumbing inspector means a plumbing inspector of the city. 
    Sub-main sewer means a sewer into which the wastewater from two or more lateral sewers is discharged and which subsequently discharges into a main, a trunk, or other collector. 
    Trunk sewer means the principal sewer to which branch sewers and sub-mains are tributary. 
(Code 1996, § 100.02) 
Sec. 48-310. - Application and approval required. 
    No connection to any part of the interceptor or trunk sewer system described in this division shall be made without making application for the connection, obtaining approval from the city engineer to make the connection and making payment of the connection fee required in this division. 
(Code 1996, § 100.03) 
Sec. 48-311. - Connection charge. 
    The connection fee as required above shall be $330.00 per acre or part thereof of land to be served by the connection. 
(Code 1996, § 100.04) 
Sec. 48-312. - Computing area. 
    In computing the acreage to be served by the connection; any street, parks or open spaces in the area to be served shall be included. 
(Code 1996, § 100.05) 
Sec. 48-313. - Applicability. 
    Any connection to a sub-main, lateral or collection system that will result in a contribution of sewage to the interceptor or trunk sewer line as defined herein shall be subject to the connection fee set forth in section 48-311. 
(Code 1996, § 100.06) 
Sec. 48-314. - Plans approved; lines over eight inches. 
    All plans and specifications for proposed connections shall be submitted to the city engineer and the engineer's approval obtained prior to start of construction. 
(Code 1996, § 100.07) 
Sec. 48-315. - Description of lines covered. 
    The interceptor or trunk sewer lines as referred to in this section are those sewers following the described centerline as follows: 
(1)  Brewer Creek interceptor extension. The Brewer Creek interceptor extension centerline is described as follows: 
Commencing at the northwest corner of section 12, Township 88 north, Range 26 west of the 5th P.M., thence south along the west line of the section 12 for a distance of 530 feet to the point of beginning; thence with an angle to the left of 90° for a distance of 270 feet thence with an angle to the left of approximately 16° for a distance of approximately 1,106 feet to the existing manhole; and from the above described point of beginning with an angle to the right of 90° for a distance of 160 feet; thence with an angle to the right of 39° for a distance of 200 feet; thence with an angle to the right of 20° for a distance of 210 feet; thence with an angle to the right of 34° for a distance of approximately 230 feet to a point on the north line of section 11, Township 88 north, Range 26 west of the 5th P.M., the point being approximately 420 feet west of the northeast corner of the section 11; thence continuing north along last described line for a distance of 35 feet; thence with an angle to the left of 20° for a distance of 360 feet; thence with an angle to the left of 19° for a distance of 340 feet; thence with an angle to the left of 50° for a distance of 340 feet; thence with an angle to the right of 83° to a point on a line 103.25 rods south of the north line of the southeast quarter of section 12, Township 88 north, Range 26 west of the 5th P.M.; thence north along last described line to a point on a line approximately 350 feet south of the north line of the south half of the southeast quarter of the section 2. 
(2)  Southwest sub-main. The southwest sub-main centerline is described as follows: 
Commencing at a point on the east line of the northwest quarter, section 12, Township 88 north, Range 26 west of the 5th P.M., the point being 125 feet south of the southwest corner of Lot 117, 5th Subdivision of Southfield Heights Addition to Webster City, Iowa, thence west along the centerline of Fair Meadow Drive projected west for a distance of 755 feet to a point of beginning, thence west along last described line for a distance of 90 feet, thence with an angle to the right of 72° 34' for a distance of 323 feet, thence with an angle to the left of 5° 07' for a distance of 360 feet, thence with an angle to the left of 12° for a distance of 400 feet, thence with an angle to the right of 23° for a distance of 310 feet, thence with an angle to the right of 6° for a distance of 140 feet, thence with an angle to the right of 60° for a distance of 250 feet, and also from the above described point of beginning with an angle to the left of 90° to the south line of the north half of the southeast quarter of the northwest quarter of the section 12, thence south along last described line for a distance of 140 feet, thence with an angle to the left of 90° to the east line of the northwest quarter of the section 12, all in Hamilton County, Iowa. 
(3)  Southeast interceptor. The southeast interceptor centerline is described as follows: 
Commencing at a point 1612.6 feet east and 146.0 feet south of the center of section 7, Township 88 north, Range 25 west of the 5th P.M., Hamilton County, Iowa; thence north 00° 30' east for 462 feet; thence north 02° 15' east for 438 feet; thence north 32° 45' west for approximately 325 feet to the north line of Town and Country Subdivision to Webster City, Iowa; thence northwesterly along the CNW Railway right-of-way to the municipal sewage treatment plant. 
(4)  South central sub-main. The south central sub-main centerline is described as follows: 
Commencing at a point on the south line of Fair Meadow Drive that is 608 feet east of the northeast corner of Lot 6, Alexander's Fifth Addition to city; thence north 560 feet; thence west 135 feet; thence north approximately 385 feet to an existing manhole; also from the above described point of beginning east across relocated Iowa Highway 17 for 415 feet. 
(Code 1996, § 100.08) 
Sec. 48-316. - Abatement of violations. 
    Any person found to be violating any provision of this division shall be served by the city with written notice stating the nature of the violation and providing a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory correction thereof. The offender shall, within the period of time stated in such notice, permanently cease all violations. 
(Code 1996, § 100.09) 
Sec. 48-317. - Violation continued. 
    Any person who shall continue any violation beyond the time limit provided for in section 48-316 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and on conviction thereof shall be fined in the amount not exceeding $100.00 for each violation. Each day in which any such violation shall continue shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(Code 1996, § 100.10) 
Sec. 48-318. - Liability for costs. 
    Any person violating any of the provisions of this division shall become liable to the city for any expense, loss, or damage occasioned the city by reason of such violation. 
(Code 1996, § 100.11) 
Sec. 48-319. - Front foot charge. 
    The property lying within the district described in this section shall pay a front foot charge of $10.75 per front foot of property served by the ten-inch sanitary sewer that has been installed within the Closz Drive right-of-way from Superior Street (Iowa Highway 17) to S. Edgewood Drive (formerly Iowa Highway 17). The council reserves the right to waive the front foot charge for any parcel of land described in this section. Should any parcel of property described in this section be transferred and developed through involvement of the city Development Corporation, the front foot charge will be waived. The front foot charge district is described as follows: 
(1)  A tract of land in the southwest quarter of section 7, Township 88 north, Range 25 west of the 5th P.M., in Hamilton County, Iowa, more particularly described as follows: 
(2)  Commencing at the northwest corner of the southwest quarter of the southwest quarter of the section 7; thence north 90 degrees 00 minutes east 685.24 feet along the north line of the south half of the southwest quarter of the section 7 to the point of beginning; thence south 00 degrees 00 minutes 00 seconds west 40 feet; thence continuing south 00 degrees 00 minutes 00 seconds west 252.04 feet; thence south 90 degrees 00 minutes 00 seconds east 138.45 feet; thence south 00 degrees 00 minutes 00 seconds west 150 feet; thence north 90 degrees 00 minutes 00 seconds east 1,300 feet; thence north 00 degrees 00 minutes 00 seconds east 880 feet; thence north 90 degrees 00 minutes 00 seconds west to a point on the east right-of-way line of Iowa Highway 17, thence south along the east right-of-way line to the south right-of-way line of Closz Drive; thence east along the south right-of-way line to Closz Drive, the line being the north line of the south half of the southwest quarter of the section 7, to the point of beginning. 
(Code 1996, §§ 100.12, 100.13) 
Sec. 48-320. - Charge per acre. 
    Any property utilizing the lift station identified in the charge per acre district, shall pay a charge of $5,000.00 per acre. The charge per acre district is described as that area connecting or utilizing the lift station located near Marvel Street as shown in the approximate location on attachment "A" except those parcels delineated on attachment "A." Attachment "A" is on file in the office of the clerk. 
(Code 1996, §§ 100.14, 100.15) 
Secs. 48-321-48-343. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 7. - INDUSTRIAL SEWER USER COMPLIANCE ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 48-321. - Definitions. 
    This division hereby adopts and incorporates all definitions found in division 1 through division 5, except to the extent the following additional terms are defined. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    CBOD means carbonaceous five-day biochemical oxygen demand as measured by the test method set forth in the latest edition of Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater. 
    FOG and Oil Grease mean fats, oil, and grease as set forth in EPA Method 1664, Revision A (n-hexane extractable material). 
    IDNR refers to the Iowa Department of Natural Resources. 
    Industrial user means an individual, partnership, business, corporation or entity who contributes wastewater in an amount or strength of which is greater than normal domestic sewage. 
    NPDES means National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System. 
    Pass through means the movement of an environmental pollutant that is not affected by the treatment technologies in place at the POTW which would cause the city to be in violation of its NPDES discharge permit. 
    POTW means publicly owned treatment works. 
    TKN means total Kjeldahl nitrogen as measured by the test method set forth in the latest edition of Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater. 
    TSS means total suspended solids as measured by the test method set forth on the latest edition of Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater. 
(Code 1996, § 101.01; Ord. No. 2019-1823, § 1, 4-1-2019) 
Sec. 48-322. - Applicability. 
    This division applies to any industrial user which discharges wastewater into the city's sewer system under the compliance criteria of an IDNR NPDES permit or a city wastewater treatment agreement (DNR Form 31) or an agreement for wastewater services. 
(Code 1996, § 101.02; Ord. No. 2019-1823, § 1, 4-1-2019) 
Sec. 48-323. - Publication of users in noncompliance. 
    The city manager may publish one time annually, in the largest local daily newspaper, the names of industrial users found by the city, in accordance with this chapter, to be in significant noncompliance. The term "significant noncompliance" means: 
(1)  Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined herein as those in which 66 percent or more of wastewater measurements obtained from representative samples collected at the permitted discharge point in accordance with accepted sampling protocols during a six-month period exceed, by an amount greater than the range of error of the measurement technique, the daily maximum limit for the same pollutant parameter; 
(2)  Technical review criteria (TRC) violations, defined herein as those in which 33 percent or more of wastewater measurements obtained from representative samples collected at the permitted discharge point, in accordance with accepted sampling protocols, for each pollutant parameter during a six-month period equals or exceeds the product of the daily maximum limit multiplied by the applicable criteria (1.4 for CBOD, TSS, FOG, and 1.2 for all other pollutants other than pH); 
(3)  Any other discharge violations that the city can document, based on recognized scientific methodology, which caused (alone or in combination with other discharges) major interference for the POTW or pass through, including endangering the health of POTW personnel or the general public; 
(4)  Any discharge of a pollutant that has caused endangerment to the public or to the environment and has resulted in the city's exercise of its emergency authority to halt or prevent such a discharge; 
(5)  Failure to meet, within 90 days of the scheduled date, a compliance schedule milestone contained in a wastewater discharge permit or enforcement order for starting construction, completing construction or attaining final compliance, unless such noncompliance has been waived by the city or the city has interfered in the industrial user's ability to comply; 
(6)  Failure to provide, within 60 days after the due date required by the city, any required reports, including baseline monitoring reports, reports on compliance with categorical pretreatment standard deadlines, periodic self-monitoring reports, and reports on compliance with compliance schedules. 
(Code 1996, § 101.03; Ord. No. 2019-1823, § 1, 4-1-2019) 
Sec. 48-324. - Administrative enforcement remedies. 
(a)  Notices of violation. If the city manager finds based on scientifically reliable data that any industrial user has violated or is violating a wastewater treatment agreement in a material way, the city manager may issue a notice of violation, and such notice shall be served in person on the managing officer of the industrial user or by certified mail on such person with return receipt received. The notice of violation must specify the parameters violated, the date and time of the violation, the data upon which the city relies in finding such violation, and the manner in which such data was collected. 
(b)  Consent agreements. The city manager may enter into consent agreements, consent orders, assurances of voluntary compliance, or other similar documents ("consent agreement") establishing an agreement with any industrial user responsible for any such noncompliance as to which notice is given in a notice of violation. Such agreements shall specify the actions to be taken by the industrial user and the time frame for completion of those actions outlined in the consent agreement. In the event a consent agreement is not entered into within 60 days of the service of notice of violation, the city manager may seek a compliance order in accordance with subsection (c) of this section. 
(c)  Compliance orders. In the event a consent agreement is not entered into, or the industrial user fails to comply with the terms of a consent agreement, the city manager may request the city council to approve the issuance of a compliance order to the industrial user responsible for the discharge, directing that the industrial user submit a plan of action which will include a schedule for the industrial user to come into compliance. The industrial user shall be notified in writing of any such request at least seven days prior to the council's consideration of the request by personal service on the managing officer or by certified mail on such person with return receipt requested. The notice shall include the time, date, and location of the meeting at which the request will be considered, the proposed compliance order being requested and the basis therefor, including all data. The industrial user shall have the opportunity to present information and argument at such meeting. In the event a compliance order is issued in the form approved by the council, and the industrial user does not submit an acceptable plan of action or come into compliance within the agreed upon schedule, the city manager may seek a cease and desist order pursuant to subsections (d) and (f) of this section, or request the issuance of a municipal infraction citation pursuant to subsection (f) of this section. 
(d)  Cease and desist orders. The city manager may request that the city council approve a cease and desist order per the criteria set forth in subsection (c) of this section, directing the industrial user to cease its failure to comply with a compliance order or desist unlawful discharging of industrial waste to the city's sewer system. Such order shall not be issued until such time as a show cause hearing has been held as set out below in subsection (e) of this section. 
(e)  Show cause hearings. The city manager may order any industrial user that fails to comply with a compliance order to appear before the city council and show cause why a cease and desist order should not be issued. Notice shall be served on the industrial user specifying the time and place for the meeting, the proposed order, the basis for such action including all data, and a request that the industrial user show cause why this proposed order should not be issued. Such written notice must be served personally at least 14 days prior to the hearing on the managing officer of the industrial user or by certified mail on such person with return receipt received. The industrial user shall have the opportunity to present information and argument at such hearing. Whether or not the industrial user appears as ordered, immediate enforcement action in the form of a cease and desist order may be issued by the city council following the hearing date. The industrial user may also request a hearing before the city council to show cause why a proposed cease and desist order should not be issued, and the city council shall notify the city manager and industrial user of any such hearing in the manner set out in this section. 
(f)  Municipal infractions. In the event an industrial user fails to comply with the terms and conditions of a compliance order within the specified period of time, the city manager may request the city council to authorize the issuance of a civil citation for a municipal infraction for an environmental violation. The industrial user shall be notified in writing of any such request at least 14 days prior to the council consideration of the request, by personal service on its managing officer or by certified mail on such person with return receipt requested, and such notice shall include the time, date, and location of the meeting at which the request will be considered, the reasons for such action, the proposed action being requested and the basis therefor including supporting data. The industrial user shall have the opportunity to present information and argument at the meeting. In the event the city council grants the request, which decision must be in writing, the city manager may issue the citation in accordance with section 1-17. 
(g)  Administrative penalty charges. An industrial user contributing wastewater to the POTW in excess of the limitations contained within its wastewater discharge agreement may be assessed a penalty charge, based on the schedule and methods of calculating penalties in 01section 48-281, which shall be in addition to the rates and charges ordinarily billed to such users for sewer use. Unpaid penalty charges shall, after 60 calendar days, be assessed an additional penalty of ten percent for the unpaid balance, and interest shall accrue thereafter at a rate of one percent per month, compounded monthly. Industrial users desiring to dispute such penalty charges must file written request with the city manager to reconsider the penalty charges along with full payment within 30 days of being notified of the penalty charges. The city manager shall convene a hearing before the city council on the matter within 30 days of receiving the request from the industrial user, with notice to be given in writing at least seven days in advance of the hearing in the same manner as provided for in subsection (a) of this section. The industrial user may present information and argument at such hearing. The city council shall issue its decision on any such request within 20 days of such hearing. In the event the industrial user's request results in a full or partial refund, the refund, together with any interest accruing thereto, shall be returned to the industrial user within ten days of the city council's decision. An industrial user which is denied, in whole or in part, the relief sought in any such request for reconsideration may seek further and additional relief through any and all other remedies available under applicable law. Issuance of an administrative penalty charge shall not be a prerequisite for the city taking any other action against the industrial user; however, if the city elects to impose administrative penalty charges, it cannot also cause a citation for municipal infraction to be issued for the same alleged violations of the industrial user's wastewater treatment agreement. All penalty charges collected under the guidelines of this division shall be directed to the operating budget of the city's wastewater treatment plant. 
(h)  Emergency service suspensions. 
(1)  The city manager may immediately suspend an industrial user's sewer service at a particular discharge point (after notice to the industrial user's managing officer) when such a suspension: 
a.  Is necessary in order to stop an actual or threatened discharge which, based on data collected in accordance with recognized scientific methodology, presents or causes an imminent substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of the general public or to the environment; or 
b.  When the discharge threatens to cause undue, substantial, irreversible damage to the equipment within the city's POTW or harm to its personnel. 
(2)  Any industrial user notified of a suspension shall immediately stop or eliminate its contribution to the sewer system at that discharge point. In the event of an industrial user's failure to immediately comply with the suspension order, the city manager shall take such steps as deemed necessary including immediate severance of the designated sewer connection, to prevent or minimize damage to the POTW, its receiving stream, or endangerment to any individuals or the environment. The city manager shall allow the industrial user to recommence its discharge when industrial user has demonstrated to the city manager that the period of endangerment has passed. The city manager must accept or deny the request of the industrial user to recommence its discharge within 48 hours of such a request, not accounting for non-working days or holidays. If the city manager refuses the industrial user's request to recommence discharge, a hearing must be held within 48 hours of that refusal before the city council, not accounting for non-working days or holidays, with notice to be given immediately in the same manner as provided in subsection (a) of this section, at which time the city manager must show cause why suspension must be continued and the industrial user shall have the opportunity to present information and argument. The city council shall issue its decision on the request to lift the suspension at that hearing, stating the basis therefor. In the event the industrial user's request is granted, the city manager shall immediately allow the discharge to recommence. In the event the industrial user's request is denied, the industrial user may seek further and additional relief through any and all other remedies available under applicable law. 
(3)  An industrial user that is responsible, in whole or in part, for any discharge which results in the emergency suspension of its sewer service at a particular discharge point shall submit to the city manager a detailed written statement describing the causes of the harmful condition and the measures taken to prevent any future occurrence prior to any show cause or termination hearing provided for under other sections of this division. 
(4)  Nothing in this section shall be interpreted to require a hearing prior to any emergency suspension under this section. 
(i)  Terminations of industrial waste discharge. In addition to the circumstances upon which the city may suspend sewer service under subsection (h) of this section, any industrial user which commits the violations set forth below may be subject to termination of its wastewater treatment agreement: 
(1)  Violation of a cease and desist order; 
(2)  Refusal of reasonable access to the industrial user's premises for the purpose of inspection, monitoring, or sampling; 
(3)  Falsifying self-monitoring reports; or 
(4)  Failure to pay fees, sewer user charges, or administrative penalty charges within 60 days of written notice of same. 
(j)  Procedures for termination of industrial waste discharge. The city may terminate an industrial user's wastewater treatment agreement pursuant to subsection (i) of this section based on the following procedures: 
(1)  The city shall issue a written notice to the industrial user a minimum of 20 days prior to the date set for a hearing before the city council. Such notice shall notify the industrial user of the time, date, and place of hearing, the purpose for the hearing, the proposed action, and the basis for such proposed action including the information upon which the city relies in proposing such action. Such written notice shall be served in the same manner as provided for in subsection (a) of this section. 
(2)  If after such hearing, the city council makes a finding in writing based on substantial evidence that actions subject to the termination of industrial waste discharge under subsection (i) of this section have occurred as alleged and are not remedied as of the time of such hearing or to be remedied within a reasonable period thereafter, the city council may direct the city manager to terminate the industrial user's wastewater treatment agreement subject to the requirements set forth below. The city council shall set out its decision and the basis therefor in writing. 
(3)  Written notice of the city council's decision shall be served on the managing officer of the industrial user by registered mail, return receipt requested, or by personal service. If termination is ordered, the effective date of such termination can be no sooner than 45 days after the date of receipt of the notice by the industrial user. At any time, the industrial user may challenge that decision through any and all remedies available to it under applicable law. 
(4)  In the event of termination of the industrial user's wastewater treatment agreement, the agreement shall be reinstated once the industrial user has provided information to the city manager that the user has remedied the circumstances which resulted in the city's decision to terminate. The city manager must accept or deny the request within 48 hours, not accounting for non-working days or holidays. If the city manager refuses to reinstate, a hearing must be held within 48 hours of that refusal before the city council, not accounting for non-working days or holidays, at which time the city manager must show cause why termination must be continued. The procedures shall be in accordance with those set out in subsection (h)(2) of this section to the extent applicable. 
(Code 1996, § 101.04; Ord. No. 2019-1823, § 1, 4-1-2019) 
Sec. 48-325. - Other remedies. 
    In addition to other remedies provided for in division 5, including, but not limited to, those provided in section 48-288, an industrial user may be charged by the city for all or part of any administrative penalty or fine imposed on the city by a state or federal agency for violations of the city's obligations, but only to the extent the city proves based on scientifically reliable data that the city's violation was caused by the industrial user's unlawful discharges. The remedies provided in this division shall not be exclusive, and the city may pursue other remedies, as are authorized by applicable law, against any persons violating the provisions in this chapter, including injunctive relief. 
(Code 1996, § 101.05; Ord. No. 2019-1823, § 1, 4-1-2019) 
Sec. 48-326. - Affirmative defenses to discharge violations. 
    In addition to any and all other defenses that an industrial user may have to any action undertaken pursuant to this division, an industrial user may assert the following affirmative defenses. Proof of any such affirmative defense shall be a bar against any and all action by the city pursuant to this division. 
(1)  Upset. For the purpose of this section, the term "upset" means an exceptional incident in which there is unintentional and temporary noncompliance with discharge limits because of factors beyond the reasonable control of the industrial user. An upset does not include noncompliance to the extent caused by operational error, lack of preventative maintenance, or careless or improper operation. An upset shall constitute an affirmative defense if the following requirements are met: 
a.  An upset occurred and the industrial user has reasonably identified the causes of the upset; 
b.  The industrial user's facility was at the time being operated in a prudent and workman-like manner and in compliance with applicable operation and maintenance procedures; and 
c.  The industrial user submitted the following information to the city manager as soon as possible following the upset: 
1.  A description of the upset and reasonable cause of noncompliance; 
2.  The period of noncompliance, including dates and times; 
3.  Steps being taken and/or planned to reduce, eliminate, and prevent recurrence of the noncompliance. 
(2)  Prohibited discharge standards. An industrial user shall have an affirmative defense to any action brought against it pursuant to this division if it can prove that it did not know or have reason to know, that its discharge, alone or in conjunction with discharges from other sources, would cause major interference with the city's POTW. 
(3)  Bypass. For the purpose of this section, the term"bypass" means the intentional diversion of waste streams from any portion of an industrial user's treatment system; and the term "severe property damage" means substantial physical damage to property, damage to the treatment facility which causes it to become inoperable, or substantial and permanent loss of natural resources, which can reasonably be expected to occur in the absence of the bypass. Bypass is an affirmative defense to actions under this chapter only in the following limited circumstances: 
a.  Bypass was unavoidable to prevent loss of life, personal injury, or severe property damage; 
b.  There were no feasible alternatives to bypass; and 
c.  Catastrophic failure of primary equipment and backup systems occurred due to unforeseen causes or natural disasters; or 
d.  Upon prior written notice to the superintendent, bypass occurs for the purpose of essential maintenance to ensure efficient operation of treatment equipment. 
(Code 1996, § 101.06; Ord. No. 2019-1823, § 1, 4-1-2019) 
Secs. 48-327-48-343. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - WIND ENERGY CONVERSION SYSTEMS 

Sec. 48-344. - Intent. 
    The intent of this article is to balance the need for clean, renewable energy resources and the necessity to protect the public health, safety and welfare of the community. The city finds these regulations are necessary to ensure that small wind energy conversion systems are appropriately designed, sited and installed. 
(Code 1996, § 133.01) 
Sec. 48-345. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Commercial wind energy conversion system means a wind energy conversion system which is intended to produce electricity for sale to a rate regulated or nonregulated utility or for use off-site. 
    Height, total system, means the height above grade of the system, including the generating unit and the highest vertical extension of any blades or rotors. 
    Off-grid means an electrical system that is not connected to utility distribution and transmission facilities or to any building or structure that is connected. 
    Shadow flicker means changing light intensity caused by sunlight through the moving blades of a wind energy conversion system. 
    Small wind energy conversion system (SWECS) means a wind energy conversion system which has a nameplate rated capacity of up to 15 kilowatts for residential uses and districts and up to 100 kilowatts for commercial and industrial districts and which is incidental and subordinate to a principal use on the same parcel. A system is considered a SWECS only if it supplies electrical power solely for use by the owner on the site, except that when a parcel on which the system is installed also receives electrical power supplied by a utility company, excess electrical power generated and not presently needed by the owner for on-site use may be used by the utility company in accordance with Iowa Admin. Code § 199.15.11(5). 
    Small wind energy conversion system, building mounted, means a SWECS which is securely fastened to any portion of a principal building in order to achieve desired elevation, whether attached directly to the principal building or attached to a tower structure which is in turn fastened to the principal building. 
    Small wind energy conversion system, free standing, means a SWECS which is elevated by means of a monopole tower only and is not located on another supporting structure except that the tower shall have an appropriately constructed concrete base. Guyed, lattice, or other non-monopole style towers shall not meet this definition. 
    Small wind energy conversion system, horizontal axis, means a small wind energy conversion system that has blades which rotate through a horizontal plane. It usually resembles a propeller. 
    Small wind energy conversion system, vertical axis, means a small wind energy conversion system that has blades which rotate through a vertical plane. It often resembles an egg beater. 
    Tower means the vertical component of a wind energy conversion system that elevates the wind turbine generator and attached blades above the ground. 
    Wind energy conversion system (WECS) means an aggregation of parts including the foundation, base, tower, generator, rotor, blades, supports, guy wires and accessory equipment such as utility interconnect and battery banks, etc., in such configuration as necessary to convert the power of wind into mechanical or electrical energy, e.g., wind charger, windmill or wind turbine. 
    Wind turbine generator means the component of a wind energy conversion system that transforms mechanical energy from the wind into electrical energy. 
(Code 1996, § 133.02) 
Sec. 48-346. - Commercial wind energy conversion system. 
    It is unlawful to erect or maintain a commercial wind energy conversion system within the corporate limits of city. 
(Code 1996, § 133.03) 
Sec. 48-347. - Special accessory use. 
(a)  Special use. A small wind energy conversion system may be only allowed as an accessory use to a permitted principal use and shall require approval of a special use permit from the board of adjustment prior to construction, installation, alteration, or location of such structure. 
(b)  Permit required. It is unlawful to construct, erect, install, or alter or locate any small wind energy conversion system within the city, unless a special use permit has been obtained from the zoning board of adjustment. The permit may be revoked at any time the approved system does not comply with the regulations, and rules established herein, and any additional conditions imposed by the board. The owner of the system shall also obtain all other permits or licenses required by federal, state, and local agencies prior to construction of the system. 
(c)  Public notification. Following receipt of the application for special use permit, the board of adjustment shall meet. Notice will be sent to the surrounding property owners within 200 feet of the property having the site plan considered. Notice shall be sent not less than seven days and not more than 20 days prior to the meeting at which the application is first considered. The notice shall contain the date, time and location of the meeting. 
(Code 1996, § 133.04) 
Sec. 48-348. - General regulations. 
(a)  Zoning. SWECS may be allowed in all zoning districts subject to the provisions contained herein and elsewhere within this Code. 
(b)  Number of systems per zoning lot. 
(1)  Residential use. No more than one freestanding SWECS may be placed on any parcel or lot zoned for residential use. 
(2)  Commercial, industrial, and institutional use. No more than one freestanding SWECS may be placed on any parcel or lot with a commercial, industrial, or institutional use that is taller than the tallest existing principal building located on the parcel or lot. 
(3)  Mixed use. Any building containing both residential and commercial uses or described as a "mixed use" building, shall be considered to be a commercial use for the purposes of this article. 
(c)  Tower. Only monopole towers shall be permitted for freestanding SWECS. Lattice, guyed or towers of any other type shall not be considered to be in compliance with this article. 
(d)  Color. Freestanding SWECS shall be a neutral color such as white, sky blue or light gray. Building mounted SWECS shall match the color of the building on which it is mounted. Other colors may be allowed at the discretion of the board of adjustment. The surface shall be non-reflective. 
(e)  Lighting. No lights shall be installed on the tower, unless required to meet FAA regulations. 
(f)  Signage. No signage or advertising of any kind shall be permitted on the tower or any associated structures. 
(g)  Climbing apparatus. The tower must be designed to prevent climbing within the first ten feet. 
(h)  Maintenance. Facilities shall be well maintained in accordance with manufacturer's specifications and shall remain in an operational condition that poses no potential safety hazard or is in violation of any provisions contained within this article or elsewhere within this Code. 
(i)  Displacement of parking prohibited. The location of the SWECS shall not result in the net loss of required parking as specified elsewhere in the city zoning regulations. 
(j)  Utility notification. The city shall notify the utility of receipt of an application to install an interconnected customer-owned generator. Off-grid systems shall be exempt from this notification requirement. 
(k)  Interconnection. The SWECS, if not off-grid, shall meet the requirements for interconnection and operation as set forth by the utility and the state utilities board. No permit of any kind shall be issued until the city has been provided with a copy of an executed interconnection agreement. Off-grid systems shall be exempt from this requirement. 
(l)  Restriction on use of electricity generated. A SWECS shall be used exclusively to supply electrical power to the owner for on-site consumption, except that excess electrical power generated by the SWECS and not presently needed for use by the owner may be used by the utility company in accordance with Iowa Admin. Code § 199.15.11(5). 
(m)  Noise. A SWECS shall be designed, installed and operated so that the noise generated does not exceed five decibels (dBA) within 100 feet of the wind tower, except during short-term events such as severe wind storms or utility outages. 
(n)  Shadow flicker. No SWECS shall be installed and operated so as to cause a shadow flicker to fall on or in any existing residential structure. A shadow flicker model must demonstrate that shadow flicker shall not fall on, or in, any existing residential structure. Shadow flicker expected to fall on a roadway or a portion of a residentially zoned parcel may be acceptable if the flicker does not exceed 30 hours per year, and the flicker will fall more than 100 feet from an existing residence; or the traffic volumes are less than 500 vehicles on the roadway. 
(1)  Map and describe within a 1,000-foot radius of the proposed wind energy system the topography, existing residences and location of their windows, locations of other structures, wind speeds and directions, existing vegetation and roadways. The model shall represent the most probable scenarios of wind constancy, sunshine constancy, and wind directions and speed; 
(2)  Calculate the locations of shadow flicker caused by the proposed project and the expected durations of the flicker at these locations, calculate the total number of hours per year of flicker at all locations; 
(3)  Identify problem areas where shadow flicker will interfere with existing or future residences and roadways and describe proposed mitigation measures, including, but not limited to, a change in sitting of the wind energy conversion system, a change in the operation of the wind energy conversion system, or grading or landscaping mitigation measures. 
(o)  Safety controls. Each SWECS shall be equipped with both an automatic and manual braking, governing, or feathering system to prevent uncontrolled rotation, over-speeding, and excessive pressure on the tower structure, rotor blades, or turbine components. The automatic braking system shall also be capable of stopping turbine rotation in the event of a power outage so as to prevent back feeding of the grid. 
(p)  Shut off. A clearly marked and easily accessible shut off for the wind turbine will be required as determined by the building official. 
(q)  Electromagnetic interference. All SWECS shall be designed and constructed so as not to cause radio and television interference. If it is determined that the SWECS is causing electromagnetic interference, the owner/operator shall take the necessary corrective action to eliminate this interference including relocation or removal of the facilities, subject to the approval of the appropriate city authority. A permit granting a SWECS may be revoked if electromagnetic interference from the SWECS becomes evident. 
(r)  Wind access easements. The enactment of this article does not constitute the granting of an easement by the city. The SWECS owner/operator shall have the sole responsibility to acquire any covenants, easements, or similar documentation to ensure or protect access to sufficient wind as may or may not be necessary to operate the SWECS. 
(s)  Insurance. The owner/operator of a wind energy conversion system shall maintain $1,000,000 liability insurance as a condition of obtaining a permit and shall file a copy of the insurance policy with the city. Upon granting of a permit, the owner shall assume full responsibility for any and all damages, claims, expenses, liabilities, judgments and costs of any kind, including reasonable attorney's fees related to or caused by the erection, location, use or removal of a facility, and shall agree to hold the city harmless, indemnify and defend it from all such liabilities incurred or judgments entered against it as a result of the erection, location, use or removal of the facility. 
(t)  Engineer certification. Applications for any SWECS shall be accompanied by standard drawings of the wind turbine structure, including the tower, base, and footings. An engineering analysis of all components of the SWECS showing compliance with the applicable regulations and certified by a state-licensed professional engineer shall also be submitted. 
(u)  Installation. Installation must be done according to manufacturer's recommendations. All wiring and electrical work must be completed according to the applicable building and electric codes. All electrical components must meet code recognized test standards. 
(v)  Removal. Any wind energy conversion system that remains non-functional or inoperative for a continuous period of 180 consecutive days, shall be considered abandoned and shall constitute a public nuisance. Within the next 180 days, after notice from the city, the owner shall reactivate the tower or it shall be dismantled and removed at the owner's expense. Removal of the system includes the entire structure including foundations, transmission equipment and fencing from the property. 
(1)  Non-function or lack of operation may be proven by reports from the interconnected utility. The owner and successors shall make available to the city all reports to and from the users of energy from the wind energy system if requested. 
(2)  If removal of tower and appurtenant facilities is required, the city council shall notify the owner. If the city removes a tower and appurtenant facilities, it may sell the salvage to defray the cost of removal. Further, the city may collect any remaining costs of removal from the owner of the wind energy conversion system or owner of the ground upon which it is located. The city clerk shall send a statement of the total expense incurred to the property owner who has failed to abide by the notice. If the amount shown by the statement has not been paid within one month, the clerk shall certify the costs to the county treasurer and such costs shall then be collected with, and in the same manner as, general property taxes. 
(3)  The board of adjustment can revoke a wind energy conversion system permit at any time if the requirements set forth in this ordinance or any conditions imposed by the board are not met. 
(w)  Right of entrance. By acceptance of a permit, the owner grants permission to the city, to enter on the property to remove the tower and all fixtures pursuant to the terms of the permit and to ensure compliance with the conditions set forth in the permit. 
(x)  Feasibility study. It is highly recommended that a feasibility study be made of any site prior to installing a wind turbine. The feasibility study should include measuring actual wind speeds at the proposed turbine site for at least three months. 
(Code 1996, § 133.05) 
Sec. 48-349. - Bulk regulations. 
(a)  Setbacks. 
(1)  The minimum distance between any freestanding or guyed SWECS, and any property line shall be a distance that is equivalent to 150 percent of the total system height. The setback shall be measured from the property line to the center point of the SWECS. The zoning board of adjustment may authorize a lesser setback distance if a registered engineer licensed by the state specifies, in writing, that the collapse of the system will occur within a lesser distance under all foreseeable circumstances. 
(2)  The required setback for any building mounted SWECS shall be equal to the required setback of the principal building to which the SWECS is to be attached at such time that the application to install a building mounted SWECS is received by the city. 
(b)  Maximum height. Height shall be measured from the ground to the top of the tower, including the wind turbine generator and blades. 
(1)  For lots of more than one-half and less than three acres, the maximum height shall be 60 feet. 
(2)  For lots of three to seven acres, the maximum height shall be 75 feet. 
(3)  For lots more than seven acres, the maximum shall be 100 feet. 
(4)  Building mounted SWECS may be a maximum of three feet higher than the point of attachment to the building on which they are attached. 
(c)  Minimum lot size. No SWECS shall be erected on a zoning lot smaller than 0.5 acre. 
(d)  Clearance of blade. No portion of a horizontal axis SWECS blade shall extend within 30 feet of the ground. No portion of a vertical axis SWECS shall extend within ten feet of the ground. No blades may extend over parking areas, driveways or sidewalks. No blade may extend within 20 feet of the nearest tree, structure or above ground utility facilities. 
(e)  Location. 
(1)  No part of a SWECS shall be located within or over drainage, utility or other established easements. 
(2)  A freestanding SWECS shall be located entirely in the rear yard. 
(3)  A SWECS shall be located in compliance with the guidelines of applicable Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) regulations. 
(4)  No SWECS shall be constructed so that any part thereof can extend within 20 feet laterally of an overhead electrical power line. The setback from underground electric distribution lines shall be at least 20 feet. 
(5)  Building mounted SWECS shall be prohibited unless the owner has obtained a written analysis from an Iowa licensed structural engineer determining that installation of a SWECS will not cause damage to the structure and that the SWECS can be securely fastened so as to not pose a hazard caused by detaching from the structure. 
(6)  Permit applications for SWECS shall be accompanied by a line drawing for the electrical components in sufficient detail to allow for a determination that the manner of installation conforms to the National Electrical Code. 
(Code 1996, § 133.06) 
Sec. 48-350. - Application required. 
    Application for SWECS shall be made on forms provided in the inspection department. No action may be taken regarding requests for SWECS until completed applications have been filed and a fee of $100.00 paid. Any additional costs incurred by the city regarding review of plan submitted with a permit application will be paid in full by the applicant. 
(Code 1996, § 133.07) 
Sec. 48-351. - Application process. 
    All applicants who wish to locate a wind energy conversion system must submit to the city's board of adjustment, on the forms provided by the inspection department, a plan including the following information: 
(1)  Complete property dimensions. 
(2)  Location and full dimensions of all buildings existing on the property where the system is to be located, including exterior dimensions, height of buildings, and all uses on the property. 
(3)  Location and dimensions of any natural or manmade features within 200 feet of the property such as trees, ridges, highways, street, bridges and underpasses. 
(4)  Location of all easements upon the property where the system is to be located. 
(5)  Proposed location of tower, including height and setbacks from property lines. 
(6)  Drawings, to scale, of the structure, including the tower, base, booting, and guy-wires, if any, and electrical components. The drawings and any necessary calculations shall be certified by a licensed engineer. 
(7)  Certification from a licensed engineer or qualified professional that the rotor and over speed controls have been designed for the proposed use on the proposed site. 
(8)  Evidence that the applicant has notified the utility that the customer intends to install an interconnected customer owned generator, and that the generator meets the minimum requirements established by the utility and the state utilities board. Off-grid systems shall be exempt from this requirement. 
(9)  Evidence that the wind energy conversion system does not violate any covenants of record. 
(10)  Evidence that the proposed wind energy conversion system will comply with applicable federal aviation regulations, including any necessary approvals from the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA). 
(11)  Evidence that the applicant can obtain and maintain adequate liability insurance for the facility. 
(12)  A noise study. 
(13)  A shadow flicker model. 
(14)  Any other evidence or information as required by the board of adjustment. 
(Code 1996, § 133.08) 
Sec. 48-352. - Penalty. 
    Failure to obtain a permit prior to installation of the system may result in the disconnection of electrical power to the premises. 
(Code 1996, § 133.09) 
Chapter 50 - ZONING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- City zoning, Code of Iowa ch. 414. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 50-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Abandoned farmstead means a tract of land which was at one time a farm dwelling with its related outbuilding, but which has not been reclaimed for row crops or grazing agriculture. To be classified as an abandoned farmstead some visual evidence (such as buildings, foundations, shelter belts, well, etc.) must remain for the parcel's past status as a farmstead. 
    Accessory building (also accessory use) means a subordinate building or use, whose existence is incidental to that of the principal building or to the principal use of the premises. 
    Adult amusement or entertainment means an amusement or entertainment which is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on acts or material depicting, describing or relating to "sex acts" or "specified anatomical areas," as defined herein, including, but not limited to, topless or bottomless dancers, exotic dancers, strippers, male or female impersonators or similar entertainment. 
    Adult bookstore means an establishment having as a significant portion of its stock in trade books, films, magazines and other periodicals or goods and items held for sale which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting or describing sex acts or specified anatomical areas. 
    Adult day care means the care, supervision, or guidance of an adult over 18 years of age by a person other than the parent, guardian, relative, or custodian for periods less than 24 hours per day, on a regular basis in a place other than the adult's home. 
    Adult hotel or motel means a building with accommodations used for the temporary occupancy of one or more individuals and is an establishment wherein material is presented which is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on depicting or describing sex acts or specified anatomical areas for observation by the individuals therein. 
    Adult motion picture arcade means any place to which the public is permitted or invited wherein coin- or slug-operated or electronically, electrically or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors, or other image-producing devices are maintained to show images to five or fewer persons per machine at any one time, and where the images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting or describing sex acts or specified anatomical areas. 
    Adult motion picture theater means an enclosed building used for presenting material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting or describing sex acts or specified anatomical areas. 
    Adult photo studio means an establishment which, upon payment of a fee, provides photographic equipment or models for the purpose of photographing specified anatomical areas or sex acts, as defined herein. 
    Agriculture means the use of land for agricultural purposes including farming, dairying, pasturage, agriculture, horticulture, floriculture, viticulture and animal and poultry husbandry, and the necessary accessory uses for packing, treating or storing the produce; provided, however, that the operation of such accessory use shall be secondary to that of normal agricultural activities and, provided further, that the above uses shall not include the commercial feeding of garbage or offal to animals. 
    Alley means a public thoroughfare, not more than 20 feet in width, for the use of vehicles, which affords only a secondary means of access to abutting property. 
    Alteration, structural, means any change in the load bearing members of a building, such as bearing walls, partitions, columns, beams or girders. The enlargement of the size or height of a building is construed to be a structural alteration. 
    Animal weight capacity means the product of multiplying the maximum number of animals which the owner or operator confines in the animal feeding operation or confinement feeding operation at any one time by the average weight during a production cycle. 
    Apartment means a room or suite of rooms, with toilet and culinary accommodations, used or designed for use as a residence by a family, located in a building containing two or more such rooms or suites or located in a building devoted primarily to nonresidential use. 
    Assisted living facility means residences that provide rooms, meals, personal care, and supervision of self-administered medication. They may provide other services, such as recreational activities, financial services, and transportation. They may be combined with other types of housing such as congregate apartment housing for the elderly and residential health care facilities. 
    Attic means a space under a gable, hip or gambrel or other roof, the finished floor of which is, or would be, at or entirely above the level of the wall plates of at least two exterior walls, and the height of which, from the floor level to the highest point of the roof, does not exceed ten feet. 
    Basement means a story partly underground but having at least one-half of the height of one or more walls above the highest level of the adjoining ground. A basement is counted as a story under the provisions of this chapter. (See also Cellar. ) 
    Board means the zoning board of adjustment. 
    Boardinghouse means a building other than a hotel, fraternity house or sorority house, where meals are regularly served for compensation to more than three persons not members of the family there residing. 
    Building means a structure having a roof supported by columns or walls for shelter, support or enclosure of persons, animals or chattel. When separated by division walls from the ground up without openings, each portion of such structure shall be deemed a separate building. 
    Building, height of, means the perpendicular distance measured in a straight line from the curb level to the highest point of the roof beams in the case of flat roofs, and to the average of the height of the roof in the case of pitched roofs, the measurement in all cases to be taken through the center of the front of the building. Where a dwelling is situated on ground above the curb level, such height shall be measured from the level of the adjoining ground, at the front building wall, provided the distance from the building to the street line is not less than the height of the adjoining ground above the curb level. Where a dwelling is on a corner lot and there is more than one grade or level, the measurement shall be taken from the main entrance elevation. 
    Building line means a building setback line as established under the provisions of the International Building Code. 
    Building wall means the wall of the principal building forming a part of the main structure. The foundation walls of unenclosed porches or piazzas, steps and retaining wall or similar structure shall not be considered as building walls under the provisions of this chapter. 
    Bulk stations means distributing stations, commonly known as bulk or tank stations, used for the storage and distribution of flammable liquids or liquefied petroleum products or any other bulk liquid products, where the aggregate capacity of all storage tanks is more than 12,000 gallons. 
    Business and technology park means a planned business development that features smaller office buildings, at a scale comparable to surrounding residential development, which are clustered in a park-like setting. Such developments are low intensity opportunities to provide employment near housing and create transitions between residential development and more intense uses. 
    Business or commercial means the engaging in the purchase, sale or exchange of goods or services, or the operation for profit of offices or recreational or amusement enterprises. 
    Carport means space for the storage or housing of motor vehicles and enclosed on not more than two sides by walls and is attached or detached to the principal building. 
    Cellar means a story having more than one-half of the height of all walls below the highest level of the adjoining ground. A cellar is not considered as a story for the purpose of this chapter. (See also Basement. ) 
    Child day care means the care, supervision, or guidance of a child under 18 years of age by a person other than the parent, guardian, relative, or custodian for periods less than 24 hours per day, on a regular basis in a place other than the child's home. 
    Clinic, dental or medical, means a building in which a group of physicians, dentists or physicians and dentists and allied professional assistants are associated for the purpose of carrying on their profession. The clinic may include a dental or medical laboratory. It does not include in-patient care or operating rooms for major surgery. 
    Club or lodge (private) means an association of persons for the promotion of some nonprofit object, who are bona fide members paying annual dues, which owns, hires or leases a building, or portion thereof, except a fraternity or sorority, the use of such premises being restricted to members and their guests. It is permissible to serve food and meals to members and their guests on such premises provided adequate dining room space and kitchen facilities are available and are operated in compliance with state and local laws. 
    Co-office space means the co-location of more than one business where private offices are provided for each individual business, but common spaces such as mail/copying rooms, kitchenettes, conference rooms and reception areas are shared spaces. 
    Commercial feedlot means a feedlot within the jurisdictional zoning area adjacent to the corporate limits or feedlots and confinement buildings within the corporate limits of the city that are not owned and operated by the individuals living on the premises. 
    Confinement feeding operation means a feedlot or animal feeding operation in which animals are confined to areas that are totally roofed. 
    Convalescent home means a building or premises in or on which care is provided for two or more invalid, infirm, aged, convalescent, or physically disabled or injured persons, not including insane or other mental cases, inebriate, or contagious cases. Nursing homes are convalescent homes. 
    Court means an open, unoccupied space on the same lot and fully enclosed on at least three adjacent sides by walls of the buildings. An outer court is any court facing for its full required width on a street, or on any other required open space not a court. 
    Curb level means the mean level of the curb or established curb grade in front of a lot. 
    Dance studio means a place for persons engaged in the study of dance. 
    Deck means an unenclosed, roofless structure adjoined to the principal building or an accessory building or structure. All decks are subject to building and zoning regulations. 
    District means a section of the area of the city for which regulations governing the use of buildings and premises or the height and area of buildings are uniform. 
    Driveway means the portion of private property improved, designed, and constructed for vehicular travel to public right-of-way. Improved means any nonorganic material/surface not to include black dirt or clay. 
    Dwelling means a building or portion thereof designed or used exclusively for residential occupancy, but not including house trailers, mobile homes that have not been converted to real estate, hotels, motels, boardinghouses and lodginghouses, tourist courts or tourist homes. The minimum horizontal dimension of the main body of the dwelling unit shall not be less than 20 feet. 
    Dwelling, multiple-family, means a building designed for or occupied exclusively for residence purposes by more than two families. 
    Dwelling, single-family, means a building designed for or occupied exclusively for residence purposes by one family. 
    Dwelling, two-family, means a building designed for or occupied exclusively for residence purposes by not more than two families. 
    Efficiency living unit means any room having cooking facilities used for combined living, dining, and sleeping purposes and meeting the requirements of the International Residential Code and not exceeding 600 square feet of floor area. 
    Essential services means the erection, construction, alteration or maintenance by developers, public utilities, or governmental agencies of underground or overhead gas, telephone, television, electrical, wastewater, water transmission or distribution systems, including poles, wires, mains, drains, sewers, pipes, conduits, cables, traffic signals, hydrants, and other similar equipment and accessories in connection therewith reasonably necessary for the furnishing of adequate service by such public utilities or governmental agencies or for public health or safety or general welfare. 
    Extraterritorial means existing or taking place outside the territorial limits of a jurisdiction. 
    Family means an individual, or two or more persons related to one another by blood, marriage, or legal adoption, including foster children, and not more than two roomers; or in the alternative, not more than five unrelated persons using common housekeeping and cooking facilities. 
    Farm means an area which is used for the growing of the usual farm products such as vegetables, fruit trees and grain, and their storage, as well as for raising thereon of the usual farm poultry and farm animals such as horses, cattle, sheep and swine. The term "farm" includes the operating of such an area for one or more of the above uses, including dairy farms with the necessary accessory uses for treating or storing the produce; provided, however, that the operation of any such accessory uses shall be secondary to that of the normal farming activities, and provided further that farming does not include the feeding of garbage or offal to swine or other animals. 
    Feedlot/animal feeding operation means a lot, yard, corral, building or other area in which animals are confined and fed and maintained for 45 days or more in any 12-month period, including all structures used for the storage of manure from animals in the operation. 
    Food products, manufacturing and distribution, means a type of business that produces and distributes large quantities of food or food additives that are primarily sold to wholesale markets. The term "food products, manufacturing and distribution," includes manufacturers and distributors of baked goods, dried or canned goods, meats, spices, and like products. 
    Food products, processing and preparation , means a type of business that produces small to medium sized quantities of food for retail or wholesale markets. Food is processed or prepared, and packaged as a ready-to-eat product or a ready-to-cook product, which can include such items as cheese, candy, pre-portioned meals, and washed or cut fruits and vegetables. 
    Garage, private, means an accessory building or portion of a building used only for the shelter or storage of vehicles by the occupants of the dwelling, or the leasing of space as provided herein, including covered space or carport. 
    Garage, public, means a building or portion of a building in which motor vehicles are equipped for operation, repaired, stored or kept for remuneration, hire or sale. 
    Gasoline service station means a building or a portion of a building used chiefly in connection with tanks, pumps and other appliances, for supplying motor vehicles with gasoline, oil, compressed air, water and similar supplies. When the dispensing, sale or offering for sale of motor vehicle fuel at retail is incidental to the conduct of a public garage, the premises is classified as a public garage. 
    Gross floor area means the sum of the gross horizontal area of floors of a building, including interior balconies and mezzanines. All horizontal dimensions are to be between the exterior faces of walls. 
    Home occupation. 
(1)  The term "home occupation," within the corporate limits, means an occupation or a profession conducted in a dwelling unit or within an accessory building which meets the following criteria: 
a.  Is carried on by a member of the family residing in the dwelling unit and employs not more than one person outside the immediate family residing on the premises, provided that adequate parking is available on-site or within a designated street parking area; 
b.  Is clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the dwelling unit for residential purposes; 
c.  Has no exterior display, no exterior storage of materials, and no other exterior indications of the home occupation or variation from the residential character of the principal building other than one nameplate not more than two square feet in area; 
d.  Does not occupy more than 720 square feet in area; 
e.  Produces no offensive noise, vibration, smoke, excessive congestion, dust, odors, heat or glare rendering such building or premises objectionable or detrimental to the residential character of the neighborhood; 
f.  Shall not exceed the expected amount of hazardous materials, liquids, and chemicals presenting a physical hazard and health hazard as defined by the city's adopted building code; 
g.  Any home occupation not operating within these standards shall be subject to a municipal infraction and may be subject to an annual or semi-annual inspection with conditions as needed as a follow-up to the inspection; and 
h.  Home occupations that involve an exterior activity or work that is performed off-site, where work done in conjunction with the home occupation does not take place within the confines of the structures on the premises or otherwise at the specified property, may employ an unlimited number of individuals. Such employees shall not gather, work, park, or otherwise associate at the actual residential home or property of the home occupation. 
(2)  The term "home occupation," outside of the corporate limits but within the two-mile extraterritorial area, means an occupation or profession conducted in a dwelling unit or within an accessory building which meets the following criteria: 
a.  A dwelling unit must be present and the owner of the business must use the residence as his principal residence; 
b.  Must meet all bulk regulations of the district in which it is located; 
c.  Does not employ more than three persons outside the immediate family residing on the premises (does not include employees working for the business that do not work on the home occupation site); 
d.  Has no exterior display of machinery, enclosures, equipment, supplies, etc., no exterior storage of materials, and no other exterior indications of the home occupation or variation from the residential character of the principal building other than one advertising sign not more than 32 square feet in area; 
e.  Shall not be objectionable to its surroundings due to nuisance factors such as exterior appearance, the emission of odor, gas, dust, smoke, noise, or in any other way; 
f.  Shall not exceed the expected amount of hazardous materials, liquids, and chemicals presenting a physical hazard and health hazard as defined by the city's adopted building code; 
g.  Does not occupy more than 720 square feet of the dwelling unit or not more than a total of 5,500 square feet of one or more accessory buildings; and 
Any home occupation not operating within these standards shall be subject to a municipal infraction and may be subject to an annual or semi-annual inspection with conditions as needed as a follow-up to the inspection. 
    Hospital means an institution providing health services, primarily for in-patient, and medical and surgical care of the sick and injured, including as an integral part of the institution such related facilities as laboratories, central service facilities and staff offices. 
    Hotel means a building occupied as the more or less temporary abiding place of individuals who are lodged with or without meals and in which there are more than 20 sleeping rooms usually occupied independently. 
    Junkyard, salvage yard or scrap yard means an open area on any lot or parcel of land which is used for storage, abandonment or keeping of junk, including scrap metals or scrap materials, or for the abandonment or dismantling of machinery, motor vehicles, or other vehicles or parts thereof. 
    Lawful use means the legal use of a building or land existing on June 18, 1973, or for which a zoning permit has been issued thereafter. 
    Lodginghouse means a building or portion thereof, other than a hotel or motel, where lodging only is provided for compensation to four or more persons including roominghouses. 
    Lot means a parcel of land under one ownership on which a principal building and its accessories are or may be placed, together with the required open spaces, having its frontage upon one or more streets or public places, and may consist of: 
(1)  A single lot of record, or a portion of a lot of record; 
(2)  A combination of complete lots of record, or portions of lots of record; 
(3)  A parcel of land described by metes and bounds, provided that in no cause of subdivision shall any residual lot or parcel be created which does not meet the requirements of this chapter. 
    Lot area means the area of a horizontal plane, bounded by the front, side, and rear lot lines. 
    Lot measurement. 
    Depth means the mean horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines. 
    Width means the distance between straight lines connecting front and rear lot lines at each side of the lot, measured at the minimum building setback line. 
    Lot of record means a lot which is a part of a subdivision, the plat of which has been recorded in the office of the county recorder; or a parcel of land, the deed of which was recorded in the office of the county recorder prior to the adoption of this chapter. 
    Lot types. 
    Corner lot means a lot located at the intersection of two or more streets. 
    Interior lot means a lot other than a corner lot with only one frontage on a street other than an alley. 
    Double frontage lot means a lot with frontage on two non-intersection streets. The building lines will prevail in lieu of rear yard requirements. 
    Reversed corner lot means a corner lot, the side street line of which is substantially a continuation of the front lot line of the first lot to its rear. 
    Massage parlor means any building, room, place or establishment, where manipulated massage or manipulated exercise is practiced for pay upon the human body with an emphasis on sex acts or specified anatomical areas, by anyone not a duly licensed physician, osteopath, chiropractor, registered nurse or practical nurse operating under a physician's direction, physical therapist, registered speech pathologist and physical or occupational therapist who treat only patients recommended by a licensed physician and operate only under such physician's direction, whether with or without the use of mechanical, therapeutic or bathing devices. The term "massage parlor" shall not include a regular licensed hospital, medical clinic or nursing home, duly licensed beauty parlors or barber shops. 
    Micro-brewery, micro-winery, and micro-distillery means businesses that produce beer, wine and spirits on-site in small batches to serve local and regional customers. 
    Mobile home means any occupied vehicle used or so constructed as to permit it being used as a conveyance upon the public streets and highways and duly licensed as such, and shall include self-propelled or non-self-propelled vehicles so designed, constructed, reconstructed or added to by means of an enclosed addition or room in such a manner as will permit the occupancy thereof as a dwelling or sleeping place for one or more persons. Mobile homes of less than 20 feet in horizontal dimension shall be located within a mobile home park. 
    Mobile home converted to real estate means a mobile home, at least 20 feet in horizontal dimension, which has been attached to a permanent foundation on real estate, which has had the vehicular frame destroyed rendering it impossible to reconvert to a mobile home, and which has been inspected by the assessor, the mobile home title, registration, and license plates collected from the owner and the property entered on the tax rolls of the county. A mobile home converted to real estate will be considered a dwelling for purposes of this chapter. 
    Mobile home park means any site, lot, field, or tract of land upon which two or more occupied mobile homes are harbored, either free of charge or for revenue purposes, and includes any building, structure, tent, vehicle, or enclosure used or intended for use as a part of such mobile home park. 
    Mobile office means a business that provides customers access to use standard office equipment, including such things as computers, wireless services, fax machines, private mail boxes, teleconferencing, and photocopying for a fee. 
    Motel means a permanent building or group of buildings so arranged or designed primarily for temporary occupancy, so laid out as to provide space for parking vehicles used by the traveling public. Such building or group of buildings may include living quarters for the use of operating personnel. 
    Nonconforming building or structure means a building or structure which met all yard, area and building height regulations existing at the time of construction, reconstruction or extension but, because of changes in this chapter, does not meet all current regulations. 
    Nonconforming use means the lawful use of a building or land on the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived or amendment thereto, which use does not conform to the provisions of this chapter for the district in which it is located. 
    Office means a place where business or services for others is transacted and not a place where chattels or goods, wares or merchandise are commonly created, exchanged or sold. 
    Parking lot means an area of land, a yard or other open space on a lot used for or designed for use by temporarily standing motor vehicles, together with a driveway connecting the parking lot with a public place. 
    Parking space means a surfaced area, enclosed or unenclosed, on a lot sufficient in size (nine-foot by 20-foot minimum) to store one standard automobile, together with a driveway connecting the parking space with a public place, street or alley. 
    Personal services means retail services that provide personal grooming including care of a person's apparel. 
    Place of worship means: 
(1)  A church, synagogue, temple, mosque, or other facility that is used for prayer by persons of similar beliefs; 
(2)  A special-purpose building that is architecturally designed and particularly adapted for the primary use of conducting formal religious services on a regular basis. 
    Porch, open, means a roofed structure open on two or more sides. 
    Preschool nursery means the facilities of any dwelling, institution or organization which, for-profit or nonprofit, are used in the temporary care of six children or more at any one time. 
    Principal building means a non-accessory building in which the principal use of the lot on which it is located is conducted. 
    Professional office means any building or part thereof used by one or more persons engaged in the practice of law, accounting, architecture, medicine, engineering or other occupation customarily considered a profession. 
    Retail store means a place of business where goods are offered for sale to the consumer and not for resale. 
    Setback means the required distance between a lot line and the closest wall of a conforming structure on the lot. The normal overhang of eaves (less than or equal to two feet) is not included in this measurement. 
    Sex acts means any sexual contact, actual or simulated, either natural or deviate, between two or more persons, or between a person and an animal, by penetration of the penis into the vagina or anus, or by contact between the mouth or tongue and genitalia or anus, or by contact between a finger of one person and the genitalia of another, or by use of artificial sexual organs or substitute therefor in contact with the genitalia or anus. 
    Sexual encounter center means any business, agency or persons who, for any form of consideration or gratuity, provides a place where three or more persons may congregate, assemble or associate for the purpose of engaging in sex acts or exposing specified anatomical areas. 
    Shop means a use devoted primarily to the sale of a service or products, but the service is performed or the product to be sold is prepared in its finished form on the premises. Packaging is not considered to be preparation. 
    Specified anatomical areas include the following: human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, and female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola. 
    Story means that portion of a building included between the upper surface of any floor and the upper surface of the floor next above, except that the topmost story shall be that portion of a building included between the upper surface of the topmost floor and the ceiling or roof above. If the finished floor level directly above a usable or unused under-floor space is more than six feet above grade as defined herein for more than 50 percent of the total perimeter or is more than 12 feet above grade as defined herein at any point, such usable or unused under-floor space shall be considered as a story. 
    Street, front, means the street upon which a lot abuts. If a lot abuts upon more than one street or public place, it means the street designated as the front street in the owner's application for a building permit. 
    Street line means the dividing line between a lot and a public street or alley. 
    Street, public, means a public thoroughfare more than 24 feet in width. 
    Street wall means the wall of the principal building nearest the street under construction. 
    Structure means that which is built or constructed, an edifice or building of any kind, or any piece of work artificially built up or composed of parts joined together in some definite manner. 
    Tasting room means a type of eating and drinking establishment that has limited hours of operation and is used for purposes of tasting wine or other spirits made or sold on-site. Such establishments may also accommodate special events. 
    Towers, commercial communication, transmission and other similar towers, means tower structures including monopole, lattice or other structures designed or intended to support wires, transmission or receiving antenna, lights or other electronics, microwave, radio, television, line of sight relay devices or similar technology. 
    Used or occupied include the terms intended, designed or arranged to be used or occupied." 
    Variance means a relaxation of the terms of this chapter where such variance will not be contrary to the public interest and where, owing to conditions peculiar to the property and not the result of the actions of the applicant, a literal enforcement of the chapter would result in unnecessary and undue hardship. A variance may be authorized only for height, width, length, or number of structures, number of items, and area/size of lots, yards, and open spaces. Establishment or expansion of a use otherwise prohibited shall not be allowed by variance or shall a variance be granted because of the presence of nonconformity in the zoning district or uses in adjoining zoning districts. 
    Yard, front, means the space, unobstructed to the sky, open for the whole width of the lot, extending from the nearest part of any structure on the lot to the front line. 
    Yard, rear, means the required open space, unobstructed to the sky, extending along the rear lot line (not a street line) throughout the whole width of the lot to the rear of the principal building. 
    Yard, side, means the required open space, unobstructed to the sky, extending along the side lot line from the front yard to the rear yard, measured from the nearest point on the building to the side yard line. 
    Zoning administrative officer means the individual appointed by the city manager to administer this chapter. 
    Zoning compliance permits means the permits issued by the zoning administrative officer authorizing the use of the land for the purpose specified in the document. 
(Code 1996, § 121.02) 
Secs. 50-2-50-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ZONING MAPS 

Sec. 50-21. - Official zoning map adopted. 
    As shown by the official zoning map, the city is divided into districts named in section 50-52. The boundaries of these districts are established as shown on the official zoning map of the city and the map and all notations, references and other information shown thereon shall be and are made a part of this article by reference. The official zoning map shall be identified by the signature of the mayor attested by the clerk and bearing the seal of the city under the following words: "Ordinance No. 2001-1564 of Webster City, Iowa, adopted June 4, 2001." Regardless of the existence of purported copies of the official zoning map which may from time to time be made or published, the official zoning map which shall be located in the office of the zoning administrative officer is the final authority as to the current zoning status of land and water areas, buildings and other structures in the city. The official zoning map shall be amended in the manner set forth in section 50-23. 
(Code 1996, § 121.05) 
Editor's note- The official zoning map was adopted by Ordinance No. 2001-1564 on June 4, 2001. The following ordinances have been adopted amending the official zoning map of the city and have not been included as a part of this Code but have been specifically saved from repeal and are in full force and effect. 
Ordinance Adopted 1089 4-18-1977 2002-1580 6-17-2002 2003-1606 9-2-2003 2005-1634 2-7-2005 2007-1770 7-16-2007 2008-1678 6-16-2008 2008-1680 8-4-2008 2008-1682 8-18-2008 2014-1780 11-17-2014 2015-1785 11-16-2015 2018-1813 2-5-2018  
Sec. 50-22. - Official extraterritorial zoning map adopted. 
    As shown by the official extraterritorial zoning map, the area is divided into districts named in section 50-52. The boundaries of these districts are established as shown on the official extraterritorial zoning map of the city and the map and all notations, references and other information shown thereon shall be and are made a part of this article by reference. The official extraterritorial zoning map shall be identified by the signature of the mayor attested by the clerk and bearing the seal of the city under the following words: "Ordinance No. 2004-1623 of the city, adopted July 6, 2004." Regardless of the existence of purported copies of the official extraterritorial zoning map which may from time to time be made or published, the official extraterritorial zoning map which shall be located in the office of the zoning administrative officer is the final authority as to the current zoning status of land and water areas, buildings and other structures in the city's extraterritorial area. The official extraterritorial zoning map shall be amended in the manner set forth in section 50-23. 
(Code 1996, § 121.05A) 
Sec. 50-23. - Amending official zoning map. 
    Amendments, supplements or changes of the boundaries of districts as shown on the official zoning map shall be made by an ordinance amending Ordinance No. 2001-1564. The amending ordinance shall refer to the official zoning map and shall set out the identification of the area affected by legal description and identify the zoning district as the same exists and the new district's designation applicable to the property. The ordinance shall, after adoption and publication, be recorded by the clerk as other ordinances and a certified copy thereof shall be attached to the official zoning map. Such amendatory ordinance shall, however, not repeal or reenact the map, but only amend it. The official zoning map, together with amending ordinances, shall be the final authority as the current zoning status of land and water areas, buildings, and other structures in the city. 
(Code 1996, § 121.06) 
Sec. 50-24. - Replacement of zoning map. 
    In the event that the official zoning map becomes damaged, destroyed, lost or difficult to interpret because of the nature or number of changes and additions, the council may, by ordinance, adopt a new official zoning map which shall supersede the prior official zoning map. The new official zoning map may correct drafting or other errors or omissions on the prior official zoning map, but no such correction shall have the effect of amending the original zoning ordinance or any subsequent amendment thereof. The new official zoning map shall be identified by the signature of the mayor, attested by the city clerk, dated and bearing the seal of the city under the following words: "This is to certify that this official zoning map supersedes and replaces the official zoning map adopted ___________, as part of Ordinance No. _________ of the city." 
(Code 1996, § 121.07) 
Secs. 50-25-50-51. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - DISTRICTS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 50-52. - Districts established. 
    For the purpose of this article, the city is divided into classes of districts as follows: 
(1)  G-1 District (Greenbelt). 
(2)  A-1 District (Agriculture). 
(3)  R-1 District (Single-Family Dwelling). 
(4)  R-2 District (Multiple-Family Dwelling). 
(5)  R-3 District (Over Four-Unit Multiple-Family Dwelling). 
(6)  R-4 District (Mobile Home Park). 
(7)  R-5 District (Suburban Residential). 
(8)  C-2 District Central Business District)]. 
(9)  C-3 District Highway Business District)]. 
(10)  M-1 District Light Industrial. 
(11)  M-2 District Heavy Industrial) 
(Code 1996, § 121.03) 
Sec. 50-53. - Classification of newly annexed territory. 
    All territory hereafter annexed to the city shall be in the A-1 Agricultural District until such classification is subsequently changed by an amendment to this article. 
(Code 1996, § 121.04) 
Sec. 50-54. - Rules for interpretation of district boundaries. 
    Where uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of districts as shown on the official zoning map, the following rules apply: 
(1)  Boundaries indicated as approximately following the centerlines of streets, highways or alleys shall be construed to follow such centerlines. 
(2)  Boundaries indicated as approximately following platted lot lines shall be construed as following such lot lines. 
(3)  Boundaries indicated as approximately following city limits shall be construed as following such city limits. 
(4)  Boundaries indicated as following railroad lines shall be construed to be midway between the main tracks. 
(5)  Boundaries indicated as following shorelines shall be construed to follow such shorelines, and, in the event of change in the shoreline, shall be construed as moving with the actual shoreline; boundaries indicated as approximately following the center lines of streams, rivers, lakes or other bodies of water shall be construed to follow such center lines. 
(6)  Boundaries indicated as parallel to or extensions of features indicated in subsections (1) through (5) of this section shall be so construed. Distances not specifically indicated on the official zoning map shall be determined by the scale of the map. 
(7)  Boundaries indicating the extremes of the floodplain are approximate; actual floodplain elevations are available from the city engineering department. 
(Code 1996, § 121.08) 
Sec. 50-55. - Application of district regulations. 
    The regulations set by this article within each district are minimum regulations and apply uniformly to each class or kind of structure or land, and particularly, except as hereinafter provided: 
(1)  No building, structure, or land shall hereafter be used or occupied, no building or structure or part thereof shall hereafter be erected, constructed, reconstructed, moved, or structurally altered unless in conformity with all the regulations herein specified for the district in which it is located. 
(2)  No building or other structure shall hereafter be erected or altered to exceed the height; to accommodate or house a greater number of families; to occupy a greater percentage of the lot area; or to have narrower or smaller rear yards, front yards, side yards, or other open spaces; than herein required; or in other manner contrary to the provisions of this article. 
(3)  No part of a yard, or other open space, or off-street parking or loading space required about or in connection with any building for the purpose of complying with this article shall be included as part of a yard, open space, or off-street parking or loading space similarly required for any other building. 
(4)  No yard or lot existing at the time of passage of the ordinance from which this article is derived shall be reduced in dimension or area below the minimum requirements set forth herein. Yards or lots created after the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived shall meet at least the minimum requirements established by this article. 
(5)  Not more than one principal building shall be permitted on any lot, tract, or parcel of land until the same has been platted in accordance with state law, except as may be otherwise specifically provided in this article. 
(6)  No building in the rear of any principal building on the same interior lot shall be used for residence purposes, except as may be otherwise specifically provided in this article. 
(7)  Any lot upon which a principal building is placed shall abut on a street or a public place. The minimum lot width necessary to abut upon a public street shall be 20 feet. 
(8)  Nothing in this article shall prevent the restoration of any wall or other portion of a building declared unsafe by any authorized public official. 
(Code 1996, § 121.09) 
Secs. 50-56-50-83. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - NONCONFORMITIES 

Sec. 50-84. - Intent for nonconformities prior to January 1, 1965. 
(a)  Within the districts established by this division or amendments that may later be adopted, there exist lots, structures and uses of land and structures which were lawful before this zoning chapter was passed or later amended, but which would be prohibited, regulated or restricted under the terms of this division or future amendments. 
(b)  It is the intent of this division to permit these nonconformities to continue until they are removed, but not to encourage their survival. Such uses are declared by this division to be incompatible with permitted uses in the districts involved. 
(c)  It is further the intent of this division that nonconformities shall not be enlarged upon, expanded, or extended, or be used as grounds for adding other structures or uses prohibited elsewhere in the same district. A nonconforming use of a structure, a nonconforming use of land, or a nonconforming use of a structure and land shall not be extended or enlarged by attachment on a building or premises of additional signs intended to be seen from off the premises, or by the addition of other uses of a nature which would be prohibited in the district involved. 
(Code 1996, § 121.10) 
Sec. 50-85. - Nonconforming lots of record. 
    In any district in which single-family dwellings are permitted, notwithstanding limitations imposed by other provisions of this division, a single-family dwelling and customary accessory buildings may be erected on any single lot of record at the effective date of the ordinance from which this division is derived. This provision shall apply even though such lot fails to meet the requirements for area or width, or both, that are generally applicable in the district. 
(Code 1996, § 121.11) 
Sec. 50-86. - Nonconforming uses of land. 
    Where, at the effective date of the ordinance from which this division is derived, lawful use of land exists that is made no longer permissible under the terms of this division, as enacted or amended, such use may be continued, so long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the following provisions: 
(1)  No such nonconforming use shall be enlarged or increased or extended to occupy a greater area of land than was occupied at the effective date of the ordinance from which this division is derived. 
(2)  No such nonconforming use shall be moved in whole or in part to any other portion of the lot or parcel occupied by such use at the effective date of the ordinance from which this division is derived. 
(3)  If any such nonconforming use of land ceases for any reason for a period of more than six months, any subsequent use of such land shall conform to the regulations specified by this division for the district in which such land is located. 
(Code 1996, § 121.12; Ord. No. 2005-1640) 
Sec. 50-87. - Nonconforming uses of structures. 
    If a lawful use of a structure, or of a structure and premises in combination, exists at the effective date of the ordinance from which this division is derived that would not be allowed in the district under the terms of this division, the lawful use may be continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the following provisions: 
(1)  No existing structure devoted to a use not permitted by this division in the district in which it is located shall be enlarged, extended, constructed, reconstructed, moved or structurally altered except in changing the use of the structure to a use permitted in the district in which it is located. 
(2)  Any nonconforming use may be extended throughout any parts of a building which were obviously arranged or designed for such use at the time of adoption or amendment of this division, but no such use shall be extended to occupy any land outside such building. 
(3)  If no structural alterations are made, any nonconforming use of a structure, or structure and premises, may be changed to a more restricted classification. 
(4)  Any structure, or structure and land in combination, in or on which a nonconforming use is superseded by a permitted use, shall thereafter conform to the regulations for the district in which such structure is located, and the nonconforming use may not thereafter be resumed. 
(5)  When a nonconforming use of a structure, or structure and premises in combination, is discontinued or abandoned for six months, the structure, or structure and premises in combination, shall not thereafter be used except in conformance with the regulations of the district in which it is located. 
(6)  Should such structure be destroyed by any means to an extent of more than 50 percent of its replacement cost at the time of destruction, it shall not be reconstructed except in conformity with the provisions of this division. If destruction is less than 50 percent of its replacement cost, reconstruction must commence within six months. 
(7)  Where nonconforming use status is applied to a structure and premises in combination, removal of the structure shall eliminate the nonconforming status of the land. 
(Code 1996, § 121.13) 
Sec. 50-88. - Repairs and maintenance. 
    On any building devoted in whole or in part to any nonconforming use, work may be done on ordinary repairs, or on repair or replacement of non-bearing walls, fixtures, wiring or plumbing, provided that the cubic content of the building as it existed at the time of passage or amendment to this division shall not be increased. Nothing in this division shall be deemed to prevent the strengthening or restoring to a safe condition of any building or part thereof declared to be unsafe by any official charged with protecting the public safety, upon order of such official. 
(Code 1996, § 121.15) 
Sec. 50-89. - Nonconformities in other than G, A, or R zoning districts. 
    The regulations described in section 50-86 shall apply to nonconforming uses in a commercial or industrial district, subject to the following exceptions: 
(1)  Any structure or building in districts other than a G, A, or R district devoted to a use made nonconforming by this division may be structurally altered or enlarged in conformity with the lot area, the lot frontage and yard and height requirements of the district in which situated, provided such construction shall be limited to buildings on land owned of record by the owner of the land devoted to the nonconforming use prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this division is derived. 
(2)  In the event of such structural alteration or enlargement of buildings, the premises involved may not be used for any nonconforming use other than the use existing on the effective date of the ordinance from which this division is derived, other provisions of this division notwithstanding. 
(Code 1996, § 121.14; Ord. No. 2005-1640) 
Secs. 50-90-50-106. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - DISTRICT RESTRICTIONS 

Sec. 50-107. - G-1 Greenbelt District. 
(a)  The regulations set forth in this section, or set forth in this division when referred to in this section, are the regulations of the G-1 district. This district is established to accommodate open space and floodwater. Placement of buildings and structures is regulated by the city's floodplain regulations (article IV of this chapter). The following uses are permitted in the G-1 district: 
(1)  Accessory use in conjunction with a principal use. 
(2)  Essential services. 
(3)  Farm or apiary, including the usual farm buildings and structures, but not including commercial feedlots and commercial grain storage and grain drying facilities. 
(4)  Forests. 
(5)  Golf courses and golf driving ranges. 
(6)  Nature and wild life reserves. 
(7)  Parking lot. 
(8)  Parks, including picnic tables and similar facilities normally found in park areas. 
(9)  Plant nursery and truck gardens. 
(10)  Tennis court and similar game areas, including structures normally used in the playing of the game. 
(11)  Special exception uses allowed by the board of adjustment as follows: 
a.  Reserved for future list of special exceptions. 
(b)  Extraction of topsoil, gravel, sand or other natural resources except that in any such operation there shall be a restoration plan filed with the city containing the following: 
(1)  An agreement with the city whereby the applicant contracts to restore the premises to a condition and within a time satisfactory to the city; 
(2)  A physical restoration plan showing the proposed contours after restoration, plantings and other special features for the restoration and the method by which such restoration is to be accomplished; and 
(3)  A bond, written by a licensed surety company, a certified check or other financial guarantee satisfactory to the city attorney in an amount sufficient to secure the performance of the restoration agreement. 
(Code 1996, § 122.01) 
Sec. 50-108. - A-1 (Agricultural) District. 
    The regulations set forth in this section, or set forth in this division when referred to in this section, are the regulations of the A-1 district. This district is established to accommodate areas predominately agricultural in character or undeveloped for urban use. As urban development expands, areas suitable for such use will be rezoned according to the comprehensive plan. A building or premises shall be used only for the following purposes. 
(1)  Accessory building in conjunction with a principal use. 
(2)  Essential services. 
(3)  Within the corporate limits of city, agriculture, including the usual farm buildings and structures, but not including commercial feedlots and commercial grain storage and grain drying facilities. (Note: Animals are further regulated by this Code.) Within the extraterritorial zoning jurisdiction, agriculture including the raising of crops or animals, including animal feeding operations and confinement feeding operations as permitted by department of natural resources rules and regulations for manure management plans and site distances to adjacent uses. 
(4)  Forest. 
(5)  Home occupation in conjunction with a principal use. 
(6)  One- and two-family dwelling. 
(7)  Parking lot. 
(8)  Park, sports arena, playground and recreation area, including country club, golf course and swimming pool. The limited commercial sale of goods, foods and liquids normally associated with such uses is permitted. 
(9)  Plant nursery and truck garden. 
(10)  Stable. 
(11)  Special exception uses allowed by the board of adjustment as follows: 
a.  Airport, landing field, or landing strip. 
b.  Area for dumping or disposal of trash or garbage. 
c.  Extraction of topsoil, gravel, sand or other natural resources except that in any such operation there shall be a restoration plan filed with the city containing the following: 
1.  An agreement with the city whereby the applicant contracts to restore the premises to a condition and within a time satisfactory to the city; 
2.  A physical restoration plan showing the proposed contours after restoration, plantings and other special features for the restoration and the method by which such restoration is to be accomplished; and 
3.  A bond, written by a licensed surety company, a certified check or other financial guarantee satisfactory to the city attorney in an amount sufficient to secure the performance of the restoration agreement. 
d.  Radio towers and radio broadcasting stations or commercial communication and transmission towers. 
e.  Roadside stand, commercial amusement or recreational development for temporary or seasonal periods, including fairgrounds. 
(12)  Vineyards and associated eating and drinking establishments. 
(Code 1996, § 122.02) 
Sec. 50-109. - R-1 (Single-Family Dwelling) District. 
    The regulations set forth in this section, or set forth in this division when referred to in this section, are the regulations of the R-1 district. This district is established to accommodate single-family dwellings and uses customarily found in low density residential areas such as public and parochial schools, and parks. A building or premises shall be used only for the following purposes: 
(1)  Accessory building in conjunction with a principal use. 
(2)  Cemetery. 
(3)  Essential services. 
(4)  Home occupation in conjunction with a principal use. 
(5)  Hospital. 
(6)  Park or playground. 
(7)  Nursery school, pre-school, child day care and adult day care. 
(8)  One- and two-family dwelling. 
(9)  Parking lot. 
(10)  Public and private school or college for academic instruction and associated uses such as tennis courts, football fields, running tracks, softball and baseball fields. 
(11)  Church and additions/alterations are permitted, only to those in existence prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this section is derived. The following regulations will apply: 
a.  Front yards shall be a minimum of 35 feet. 
b.  Side yards shall be a minimum of 20 feet plus one foot for each additional two feet of building height over 50 feet. 
c.  Rear yards shall be a minimum of 34 feet. 
(12)  Planned business or technology parks characterized by low impact office, research, and technology uses clustered in smaller buildings surrounded by a greenbelt or park-like setting may be permitted with an approved development agreement in accordance with division 6 of article V of this chapter provided they have frontage on Beach Street, Ohio Street, Superior Street, or U.S. Highway 20. The following regulations will apply: 
a.  Minimum lot area of five acres. 
b.  Maximum building height of 35 feet. 
c.  Front yards shall be a minimum of 35 feet. 
d.  Side yards shall be a minimum of 20 feet. 
e.  Rear yards shall be a minimum of 35 feet. 
(Code 1996, § 122.03) 
Sec. 50-110. - R-2 (Multiple-Family Dwelling) District. 
    The regulations set forth in this section or set forth in this division when referred to in this section, are the regulations of the R-2 district. This district is established to accommodate one- to four-unit family dwellings and other uses customarily found in low density residential areas such as churches, public and parochial schools, and parks. A building or premises shall be used only for the following purposes: 
(1)  Accessory building in conjunction with a principal use. 
(2)  Alterations and conversions of single-family dwellings into multiple-family dwellings in accordance with the lot area, frontage and yard requirements as set forth in this division. 
(3)  Boarding/bed and breakfast or lodginghouse not to exceed four units. 
(4)  Essential services. 
(5)  Home occupation in conjunction with a principal use. 
(6)  Hospital. 
(7)  Multiple-family dwelling, not to exceed four families. 
(8)  Park or playground. 
(9)  Nursery school, pre-school, child day care and adult day care. 
(10)  Parking lot. 
(11)  One- and two-family dwelling. 
(12)  Public and private school or college for academic instruction and associated uses such as tennis courts, football fields, running tracks, softball and baseball fields. 
(13)  Church and additions/alterations are permitted, only to those in existence prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this section is derived. The following regulations will apply: 
a.  Front yards shall be a minimum of 35 feet. 
b.  Side yards shall be a minimum of 20 feet plus one foot for each additional two feet of building height over 50 feet. 
c.  Rear yards shall be a minimum of 34 feet. 
(14)  Special exception uses allowed by the board of adjustment as follows: 
a.  Clinic. 
b.  Municipal, county, township, state or federal building, except maintenance and storage building. 
c.  Any structure or building in the R-2 residential district considered to be nonconforming by this subsection may be permitted to expand, make structural alterations to existing buildings, and construct new buildings within the lot requirements for uses in this district. The board of adjustment may provide conditions and safeguards as a condition of its consent. Buildings/structures should consume not more than 50 percent of the total available lot area and nonconforming provisions regarding discontinuance, abandonment, or destruction shall apply. 
(15)  Mortuary, funeral home. 
(16)  A permitted accessory use is a noncommercial horse stable for a maximum of five horses when there exists a parcel comprised of a minimum of five acres, and provided that no structure or building for the stabling of horses is closer than 150 feet to a residence on adjacent property, and provided the stable is located at least 30 feet from the property line. The area devoted to such a use shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition. 
(17)  Planned business or technology parks characterized by low impact office, research, and technology uses clustered in smaller buildings surrounded by a greenbelt or park-like setting may be permitted with an approved development agreement in accordance with division 6 of article V of this chapter provided they have frontage on Beach Street, Ohio Street, Superior Street, or U.S. Highway 20. The following regulations will apply: 
a.  Minimum lot area of five acres. 
b.  Maximum building height of 35 feet. 
c.  Front yards shall be a minimum of 35 feet. 
d.  Side yards shall be a minimum of 20 feet. 
e.  Rear yards shall be a minimum of 35 feet. 
(Code 1996, § 122.04) 
Sec. 50-111. - R-3 (Over Four-Unit Multiple-Family Dwelling) District. 
    The regulations set forth in this section or set forth in this division when referred to in this section, are the regulations of the R-3 district. It is intended that this district is established to permit medium density family developments in the suburban areas, and to serve as a transition from high density developments to single-family residential areas. A building or premises or land in the R-3 district shall be used for the following purposes: 
(1)  Accessory building in conjunction with a principal use. 
(2)  Alterations and conversions of single-family units into multiple-family dwellings in accordance with the lot area, frontage and yard requirements as set forth in this division. 
(3)  Boardinghouse/bed and breakfast or lodginghouse. 
(4)  Church. 
(5)  Clinic, sanitarium, pharmacy, home for the aged, nursing home, assisted living facility, nonprofit fraternal institution, lodge, and institution of an educational, religious, philanthropic or charitable nature. 
(6)  Commercial services business located within an apartment complex that caters primarily to the residents of the complex. 
(7)  Essential services. 
(8)  Home occupation in conjunction with a principal use. 
(9)  Hospital. 
(10)  Multiple-family dwelling, not to exceed eight families. 
(11)  Museum, library, park, or playground. 
(12)  Nursery school, pre-school, child day care and adult day care. 
(13)  Parking lot. 
(14)  One- and two-family dwelling. 
(15)  Public and private schools and colleges for academic instruction and associated uses such as tennis courts, football fields, running tracks, softball and baseball fields. 
(16)  Special exception uses allowed by the board of adjustment as follows: 
a.  A multiple-unit dwelling of more than eight units, including more than ten accessory garages. 
b.  A dance studio in an existing structure providing that it meets minimum parking requirements and has suitable space for off-street loading and unloading of participants. 
(17)  Mortuary, funeral home. 
(18)  Planned business or technology parks characterized by low impact office, research, and technology uses clustered in smaller buildings surrounded by a greenbelt or park-like setting may be permitted with an approved development agreement in accordance with division 6 of article V of this chapter provided they have frontage on Beach Street, Ohio Street, Superior Street, or U.S. Highway 20. The following regulations will apply: 
a.  Minimum lot area of five acres. 
b.  Maximum building height of 35 feet. 
c.  Front yards shall be a minimum of 35 feet. 
d.  Side yards shall be a minimum of 20 feet. 
e.  Rear yards shall be a minimum of 35 feet. 
(Code 1996, § 122.05) 
Sec. 50-112. - R-4 (Mobile Home Park) District. 
(a)  The regulations set forth in this section, or set forth in this division when referred to in this section, are the regulations of the R-4 district. It is the intent of this district to provide for mobile home developments in areas of the community where their use is compatible with existing and future residential areas. This district shall be well served by arterial streets to provide adequate access and planned development that is compatible with the character of neighboring uses. The following uses are permitted in the R-4 district: 
(1)  Mobile homes located within planned mobile home parks in accordance with the provisions of state statutes and city regulations. Minimum dimensions of a mobile home park shall be: 
a.  Area: Three acres. 
b.  Side yard: 35 feet. 
c.  Front yard: 35 feet. 
d.  Rear yard: 35 feet. 
e.  Drives: 25 feet in width surfaced with either asphalt or concrete. 
(2)  Essential services. 
(3)  Commercial support services owned by the mobile home park owner, such as meeting rooms, laundry services, etc. 
(4)  Each mobile home located within a mobile home park shall be located on a sub-lot with the following minimum dimensions: 
a.  Area: 3,000 square feet. 
b.  Width: 40 feet. 
c.  Length: 75 feet. 
d.  Front yard: Ten feet. 
e.  Rear yard: Ten feet. 
f.  Side yard: Five feet. 
g.  Parking: Two stalls for each mobile home space. 
(b)  Each petition for a change to the R-4 district shall be accompanied by a plan showing how each mobile home space is arranged and how the water, electrical, and sewer lines serving each mobile home space is provided. Also shown shall be the location of garbage cans, water hydrants, service buildings, driveways, walkways, recreation areas, required yards, parking facilities, lighting, and landscaping. 
(Code 1996, § 122.06) 
Sec. 50-113. - R-5 (Suburban Residential) District. 
    The intent of the R-5 Suburban Residential District is to provide for low to medium density residential development located outside of the corporate limits of the city, but within an extraterritorial area for zoning administration. Residential development shall be within platted subdivisions and with a limited number of institutional and recreational facilities permitted. 
(1)  Only the following principal uses and structures shall be permitted: 
a.  Single-family dwellings. 
b.  Publicly-owned and -operated buildings, parks, playgrounds, golf courses and recreation areas. 
(2)  The following accessory uses and structures shall be permitted: 
a.  Accessory uses and structures normally incidental and subordinate to the permitted uses and structures and to uses and structures permitted as exceptions; 
b.  Essential services; 
c.  Home occupations; 
d.  Private garages or carports; 
e.  Temporary buildings for uses incidental to construction work, which buildings shall be removed upon completion or abandonment of the construction work; 
f.  Stables. 
(3)  The following uses and structures may be permitted subject to approval of the zoning board of adjustment: 
a.  Boardinghouses, lodginghouses, and bed and breakfast homes; 
b.  Day nursery or nursery schools; 
c.  Multiple-family residential structures containing two or more units; 
d.  Private clubs or fraternities; 
e.  Private recreation facilities. 
(4)  The following minimum requirements shall be observed: 
a.  Lot area: 
1.  When the use is connected to public water and sewer the minimum lot area shall be 20,000 square feet. 
2.  For uses not connected to public water or sewer utilities the minimum required lot area is that established by the county sanitarian for private well or septic tank use but not less than 60,000 square feet. 
b.  Lot width: The minimum lot width shall be 100 feet. 
c.  Front yard: The minimum front yard shall be 50 feet. On lakefront lots the front yard shall be the side facing the lake. 
d.  Side yard: The minimum side yard shall be ten feet. 
e.  Rear yard: The minimum rear yard shall be 50 feet. For lakefront lots the rear yard shall be the side facing the street. 
f.  Maximum height: No building shall exceed a height of 21/2 stories or 35 feet, unless otherwise provided. 
(Code 1996, § 122.06A) 
Sec. 50-114. - C-2 (Central Business) District. 
    The regulations set forth in this section, or as set forth in this division when referred to in this section, are the regulations in the C-2 district. It is intended that this district is established to accommodate retail outlets, wholesale outlets and service commercial establishments. A building or premises in the district shall be used only for the following purposes: 
(1)  Accessory building in conjunction with a principal use. 
(2)  Antique shop. 
(3)  Art or hobby shop. 
(4)  Auction house. 
(5)  Auto parts store. 
(6)  Automatic car wash. 
(7)  Automotive service station. 
(8)  Automatic vending sales, including both indoor and outdoor. 
(9)  Bakery. 
(10)  Bank. 
(11)  Bookstore. 
(12)  Bus depot. 
(13)  Catering. 
(14)  Clothing or apparel store. 
(15)  Commercial conservatory, commercial greenhouse. 
(16)  Co-office space for uses permitted within this district. 
(17)  Department store. 
(18)  Drug store, pharmacy, vitamin store, health supplies. 
(19)  Eating or drinking establishment. 
(20)  Electrical equipment and appliance store. 
(21)  Essential services. 
(22)  Florist shop. 
(23)  Food products processing, preparation and packaging if in conjunction with wholesale or retail sales, including ready to go meals, make your own meals, dinners made easy, and local farm to market businesses. This does not include the rendering and refining of meats or food processing and manufacturing that is likely to produce excessive odor or create a nuisance. 
(24)  Furniture store or cleaning, de-mothing, upholstering, repairing, refinishing. 
(25)  Grocery store. 
(26)  Gymnasium, bowling alley, dance studio. 
(27)  Hardware store. 
(28)  Heating and air conditioning sales. 
(29)  Home occupation in conjunction with a principal use. 
(30)  Hotel/motel. 
(31)  Indoor recreation establishment. 
(32)  Jewelry store. 
(33)  Mail order store. 
(34)  Micro-brewery, micro-winery, micro-distillery, including tasting rooms. 
(35)  Mobile office, business incubator, internet cafe, wireless communication sales and service, computer sales and service. 
(36)  Mortuary, funeral home. 
(37)  Multifamily residential uses, provided that such uses not be in the first, ground, or basement floor of any structure. 
(38)  Music store. 
(39)  Municipal, county, township, state or federal buildings, except maintenance and storage buildings. 
(40)  Newspaper shop. 
(41)  Office equipment store. 
(42)  Optical store. 
(43)  Parking lot. 
(44)  Personal services including barber shop, hair salon, day spa, dry cleaning, laundry, tailor/seamstress, shoe repair. 
(45)  Photographic and camera shop. 
(46)  Professional office. 
(47)  Residential and residential accessory structures in accordance with R-3 (Over Four-Unit Multiple-Family Dwelling) District regulations. 
(48)  Retail pet shop. 
(49)  Television and radio studio. 
(50)  Theater. 
(51)  Wholesale establishment. 
(52)  Any use that is interpreted by the zoning administrative officer to be similar to those above. 
(53)  Special exception uses allowed by the zoning board of adjustment as follows: A church located in an existing building with no less than 11,000 square feet and a minimum of 14 on-premises parking spaces providing that it meets all applicable zoning and building code regulations including, but not limited to, parking, occupancy, and fire. 
(Code 1996, § 122.07) 
Sec. 50-115. - C-3 (Highway Business) District. 
    The regulations set forth in this section, or as set forth in this division when referred to in this section, are the regulations in the C-3 district. The intent of the C-3 district is to establish the location of areas best suited to the needs of highway-related businesses whose primary function is catering to traffic generated by the adjacent roadway. These uses are characterized by the need for larger lot sizes and the need to supply their own off-street parking. A building or premises in the district shall be used only for the following purposes: 
(1)  Accessory building in conjunction with a principal use. 
(2)  Adult entertainment business. 
(3)  Auditorium, exhibition hall, club. 
(4)  Automobile service station and body shop. 
(5)  Automobile, truck and implement sales and service. 
(6)  Bowling alley. 
(7)  Carpentry shop. 
(8)  Car wash. 
(9)  Church. 
(10)  Commercial nursery, greenhouse, garden supply store. 
(11)  Commercial recreation or amusement. 
(12)  Custom car, truck or motorcycle design, manufacturing, assembly and sales, including aftermarket accessories provided the business is not engaged in retail sales of or storage of used, junk, scrap or salvaged parts. 
(13)  Dance studio. 
(14)  Discount department store. 
(15)  Drive-in establishment. 
(16)  Drive-in theater. 
(17)  Dry cleaning and coin operated laundry. 
(18)  Eating or drinking establishment. 
(19)  Electric vehicle charging station or battery swapping station. 
(20)  Enameling and painting establishment. 
(21)  Essential services. 
(22)  Furniture and appliance store. 
(23)  General office space, including customer service center, call centers. 
(24)  Grocery store. 
(25)  Hay, grain, feed, seed retail. 
(26)  Home occupation in conjunction with a principal use. 
(27)  Hotel/motel. 
(28)  Light manufacturing and assembly that will not produce noise, odor, gas, smoke, dust, danger or tend to create a nuisance subject to approval of a development agreement in accordance with division 6 of article V of this chapter. The following rules will apply: 
a.  Minimum lot area of two acres. 
b.  Maximum building height of 35 feet. 
c.  Front yards shall be a minimum of 35 feet. 
d.  Side yards shall be a minimum of 25 feet. 
e.  Rear yards shall be a minimum of 35 feet. 
f.  No outdoor storage. 
(29)  Lumber and building materials store. 
(30)  Mobile home and recreational vehicle sales. 
(31)  Mortuary, funeral home. 
(32)  Nursing home, home for the aged, assisted living. 
(33)  Parking lot. 
(34)  Pawn shop (licensed in compliance with article VI of chapter 12) or rent-to-own store. 
(35)  Private club. 
(36)  Professional office. 
(37)  Residential and residential accessory structures in accordance with R-3 (Over Four-Unit Multiple Dwelling) District regulations. 
(38)  Retail pet shop. 
(39)  Radio towers and radio broadcasting stations or commercial communication and transmission towers. 
(40)  Sign painting or manufacture, including sales. 
(41)  Shopping centers, shopping mall. 
(42)  Veterinary and veterinary clinic. 
(43)  Wood working shop. 
(44)  Any use that is interpreted by the zoning administrative officer to be similar to those above. 
(45)  Any use allowed in a C-2 (Central Business) District. 
(46)  Special exception uses allowed by the zoning board of adjustment as follows: Mini-storage or self-storage facility provided land is not conducive for commercial development due to its location and limited access to utilities. The facility must be fenced or screened, must provide a dust control plan for gravel drives, and must install appropriate down cast lighting. 
(47)  Mixed use projects that contain residential structures in accordance with R-3 (Over Four-Unit Multiple Dwelling) District regulations in addition to one or more uses permitted by the C-3 (Highway Business) District regulations. 
(Code 1996, § 122.08) 
Sec. 50-116. - M-1 (Light Industrial) District. 
    The regulations set forth in this section, or set forth in this division when referred to in this section, are the regulations of the M-1 district. This district is established to accommodate business and industrial uses which do not create excessive noise, smell, dust or similar problems, but demand truck traffic, use extensive outdoor storage, use extensive warehousing or other similar characteristics which make them incompatible uses in foregoing districts. A building or premises shall be used only for the following purposes: 
(1)  Accessory building in conjunction with a principal use. 
(2)  Assembly plant. 
(3)  Automobile repair, including body shop. 
(4)  Baggage, transfer, storage warehouse, mini-storage or self-storage facility. 
(5)  Call center, customer service center (no walk-in customers). 
(6)  Cellophane products manufacturing. 
(7)  Commercial recreation and amusement in conjunction with an allowed principal use. 
(8)  Concrete central mixing and proportioning plant. 
(9)  Contractor's equipment: rental, sales and storage. 
(10)  Dairy products processing. 
(11)  Data center, server farm, digital records storage facility. 
(12)  Essential services. 
(13)  Extraction of sand, gravel and other raw materials, rock crushing and gravel washing. 
(14)  Feed manufacturing, processing and wholesaling. 
(15)  Food products manufacturing and distribution, except that the manufacturing of fish and meat products, sauerkraut, vinegar, yeast, and the rendering of refining of fats and oils may only be allowed upon approval of a development agreement as set forth in division 6 of article V of this chapter. 
(16)  General manufacturing, except that those industries which without adequate development conditions and mitigation might tend to produce excessive noise, odor, gas, smoke, dust, danger or tend to create a nuisance may only be allowed upon approval of a development agreement as set forth in division 6 of article V of this chapter. 
(17)  Home occupation in conjunction with a principal use. 
(18)  Iron works, ornamental: No foundry, drop hammer or no punch press over 75 tons capacity. 
(19)  Leather products manufacturing: Previously prepared leather with no leather making. 
(20)  Living quarters used by custodians or watchmen. 
(21)  Paper products manufacturing: Previously prepared paper, with no paper making. 
(22)  Parking lots. 
(23)  Pharmaceutical drug manufacturing. 
(24)  Plastics products manufacturing: Previously prepared plastic, with no plastic manufacturing. 
(25)  Research labs, biotechnology, testing facilities. 
(26)  Sheet metal shop. 
(27)  Soft drink manufacturing or bottling. 
(28)  Temporary buildings for uses incidental to construction work, which building shall be removed upon the completion or abandonment of the construction work. 
(29)  Textile products manufacturing. 
(30)  Tire recapping, retreading or rebuilding. 
(31)  Tool manufacturing: No drop hammer or no punch press over 75 tons. 
(32)  Truck terminal. 
(33)  Warehousing or wholesaling establishment. 
(34)  Wastewater treatment plant. 
(35)  Water plant. 
(36)  Welding shop. 
(37)  Wood products manufacturing. 
(38)  Any use that is interpreted by the zoning administrative officer to be similar to those above. 
(39)  Special exception uses allowed by the board of adjustment as follows: 
a.  Extraction of topsoil, gravel, sand or other natural resources except that in any such operation there shall be a restoration plan filed with the city containing the following: 
1.  An agreement with the city whereby the applicant contracts to restore the premises to a condition and within a time satisfactory to the city; 
2.  A physical restoration plan showing the proposed contours after restoration, plantings and other such features for the restoration and the method by which such restoration is to be accomplished; and 
3.  A bond, written by a licensed surety company, a certified check or other financial guarantee satisfactory to the city attorney in an amount sufficient to secure the performance of the restoration agreement. 
b.  Radio towers or radio broadcasting stations. 
(40)  The following uses permitted in a C-3 (Highway Business) District are allowed in an M-1 (Light Industrial) District: lumber yards, essential service buildings, farm machinery sales, nursery, auto sales, bowling alley, fraternal lodge, and eating and drinking establishments. 
(Code 1996, § 122.09) 
Sec. 50-117. - M-2 (Heavy Industrial) District. 
    The regulations set forth in this section, or set forth in this division when referred to in this section, are the regulations in the M-2 district. This district is established to accommodate business and industrial uses whose operation might tend to produce excessive noise, odor, gas, smoke, dust, danger or tend to create a nuisance. A building or premises shall be used only for the following purposes: 
(1)  Any use allowed in an M-1 Light Industrial District. 
(2)  A use not permitted in an M-1 district may be permitted subject to approval by the city council after public hearing, and after report and recommendation by the planning and zoning commission. The city council shall consider all of the following provisions in its determination upon the particular use at the location requested: 
a.  That the proposed location design, construction, and operation of the particular use adequately safeguards the health, safety, and general welfare of persons residing or working in adjoining or surrounding property. 
b.  That such use shall not impair an adequate supply of light and air to surrounding property. 
c.  That such use shall not duly increase congestion in the streets, or public danger of fire and safety. 
d.  That such use shall not diminish or impair established property values in adjoining or surrounding property. 
e.  That such use shall be in accord with the intent, purpose and spirit of this division. 
(Code 1996, § 122.10) 
Secs. 50-118-50-147. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - OTHER REGULATIONS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 50-148. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    100-year flood means a flood, the magnitude of which has a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year or which, on the average, will be equaled or exceeded a least once every 100 years. 
    Base flood means the flood having one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. (See also 100-year flood ). 
    Basement means any enclosed area of a building which has its floor or lowest level below ground level (subgrade) on all sides. Also see Lowest floor. 
    Development means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, building or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations. 
    Existing construction means any structure for which the start of construction commenced before July 31, 1978. 
    Existing factory-built home park or subdivision means a factory-built home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the factory-built homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before July 31, 1978. 
    Expansion of existing factory-built home park or subdivision means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the factory-built homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads). 
    Factory-built home means any structure, designed for residential use, which is wholly or in substantial part, made, fabricated, formed or assembled in manufacturing facilities for installation or assembly and installation, on a building site. For the purpose of this article, the term "factory-built home" includes mobile homes, manufactured homes and modular homes and also it includes recreational vehicles which are placed on a site for greater than 180 consecutive days and not fully licensed for and ready for highway use. 
    Factory-built home park means a parcel or contiguous parcels of land divided into two or more factory-built home lots for sale or lease. 
    Flood means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas resulting from the overflow of streams or rivers or from the unusual and rapid runoff of surface waters from any source. 
    Flood elevation means the elevation floodwaters would reach at a particular site during the occurrence of a specific flood. For instance, the 100-year flood elevation is the elevation of floodwaters related to the occurrence of the 100-year flood. 
    Flood insurance rate map (FIRM) means the official map prepared as part of (but published separately from) the flood insurance study which delineates both the flood hazard areas and the risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
    Floodplain means any land area susceptible to being inundated by water as a result of a flood. 
    Floodplain management means an overall program of corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damages and promoting the wise use of floodplains, including, but not limited to, emergency preparedness plans, flood control works, floodproofing and floodplain management regulations. 
    Floodproofing means any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures, including utility and sanitary facilities, which will reduce or eliminate flood damage to such structures. 
    Floodway means the channel of a river or stream and those portions of the floodplains adjoining the channel, which are reasonably required to carry and discharge floodwaters or flood flows so that confinement of flood flows to the floodway area will not cumulatively increase the water surface elevation of the base flood by more than one foot. 
    Floodway fringe means those portions of the floodplain, other than the floodway, which can be filled, levied, or otherwise obstructed without causing substantially higher flood levels or flow velocities. 
    Historic structure means any structure that is: 
(1)  Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places, maintained by the Department of the Interior, or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing of the National Register; 
(2)  Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; 
(3)  Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
(4)  Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified by either: 
a.  An approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
b.  Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs. 
    Lowest floor means the floor of the lowest enclosed area in a building including a basement except when all the following criteria are met: 
(1)  The enclosed area is designed to flood to equalize hydrostatic pressure during floods with walls or openings that satisfy the provisions of section 50-245(b)(4)a; 
(2)  The enclosed area is unfinished (not carpeted, dry walled, etc.) and used solely for low damage potential uses such as building access, parking or storage; 
(3)  Machinery and service facilities (e.g., hot water heater, furnace, electrical service) contained in the enclosed area are located at least one foot above the 100-year flood level; and 
(4)  The enclosed area is not a "basement," as defined in this section. 
In cases where the lowest enclosed area satisfies criteria in subsections (1) through (4) of this definition, the lowest floor is the floor of the next highest enclosed area that does not satisfy the criteria above. 
    New construction means (new buildings, factory-built home parks) those structures or development for which the start of construction commenced on or after July 31, 1978. 
    New factory-built home park or subdivision means a factory-built home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the factory-built homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after July 31, 1978. 
    Recreational vehicle means a vehicle which is: 
(1)  Built on a single chassis; 
(2)  400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; 
(3)  Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and 
(4)  Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as a temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
    Special flood hazard area means the land within a community subject to the 100-year flood. This land is identified as zone A on the community's flood insurance rate map. 
    Start of construction means includes substantial improvement, and means the date the development permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement, was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement or permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as pouring of a slab or footings, the installation of pile, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a factory-built home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; or does it include the installation of streets or walkways; or does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; or does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
    Structure means anything constructed or erected on the ground or attached to the ground, including, but not limited to, buildings, factories, sheds, cabins, factory-built homes, storage tanks, and other similar uses. 
    Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damage condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
    Substantial improvement means any improvement to a structure which satisfies either of the following criteria: 
(1)  Any repair, reconstruction, or improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure either: 
a.  Before the start of construction of the improvement; or 
b.  If the structure has been substantially damaged and is being restored, before the damage occurred. 
The term "substantial improvement" does not, however, include any project for improvement of a structure to comply with existing state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which are solely necessary to ensure safe conditions for the existing use. The term "substantial improvement" also does not include any alteration of an historic structure, provided the alteration will not preclude the structure's designation as an historic structure. 
(2)  Any addition which increases the original floor area of a building by 25 percent or more. All additions constructed after July 31, 1978 shall be added to any proposed addition in determining whether the total increase in original floor space would exceed 25 percent. 
    Variance means a grant of relief by a community from the terms of the floodplain management regulations. 
    Violation means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. 
(Code 1996, § 131.12) 
Sec. 50-149. - Fences, walls, and hedges. 
(a)  In any G, A, or R district, fences, walls and hedges must meet the following regulations: 
(1)  In front yards, cannot exceed four feet in height. 
(2)  In side yards, cannot exceed six feet in height. 
(3)  In rear yards, cannot exceed six feet in height. 
(4)  In street side yards on a corner lot, can be a maximum of six feet tall with a ten-foot setback. 
(5)  In the case of retaining walls supporting embankments, the above requirements shall only apply to the part of the wall above the ground surface of the retained embankment. 
(b)  In any C or M district, fences, walls or hedges must meet the following regulations: 
(1)  In front yards, cannot exceed four feet in height. 
(2)  In side yards, cannot exceed eight feet in height. 
(3)  In rear yards, cannot exceed eight feet in height. 
(4)  In the case of retaining walls supporting embankments, the above requirements shall only apply to the part of the wall above the ground surface of the retained embankment. 
(c)  Approved fence materials for all districts: 
(1)  Residential fences and commercial fences abutting residentially zoned property shall be constructed of stone, brick, treated wood, wood composite, vinyl panel, plaster, open ornamental/tubular metal, landscape hedge, or other building material as approved by the zoning administrator. Residential fences may also be chainlink if not located in front of any portion of the primary structure's front facade. 
(2)  Commercial fences (except where abutting residential uses) shall be constructed of stone, brick, CMU block, pre-cast concrete panel, treated wood, wood composite, vinyl panel, chainlink with or without mesh, chainlink with or without vinyl coating, plaster, open ornamental/tubular metal, landscape hedge, metal pipe barrier, chained/cabled bollards. 
(3)  Commercial fences (except where abutting residential uses) may be constructed of R-panel/metal sheet panel if the property is zoned M-1 (Light Industrial) or M-2 (Heavy Industrial). 
(d)  Prohibited fence materials for all districts: 
(1)  Electrical fences or electrical attachments of any type designed to administer a shock shall not be constructed within the legal limits of the city. 
(2)  Permanent barbed wire and razor wire fences of any type or dimension shall not be constructed within the legal limits of the city. "Vee" arms or base and arms with barbed wire not to exceed three strands will be permitted in the C-3 (Highway Business) District, M-1 (Light Industrial) District and M-2 (Heavy Industrial) District. The lowest strand of barbed wire shall be a minimum of six feet above ground level. 
(3)  CMU block walls, R-panel/metal sheet panel, metal pipe barrier, and chained/cabled bollards shall be prohibited in residentially zoned areas and where nonresidential uses abut residentially zoned areas. 
(e)  Temporary fences in all districts: 
(1)  Temporary fencing for the purpose of protecting or securing of construction sites shall be allowed and must be removed at the completion of the project. 
(f)  Fences, walls and hedges that are not in compliance with current regulations can remain until a new fence, wall, or hedge is installed. For the purpose of this section, replacing 50 percent of a fence constitutes a new fence. The only exception to this is when a fence is adjacent an alley or a driveway, the fence must meet current regulations. 
(g)  All fences and walls, whether new or replacement, require a zoning permit. 
(h)  For the purpose of this section, the front yard is considered the side where the front door is located and property addressed. If there is a conflict, a determination will be made by the building inspector. 
(Code 1996, § 123.01) 
Sec. 50-150. - Visibility at intersections. 
    On any corner lot in any G-1, A-1, R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4 or R-5 District, no fence, wall or other structure shall be erected, or no foliage plant is permitted to grow to a height of more than 21/2 feet above the elevation of the established curb grade at the intersection of the streets on that part of any yard which is bounded by the street lines of the intersection streets and a line connecting two points on the street right-of-way lines 25 feet from their point of intersection. 
(Code 1996, § 123.02) 
Sec. 50-151. - Screening requirements; salvage and scrap yards. 
    Except in those instances described in subsections (1) through (3) of this section, the term "scrap yard" or "salvage yard," as defined in this chapter, must be surrounded by a solid opaque fence or wall, of uniform design and color, and not less than six feet high, which substantially screens the area in which scrap, salvage or junk is stored or deposited. The fence must be kept in good repair and shall not be used for advertising displays or signs. Suitable gates, likewise opaque, are required, which shall be closed and locked after business hours or when the scrap or salvage yard is unattended. A portion of any one gate not to exceed ten feet in length, may be constructed of a nonopaque material to permit observation of the fenced premises. No scrap, salvage or junk shall be permitted to be stored or deposited outside of the fence, nor shall any scrap, salvage or junk be stacked or piled higher than the fence within 30 feet of the fence. Variations from the requirements of this section may be granted as follows: 
(1)  If the perimeter of the scrap or salvage yard is effectively blocked from the public view by natural terrain features or is substantially lower in elevation than the surrounding terrain in a manner which renders thereby the opacity requirements hereof ineffective, the zoning administrative officer may, upon application, allow the substitution of a suitable fence in place of the solid opaque fence required herein. 
(2)  If two or more scrap or salvage yards which otherwise meet the standards of this section abut each other and are located on lots adjoining each other, the fencing requirement of this section shall be waived by the zoning administrator for such common boundary so long as the common boundary continues to exist. 
(3)  If a scrap or salvage yard abuts against an opaque fence which meets the fencing requirements, or an opaque structure which is not less than six feet high, the fencing requirements of this section shall be waived by the zoning administrator for such common boundary. 
(Code 1996, § 123.03) 
Sec. 50-152. - Private garages and accessory buildings. 
    In any A or R district the following requirements apply to detached garages and detached accessory buildings: 
(1)  A detached private garage is permitted in the side or rear yard on the same lot with a dwelling either as a separate building or in a separate room within or attached to the dwelling; however, the number of spaces for motor vehicles shall be no greater than four in an R-1 district; ten in an R-2 district; or ten in an R-3 district. 
(2)  Each detached private garage or accessory building shall be not less than three feet from a property lot line or alley line. On corner lots an accessory building to be used as a garage shall meet the applicable setbacks for the district in which it is located. 
(3)  No detached garage or accessory building is permitted within the limits of a front yard. On through lots the front yard setbacks apply on both street frontages. 
(4)  Detached accessory buildings, other than private garages, within a rear yard may not occupy more than one-third of such area and shall not be more than 12 feet in height. 
(5)  When wholly or partially within the limits of any side yard, a detached garage or accessory building is considered a part of the principal building on the same lot and shall conform to all yard and space requirements specified herein for principal buildings. 
(6)  No detached garage or accessory building shall contain living quarters. 
(7)  No detached accessory building shall be located within a front yard. 
(8)  The construction of a detached garage or accessory building shall not precede the construction of the principal building on the same property. 
(9)  A detached garage on the same property with the principal building shall not exceed the height of that principal building or 35 feet whichever is less. 
(Code 1996, § 123.04) 
Sec. 50-153. - Temporary buildings. 
(a)  No temporary buildings, trailers, mobile homes, tents, portable or potentially portable structures shall be used for any purpose in any district, except: 
(1)  When located within a mobile home park; 
(2)  For temporary buildings used to replace a building destroyed by fire or other calamity; 
(3)  For use during renovation, expansion, planning and construction; or 
(4)  An accessory use in conjunction with the commercial or industrial principle use, and not to exceed six months. 
(b)  All permits allowing temporary buildings are to be for a maximum of two years. Small metal tool sheds, playhouses, and dog houses that are anchored adequately are excluded from the requirements. Overnight camping trailers, travel trailers, and tents are excluded from requirements for periods not to exceed two weeks. 
(c)  Temporary buildings are not required to meet setback requirements and shall not be located on city right-of-way without the approval of the city planning department. 
(Code 1996, § 123.05) 
Sec. 50-154. - Table of general requirements. 
    The following table gives height, yard, lot width and area requirements generally, based on the assumption that the lot is served by public water and sewer. When public water and sewer are not available, minimum lot size shall be 20,000 square feet except in an R-5 (Suburban Residential) District which requires lot area to be established by the county sanitarian, but in no case less than 60,000 square feet. 
Zoning

DistrictMaximum Height of Building
(see subsections (1)(12)(13)(14) of this section) Minimum Yard Requirements in feet
(see subsections (2)(12)(13)(14) of this section) Minimum Lot Width In feet Minimum Lot Area Per Dwelling Unit in square feet Stories Feet Front Rear Side Building Line Street Line One Two Over Two (each) G-1 Greenbelt 2 35 50(h) 50 20 100 40 N/A N/A N/A A-1 Agricultural 2 35 50(h) 50 20 100 40 20,000 N/A R-1 Single-Family 2 35 25(h)(1) 25 (c) 60 40 6,000 7,500 N/A R-2 Multiple-Family 2 1/2 35 20(h)(1) 25 (c) 60 40 6,000 6,500 1,500(f) R-3 Over Four-Unit Multiple- 
Dwelling 3 35 20(h)(1) 25 (c) 60 40 6,000 6,500 1,250(g) R-4 Mobile Home Park 3 35 35 35 35 200 40 43,560 N/A N/A R-5 Suburban Residential 2 1/2 35 50 50 10 100 40 60,000 ** N/A N/A C-2 Central Business 4 50 (h) (d) (d) 20 20 N/A N/A N/A C-3 Highway Business 3 35 20(h) 25 (d) 20 20 N/A N/A N/A M-1 Light Industrial 4 50 30(h) 40(i) 0(j) 20 20 N/A N/A N/A M-2 Heavy Industrial 4 50 30(h) 40(i) 0(k) 20 20 N/A N/A N/A ** See 50-113(4.)a2  
(1)  Farm buildings other than dwellings, communication towers, flag poles and bell towers are exempt from these regulations. 
(2)  These regulations do not apply to a church, school, library, museum, club, and community buildings where activities, games, meetings, and group functions are held, such as a social center, community building or building of similar institution. However, the following regulations will apply in R-1, R-2 and R-3 zones only: 
a.  Front yards shall be a minimum of 35 feet; 
b.  Side yards shall be a minimum of 20 feet plus one foot for each additional two feet of building height over 50 feet; 
c.  Rear yards shall be a minimum of 34 feet. 
(3)  Side yards shall be a minimum of six feet for one-story buildings, eight feet for two-story buildings, ten feet for 2 1/2-story buildings. 
(4)  Side yard setback required on the side of a lot adjoining an R-1, R-2, or R-3 district in which case the side yard regulation of the district which it adjoins shall apply. No rear yard required except on the rear of a lot abutting an A-1, R-1, R-2, or R-3 district in which case the rear yard regulations of the district which it adjoins shall apply. On corner lots the side yard adjoining the street or public place shall be a minimum of ten feet in the C-3 district. 
(5)  Area requirements for structures containing six or more dwelling units shall provide 1,500 square feet of lot area per each dwelling unit. 
(6)  Area requirements for structures containing six or more dwelling units shall provide 1,250 square feet of lot area per each dwelling unit. 
(7)  All yard measurements shall be from existing street right-of-way lines except when there is a proposed major thoroughfare plan on file. In such case, yard measurements must be made from proposed major thoroughfare right-of-way lines. 
(8)  Rear yard depth shall be 40 feet unless the rear lot line adjoins a railroad right-of-way, in which case, none required. 
(9)  Required adjacent to an R district in which case not less than 25 feet, except none required when separated by a public street, not less than 60 feet of right-of-way. On corner lots, the side yard adjoining the street or public place shall be a minimum of 15 feet in M-1 district. 
(10)  Required adjacent to an R district in which case not less than 100 feet, except none required when separated by a public street, not less than 60 feet of right-of-way. On corner lots the side yard adjoining the street or public place shall be a minimum of 15 feet in M-2 district. 
(11)  On corner, interior or irregular shaped lots, all lot lines abutting an existing or a future public street/right-of-way (greater than 18 feet) will have the required front yard setback. The portion of the lot abutting what would be the side yard setback for the adjacent lot will be considered the side yard for the lot also. 
(12)  These regulations do not apply in the case of business and technology parks allowed in an R-1, R-2, R-3 district per division 6 of article V of this chapter requiring a development agreement. In such cases the following regulations will apply: 
a.  Minimum lot area of 217,800 square feet. 
b.  Maximum building height of 35 feet. 
c.  Front yards shall be a minimum of 35 feet. 
d.  Side yards shall be a minimum of 20 feet. 
e.  Rear yards shall be a minimum of 35 feet. 
(13)  These regulations do not apply to light manufacturing and assembly allowed in the C-3 district per division 6 of article V of this chapter requiring a development agreement. In such cases the following rules will apply: 
a.  Minimum lot area of two acres. 
b.  Maximum building height of 35 feet. 
c.  Front yards shall be a minimum of 35 feet. 
d.  Side yards shall be a minimum of 25 feet. 
e.  Rear yards shall be a minimum of 35 feet. 
(14)  These general regulations may be reduced in the case of vineyards and related eating and drinking establishments in the A-1 district. In such cases a development agreement in accordance with division 6 of article V of this chapter shall establish setbacks, building heights, lot width, and minimum lot area while taking into account location, topography, adjacent uses, net buildable area, and natural habitat. However, no requirement shall be reduced by greater than 25 percent. 
(Code 1996, § 123.06) 
Sec. 50-155. - Front yard variations. 
    In any district the required front yard depth for a principal building located on a lot within 70 feet measured along the street line from the nearest corner of the lot under consideration, to any portion of two or more lots in the same block and which lots are occupied by buildings which front on the same street as the proposed principal buildings, shall be the average of the front yard depth of such existing buildings. In computing such front yard depth, existing buildings with front yard depths greater than 50 feet shall be assumed to have a front yard depth of 50 feet and a building with a front yard depth of less than required shall be assumed to have a depth as measured. 
(Code 1996, § 123.07) 
Sec. 50-156. - Front yards for through lots. 
    On through lots, the required front yard shall be provided on both streets. No accessory building or structure may extend into either of the required front yards. The provisions of the preceding section 50-155 also apply when determining the front yard setbacks for through lots. 
(Code 1996, § 123.08) 
Sec. 50-157. - Principal building projecting into required minimum yards. 
Permitted Projections (in feet) 
Front Side Rear Cornices, eaves, gutters 2 2 2 Steps and bay windows not more than 1/3 the width of the frontage of the building 5 5 5 One-story vestibules not to exceed eight feet in width 6 0 0 Chimneys 21/2 21/2 21/2 Decks 0 0 0  
(Code 1996, § 123.09) 
Sec. 50-158. - Rear yards abutting on alleys. 
    Where a lot abuts on an alley, one-half of the alley width may be considered as part of the rear yard. However, the alley width may not be used to meet the required setbacks for detached accessory buildings or detached garages within R districts. 
(Code 1996, § 123.10) 
Sec. 50-159. - Canopies. 
    This section applies only to canopies in a C-3 Highway Business District. Canopies in all other districts shall comply with regulations for buildings permitted in their respective districts. 
(1)  Definition. A canopy is a roof-like structure open on a minimum of three sides including the street side. 
(2)  Setback. None. 
(3)  Clearance from grade. (When within required setback.) 
a.  Minimum: Ten feet. 
b.  Maximum: 16 feet. 
(4)  Projection into right-of-way. Prohibited. 
(Code 1996, § 123.11) 
Sec. 50-160. - Multiple buildings on single lot. 
    More than one principal building may be erected upon a lot in the case of commercial or industrial buildings or of multiple dwellings, hospitals, institutions and public buildings, where such uses are permitted, provided that all yard and area requirements otherwise required on the lot for a single building are observed. 
(Code 1996, § 123.12) 
Sec. 50-161. - Width and yard requirements for lots previously of record. 
    Where a lot of record at the time of the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived has less width than herein required in the district in which it is located and the owner of such lot does not own any other parcel or tract adjacent thereto, the lot may nonetheless be used for a one-family dwelling or for any non-dwelling use permitted in the district in which it is located, providing that all yard requirements are met except that lots of record at the time of adoption of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived having a width of less than 60 feet, the interior side yards may be reduced for single-family dwellings to four feet. 
(Code 1996, § 123.13) 
Sec. 50-162. - Area requirements for lots of record. 
    Where a lot of record at the time of the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived has less area than herein required in the district in which it is located and the owner of such lot does not own any other parcel or tract adjacent thereto, the lot may nonetheless be used for a one-family dwelling or for any non-dwelling use permitted in the district in which it is located. 
(Code 1996, § 123.14) 
Sec. 50-163. - Adult entertainment businesses. 
(a)  No person shall cause or permit the establishment of any adult entertainment business as defined in section 50-1 in any district zoned for residential use or within 1,000 feet from another business, school, church, public park, public playground, public plaza, day nursery, day care center, nursery school, regularly scheduled school bus stop, or any dwelling (one- and two-family or multiple-dwelling). 
(b)  The establishment of an adult entertainment business shall include the opening of such business as a new business, the relocation of such business, or the conversion of an existing business location to any of the uses described as an entertainment business in section 50-1. 
(c)  Measurement of the 1,000-foot restriction shall be taken on a direct line from the property line of such adult entertainment business to the point on the property line of such other business, school, church, public park, public playground, public plaza, day nurseries, day care center, nursery school, regularly scheduled school bus stop, or any dwelling (one- and two-family or multiple-dwelling). 
(d)  All buildings used for adult entertainment business shall have their openings, entries, windows, etc., constructed, located, covered, or screened in such a manner as to prevent a view into the interior of such building from any pedestrian sidewalk, walkway, street or other public or semi-public area. Advertisements, displays or other promotional materials shall not be shown or exhibited so as to be visible to the public from the pedestrian sidewalks, walkways, or other public or semi-public area. 
(Code 1996, § 123.22) 
Sec. 50-164. - Well site protection. 
    No activity, use, land, structure or building shall be permitted within the distance specified herein from a public well without written signed permission from the city planning department, state department of natural resources, and the state department of health. 
Contamination Source Minimum Separation 
Distance from Well 
(feet) Animal pasturage, cisterns, basements, pits or sumps. 50 Sanitary and storm sewers and drains, sewer force mains. 75 Water plant wastes, land application of solid wastes, irrigation of wastewater, concrete vaults and septic tanks, chemical application to the ground, chemical and mineral above ground storage, waste storage, silage storage trench or pit, animal enclosures. 100 Mechanical wastewater treatment plants, sanitary or industrial discharge to the ground, cesspools and earth privies, soil absorption fields, animal waste solids, stockpile basin or lagoon, on or underground chemical and mineral storage, cemeteries, private wells, solid disposal sites. 200  
(Code 1996, § 123.23; Ord. No. 97-1490) 
Sec. 50-165. - Towers, commercial communication, transmission and similar towers. 
(a)  Building/zoning permit required. The owner of a tower structure shall make application for a building/zoning permit which shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  A site plan, which clearly delineates the location, type and height of the proposed tower. 
(2)  Area maps showing the location of the proposed facilities. 
(3)  A description of the parcel. 
(4)  A landscape plan. 
(5)  Fencing described in detail (color and type of materials to be used). 
(6)  A certification of the applicant that the tower will comply with all applicable federal, state and local standards and regulations. 
(7)  Whether the tower can accommodate co-location of additional antennas. 
(8)  A statement by the telecommunications company that it holds a valid license as required by state or federal law. 
(9)  A description of how the proposed site fits into the applicant's overall network. 
(10)  All other materials necessary for the city to properly evaluate the applicant's request. 
(b)  All tower structures shall be protected from unauthorized access by a security screen or fence no less than eight feet high. 
(c)  All proposals shall be accompanied by an engineer's certified collapse range specifications. 
(d)  Any tower structure that is not operated for a continuous period of 12 months shall be considered abandoned, and the owner of such tower shall remove same within 90 days of receipt of notice from the city notifying the owner of such abandonment. 
(e)  Communication towers may be located in M-1 Light Industrial and M-2 Heavy Industrial Districts only. 
(f)  The fall radius of any tower must be certified by a licensed engineer. 
(g)  The fall radius must be completely on the property on which the tower is located. 
(h)  Exceptions to the above-mentioned tower regulations are: 
(1)  Amateur radio, private or other noncommercial antennas. 
(2)  Antenna/tower less than 75 feet in height and owned and operated by federally-licensed amateur radio station operator. 
(3)  Exclusively for receiver only antennas. 
(4)  Antennas located on municipal water towers and grain elevators not exceeding 20 feet from the structure. 
(Code 1996, § 123.24) 
Secs. 50-166-50-183. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PARKING AND LOADING 

Sec. 50-184. - Off-street parking required. 
(a)  In all districts except C-2 there shall be provided at the time any building is erected or structurally altered (except as otherwise provided in this division), off-street parking spaces (not including any space within a building or structure) in accordance with the following requirements: 
(1)  Dwellings: 
a.  One- and two-family dwellings: Two parking spaces for each dwelling unit; 
b.  Multiple-dwelling: Two parking spaces for each dwelling unit. 
Parking spaces for multiple dwellings shall be paved with asphalt or Portland cement concrete and shall not be located in the front yard. 
(2)  Roominghouse, lodginghouse or boardinghouse: One parking space for each sleeping room. 
(3)  Private club or lodge including golf clubs: One parking space for every 15 memberships. 
(4)  Church or temple: One parking space for each eight seats in the main auditorium. 
(5)  School (except high school or college): One parking space for each ten seats in the auditorium or main assembly room, or one space for each classroom, whichever is greater. 
(6)  College or high schools: One parking space for each eight seats in the main auditorium or three spaces for each classroom, whichever is greater. 
(7)  Community center, library, museum or art gallery: Ten parking spaces plus one additional space for each 300 square feet of floor area in excess of 2,000 square feet. 
(8)  Hospital: One parking space for each four beds plus one for each two employees. 
(9)  Sanitarium, convalescent home, home for the aged or similar institution: One parking space for each six beds. 
(10)  Theater or auditorium (except school): One parking space for each 15 seats or bench seating spaces. 
(11)  Seasonal camp or cabin: One parking space for each two beds for each cabin or sleeping unit, whichever is greater. 
(12)  Sports arena, stadium or gymnasium: One parking space for each five seats of seating spaces. 
(13)  Hotel: One parking space for each three sleeping rooms or suite plus one space for each 200 square feet of commercial floor area contained therein. 
(14)  Tourist home, cabin, or motel: One parking space for each sleeping room. 
(15)  Dance hall, assembly or exhibition hall without fixed seats: One parking space for each 100 square feet of floor area used therefor. 
(16)  Business or professional office building including studios, banks, medical or dental clinics: Three parking spaces plus one additional parking space for each 400 square feet of floor area over 1,000. 
(17)  Bowling alley: Five parking spaces for each lane. 
(18)  Mortuary or funeral home: One parking space for each 50 square feet of floor space in slumber rooms, parlors and individual funeral service rooms. However, in an R-2 or R-3 District, there shall be a minimum of 35 off-street parking spaces provided. 
(19)  Retail store, hardware store or personal service establishment, except as otherwise specified herein: One parking space for each 200 square feet of floor area. 
(20)  Furniture or appliance store, wholesale establishments, machinery or equipment sales and service, clothing repair, shoe repair, or service shop: Two parking spaces plus one additional parking space for each 500 square feet of floor area over 1,000. 
(21)  Printing or plumbing shop or similar service establishment: One parking space for each three persons employed therein. 
(22)  Manufacturing or industrial establishment research or testing laboratory, creamery, bottling plant, warehouse or similar establishment: One parking space for each two employees on the maximum working shift plus space to accommodate all trucks and other vehicles used in connection therewith. 
(23)  Automatic car wash (not self-service): Three parking spaces for each washing bay. 
(24)  Gasoline service stations: Three parking spaces plus two for each service stall. 
(25)  Fraternity or sorority: One parking space for each 300 square feet of floor area in the building. 
(26)  Eating or drinking establishment, restaurant, nightclub, cafe, or similar recreation or amusement establishment: One parking space for each 100 square feet of floor area. 
(27)  One bedroom apartment under 600 square feet or efficiency living unit: one and one-fourth parking spaces per unit. 
(28)  Country golf course: Four parking spaces per hole; 
(29)  County fairgrounds: Parking spaces equal to one-half the capacity of the grandstand in addition to 20 spaces per exhibition building. 
(b)  Off-street parking is not required in the C-2 district. 
(Code 1996, § 123.15) 
Sec. 50-185. - Rules for computing off-street parking. 
    In computing the number of off-street parking spaces required, the following rules govern: 
(1)  The term "floor area" means the gross floor area of the specific use. 
(2)  Where fractional spaces result, the parking spaces required are the nearest whole number. 
(3)  The parking space requirement for a use not specifically mentioned herein is the same as required for a use of similar nature. 
(4)  Whenever a building erected or established after the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived is enlarged in floor area, number of employees, number of dwelling units, seating capacity or otherwise to create a need for an increase of ten percent or more in the number of existing parking spaces, such spaces shall be provided on the basis of the enlargement or change. 
(5)  Whenever a building existing prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived is enlarged to the extent of 50 percent or more in the floor area or in the area used, the building or use shall then and thereafter comply with the parking requirements set forth herein. 
(6)  In the case of mixed uses, the parking spaces required shall equal the sum of the requirements of the various uses computed separately. 
(7)  The size of a parking space for one vehicle shall consist of a rectangular area having dimensions of not less than nine by 20 feet plus adequate area for ingress and egress. 
(Code 1996, § 123.16) 
Sec. 50-186. - Location of parking spaces; shared use. 
    All parking spaces required herein shall be located on the same building or lot as the use served, except that where an increase in the number of spaces is required by a change or enlargement of use or where such spaces are provided collectively or used jointly by two or more buildings or establishments, the required spaces may be located not to exceed 300 feet therefrom. 
(1)  Not more than 50 percent of the parking spaces required for: 
a.  Theaters, bowling alleys, dance halls, nightclubs or cafes and up to 100 percent of the parking spaces required for a church or school auditorium may be provided and used jointly by: 
b.  Banks, offices, retail stores, repair shops, service establishments and similar uses not normally open, used or operated during the same hours as those listed in subsection (1)(a) of this section; provided, however, that written agreement thereto is properly executed and filed as specified below. 
(2)  In any case where the required parking spaces are not located on the same lot with the building or use served, or where such spaces are collectively or jointly provided and used, a written agreement shall be properly drawn and executed by the parties concerned, approved as to form by the city attorney, and shall be filed with the application for a building permit. 
(Code 1996, § 123.17) 
Sec. 50-187. - Locating parking space in front yard. 
    Off-street parking space may be located within the required front yard in any C-2, C-3, M-1, or M-2 district, provided such space is 50 feet or more away from any R district. No off-street parking is permitted in the front yard of any R district, except upon a regularly constructed, duly authorized driveway and parking lots in conjunction with a permitted use when the parking lot meets all yard setbacks. 
(Code 1996, § 123.18) 
Sec. 50-188. - Off-street loading required. 
    There shall be provided at the time any building is erected or structurally altered in any C or M district (except as otherwise provided in this division) one off-street loading space for the first 10,000 square feet of gross floor area plus one additional space for each 20,000 feet or any part thereof of additional square feet of gross floor area. 
(Code 1996, § 123.19) 
Secs. 50-189-50-214. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - PLANNED RESIDENTIAL UNITS 

Sec. 50-215. - Planned residential units authorized; conditions. 
    The owner of any tract of land containing two or more acres may submit to the council a plan for the use and development of all of the tract of land for residential and accessory purposes. Such plan shall be referred to the city planning commission for study, report and public hearing. After public hearing, the same shall be submitted to the council for consideration and action. The approval and recommendations of the commission shall be accompanied by a report stating the reasons for approval of the plans and specific evidence and facts showing that the proposed planned residential unit meets the following conditions: 
(1)  That the property adjacent to the area included in the plan will not be adversely affected, and to this end the commission may provide, in the absence of an appropriate physical barrier, that uses of least intensity or a buffer of open space or screening be arranged along the borders of the project. 
(2)  That the plan is consistent with the interest and purposes of this division to promote public health, safety, morals and general welfare. 
(3)  That the building shall be used for only one-family dwellings, two-family dwellings, multifamily dwellings and the usual accessory buildings and uses such as garages, storage space or community activities, including churches and including limited commercial activities such as laundry facilities that primarily serve the residents of the complex. 
(4)  That the average lot area per family, exclusive of the area occupied by public streets, shall not be less than the lot area per family required in the district in which the property is located. 
(5)  That sufficient area is reserved for recreational facilities. 
(Code 1996, § 123.20) 
Sec. 50-216. - Approval of planned residential units. 
    If the council approves the plan, building permits and certificates of occupancy may be issued, although the use of the land and the location of the buildings to be erected on the land, the yards and open spaces contemplated by the plan do not conform in all respects to the regulations of the district in which it is located. In event of any variation in the plan, as approved by the council, the zoning administrative officer shall deny the permit and the applicant for such permit may revise or amend his plan and resubmit the same to the council for approval as an original plan. 
(Code 1996, § 123.21) 
Secs. 50-217-50-240. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - FLOODPLAIN AREAS 

Sec. 50-241. - Statutory authority, findings of fact and purpose. 
    The state legislature has granted to cities the power to enact zoning regulations to encourage safety from floods and to promote health and the general welfare to the community. 
(1)  Findings of fact. 
a.  The flood hazard areas of the city are subject to periodic inundation which can result in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare of the community. 
b.  These flood losses, hazards, and related adverse effects are caused by: 
1.  The occupancy of flood hazard areas by uses vulnerable to flood damages which create hazardous conditions as a result of being inadequately elevated or otherwise protected from flooding; and 
2.  The cumulative effect of obstructions on the floodplain causing increases in flood heights and velocities. 
c.  This division relies upon engineering methodology for analyzing flood hazards which is consistent with the standards established by the department of natural resources. 
(2)  Statement of purpose. It is the purpose of this division to protect and preserve the rights, privileges and property of the city and its residents and to preserve and improve the peace, safety, health, welfare, and comfort and convenience of its residents by minimizing those flood losses described in subsection (1)(a) of this section with provisions designed to: 
a.  Reserve sufficient floodplain area for the conveyance of flood flows so that flood heights and velocities will not be increased substantially. 
b.  Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety or property in times of flood or which cause excessive increases in flood heights or velocities. 
c.  Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including public facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction or substantial improvement. 
d.  Protect individuals from buying lands which may not be suited for intended purposes because of flood hazard. 
e.  Ensure that eligibility is maintained for property owners in the community to purchase flood insurance through the National Flood Insurance Program. 
(Code 1996, § 131.01) 
Sec. 50-242. - General provisions. 
    The provisions of this division are as follows: 
(1)  Lands to which division apply. The provisions of this division shall apply to all lands within the jurisdiction of the city shown on the official floodplain zoning map as being within the boundaries of the floodway, floodway fringe, general floodplain and shallow flooding (overlay) districts, as established in section 50-243. 
(2)  Establishment of official floodplain zoning map. The flood insurance rate map (FIRM), prepared as part of the flood insurance study for Hamilton County and incorporated areas, city, panel numbers 40, 45, 135, 155, 160, 165, and 170, dated November 17, 2005 is adopted by reference and declared to be the official floodplain zoning map. The flood profiles and all explanatory material contained with the flood insurance study are also declared to be a part of this division. 
(3)  Rules for interpretation of district boundaries. The boundaries of the zoning district areas shall be determined by scaling distances on the official floodplain zoning map. When an interpretation is needed as to the exact location of a boundary, the city building official shall make the necessary interpretation. The zoning board of adjustment shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged that there is an error in any requirement, decision, or determination made by the city building official in the enforcement or administration of this division. 
(4)  Compliance. No structure or land shall hereafter be used and no structure shall be located, extended, converted or structurally altered without full compliance with the terms of this division and other applicable regulations which apply to uses within the jurisdiction of this division. 
(5)  Abrogation and greater restrictions. It is not intended by this division to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this division imposes greater restrictions, the provision of this division shall prevail. All other ordinances inconsistent with this division are repealed to the extent of the inconsistency only. 
(6)  Interpretation. In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this division shall be held to be minimum requirements and shall be liberally construed in favor of the governing body and shall not be deemed a limitation or repeal of any other powers granted by state statutes. 
(7)  Warning and disclaimer of liability. The standards required by this division are considered reasonable for regulatory purposes. This division does not imply that areas outside the designated floodplain (overlay) district areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This division shall not create liability on the part of the city or any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that from reliance on this division or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder. 
(Code 1996, § 131.02) 
Sec. 50-243. - Establishment of zoning (overlay) districts. 
(a)  The floodplain areas within the jurisdiction of this division are divided into the following districts: 
(1)  Floodway District (FW); 
(2)  Floodway Fringe District (FF); 
(3)  General Floodplain District (FP); and 
(4)  Shallow Flooding District (SF). 
The boundaries shall be as shown on the official floodplain zoning map. 
(b)  Within these districts, all uses not allowed as permitted uses or permissible as conditional uses are prohibited unless a variance to the terms of this division is granted after due consideration by the zoning board of adjustment. 
(Code 1996, § 131.03; ) 
Sec. 50-244. - Floodway (Overlay) District (FW). 
(a)  Permitted uses. The following uses shall be permitted within the Floodway District to the extent they are not prohibited by any other ordinance (or underlying zoning district) and provided they do not include placement of structures, factory-built homes, fill or other obstruction, the storage of material or equipment, excavation or alteration of a watercourse. 
(1)  Agricultural uses such as general farming, pasture, grazing, outdoor plant nurseries, horticulture, viticulture, truck farming, forestry, sod farming and wild crop harvesting. 
(2)  Industrial-commercial uses such as loading areas, parking areas, airport landing strips. 
(3)  Private and public recreational uses such as golf courses, tennis courts, driving ranges, archery ranges, picnic grounds, boat launching ramps, swimming areas, parks, wildlife and nature preserves, game farms, fish hatcheries, shooting preserves, target ranges, trap and skeet ranges, hunting and fishing areas, hiking and horseback riding trails. 
(4)  Residential uses such as lawns, gardens, parking areas and play areas. 
(5)  Such other open-space uses similar in nature to the above uses. 
(b)  Conditional uses. The following uses which involve structures (temporary or permanent), fill, storage of materials or equipment, excavation or alteration of a watercourse may be permitted only upon issuance of a conditional use permit by the board of adjustment as provided for in section 50-248(c). Such uses must also meet the applicable provisions of the floodway district performance standards. 
(1)  Uses or structures accessory to open-space uses. 
(2)  Circuses, carnivals, and similar transient amusement enterprises. 
(3)  Drive-in theaters, new and used car lots, roadside stands, signs and billboards. 
(4)  Extraction of sands, gravel and other materials. 
(5)  Marinas, boat rentals, docks, piers and wharves. 
(6)  Utility transmission lines and underground pipelines. 
(7)  Other uses similar in nature to uses described in subsection (a) or (b) of this section which are consistent with the provisions of subsection (c) of this section and the general spirit and purpose of this division. 
(c)  Performance standards. All floodway district uses allowed as a permitted or conditional use shall meet the following standards: 
(1)  No use shall be permitted in the floodway district that would result in any increase in the 100-year flood level. Consideration of the effects of any development on flood levels shall be based upon the assumption that an equal degree of development would be allowed for similarly situated lands. 
(2)  All uses within the floodway district shall: 
a.  Be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage. 
b.  Use construction methods and practices that will minimize flood damage. 
c.  Use construction materials and utility equipment that are resistant to flood damage. 
(3)  No use shall affect the capacity or conveyance of the channel or floodway of any tributary to the main stream, drainage ditch or any other drainage facility or system. 
(4)  Structures, buildings and sanitary and utility systems, if permitted, shall meet the applicable performance standards of the floodway fringe district and shall be constructed or aligned to present the minimum possible resistance to flood flows. 
(5)  Buildings, if permitted, shall have a low flood damage potential and shall not be for human habitation. 
(6)  Storage of materials or equipment that are buoyant, flammable, explosive or injurious to human, animal or plant life is prohibited. Storage of other material may be allowed if readily removable from the floodway district within the time available after flood warning. 
(7)  Watercourse alterations or relocations (channel changes and modifications) must be designed to maintain the flood carrying capacity within the altered or relocated portion. In addition, such alterations or relocations must be approved by the department of natural resources. 
(8)  Any fill allowed in the floodway must be shown to have some beneficial purpose and shall be limited to the minimum amount necessary. 
(9)  Pipeline river or stream crossings shall be buried in the streambed and banks or otherwise sufficiently protected to prevent rupture due to channel degradation and meandering or due to the action of flood flows. 
(Code 1996, § 131.04) 
Sec. 50-245. - Floodway Fringe (Overlay) District (FF). 
(a)  Permitted uses. All uses within the floodway fringe district shall be permitted to the extent that they are not prohibited by any other ordinance (or underlying zoning district) and provided they meet applicable performance standards of the floodway fringe district. 
(b)  Performance standards. All uses must be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage and meet the following applicable performance standards. 
(1)  All structures shall: 
a.  Be adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure. 
b.  Use construction methods and practices that will minimize flood damage. 
c.  Use construction materials and utility equipment that are resistant to flood damage. 
(2)  Residential buildings. All new or substantially improved residential structures shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated a minimum of one foot above the 100-year flood level. Construction shall be upon compacted fill which shall, at all points, be no lower than one foot above the 100-year flood level and extend at such elevation at least 18 feet beyond the limits of any structure erected thereon. Alternate methods of elevating (such as piers) may be allowed subject to favorable consideration by the board of adjustment, where existing topography, street grades, or other factors preclude elevating by fill. In such cases, the methods used must be adequate to support the structure as well as withstand the various forces and hazards associated with flooding. All new residential structures shall be provided with a means of access which will be passable by wheeled vehicles during the 100-year flood. 
(3)  Non-residential buildings. All new or substantially improved non-residential buildings shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated a minimum of one foot above the 100-year flood level, or together with attendant utility and sanitary systems, be floodproofed to such a level. When floodproofing is utilized, a professional engineer registered in the state shall certify that the floodproofing methods used are adequate to withstand the flood depths, pressures, velocities, impact and uplift forces and other factors associated with the 100-year flood; and that the structure, below the 100-year flood level, is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water. A record of the certification indicating the specific elevation (in relation to National Geodetic Vertical Datum) to which any structures are floodproofed shall be maintained by the administrator. 
(4)  All new and substantially improved structures: 
a.  Fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor (not including basements) that are subject to flooding shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered professional engineer or meet or exceed the following minimum criteria: 
1.  A minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding shall be provided. 
2.  The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade. 
3.  Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other coverings or devices provided they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters. 
Such areas shall be used solely for parking of vehicles, building access and low damage potential storage. 
b.  New and substantially improved structures must be designed (or modified) and adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy. 
c.  New and substantially improved structures must be constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding. 
(5)  Factory-built homes: 
a.  All factory-built homes, including those placed in existing factory-built home parks or subdivisions, shall be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the structure is a minimum of one foot above the 100-year flood level. 
b.  All factory-built homes, including those placed in existing factory-built home parks or subdivisions shall be anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. 
(6)  Utility and sanitary systems: 
a.  On-site waste disposal and water supply systems shall be located or designed to avoid impairment to the system or contamination from the system during flooding. 
b.  All new and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system as well as the discharge of effluent into floodwaters. Wastewater treatment facilities (other than on-site systems) shall be provided with a level of flood protection equal to or greater than one foot above the 100-year flood elevation. 
c.  New or replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system. Water supply treatment facilities (other than on-site systems) shall be provided with a level of protection equal to or greater than one foot above the 100-year flood elevation. 
d.  Utilities such as gas or electrical systems shall be located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage to the system and the risk associated with such flood damaged or impaired systems. 
(7)  Storage of materials and equipment that are flammable, explosive or injurious to human, animal or plant life is prohibited unless elevated a minimum of one foot above the 100-year flood level. Other material and equipment must either be similarly elevated or: 
a.  Not be subject to major flood damage and be anchored to prevent movement due to floodwaters; or 
b.  Be readily removable from the area within the time available after flood warning. 
(8)  Flood control structural works such as levees, flood walls, etc. shall provide, at a minimum, protection from a 100-year flood with a minimum of three feet of design freeboard and shall provide for adequate interior drainage. In addition, the department of natural resources shall approve structural flood control works. 
(9)  Watercourse alterations or relocations must be designed to maintain the flood-carrying capacity within the altered or relocated portion. In addition, the department of natural resources must approve such alterations or relocations. 
(10)  Subdivisions (including factory-built home parks and subdivisions) shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damages and shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood damage. Development associated with subdivision proposals (including the installation of public utilities) shall meet the applicable performance standards of this division. Subdivision proposals intended for residential use shall provide all lots with a means of access which will be passable by wheeled vehicles during the 100-year flood. Proposals for subdivisions greater than five acres or 50 lots (whichever is less) shall include 100-year flood elevation data for those areas located within the floodplain (overlay) district. 
(11)  Accessory structures. 
a.  Detached garages, sheds, and similar structures accessory to a residential use are exempt from the 100-year flood elevation requirements where the following criteria are satisfied. 
1.  The structure shall not be used for human habitation. 
2.  The structure shall be designed to have low flood damage potential. 
3.  The structure shall be constructed and placed on the building site so as to offer minimum resistance to the flow of floodwaters. 
4.  The structure shall be firmly anchored to prevent flotation which may result in damage to other structures. 
5.  The structure's service facilities such as electrical and heating equipment shall be elevated or floodproofed to at least one foot above the 100-year flood level. 
b.  Exemption from the 100-year flood elevation requirements for such a structure may result in increased premium rates for flood insurance coverage of the structure and its contents. 
(12)  Recreational vehicles. 
a.  Recreational vehicles are exempt from the requirements of subsection (b)(5) of this section regarding anchoring and elevation of factory-built homes when the following criteria are satisfied: 
1.  The recreational vehicle shall be located on the site for less than 180 consecutive days; and 
2.  The recreational vehicle must be fully licensed and ready for highway use. A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system and is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices and has no permanently attached additions. 
b.  Recreational vehicles that are located on the site for more than 180 consecutive days or are not ready for highway use must satisfy requirements of subsection (b)(5) of this section regarding anchoring and elevation of factory-built homes. 
(13)  Pipeline river and stream crossings shall be buried in the streambed and banks, or otherwise sufficiently protected to prevent rupture due to channel degradation and meandering. 
(Code 1996, § 131.05) 
Sec. 50-246. - General Floodplain (Overlay) District (FP). 
(a)  Permitted uses. The following uses shall be permitted within the general floodplain district to the extent they are not prohibited by any other ordinance (or underlying zoning district) and provided they do not include placement of structures, factory-built homes, fill or other obstructions, the storage of materials or equipment, excavation or alteration of a watercourse. 
(1)  Agricultural uses such as general farming, pasture, grazing, outdoor plant nurseries, horticulture, viticulture, truck farming, forestry, sod farming and wild crop harvesting. 
(2)  Industrial-commercial uses such as loading areas, parking areas, airport landing strips. 
(3)  Private and public recreational uses such as golf courses, tennis courts, driving ranges, archery ranges, picnic grounds, boat launching ramps, swimming areas, parks, wildlife and nature preserves, game farms, fish hatcheries, shooting preserves, target ranges, trap and skeet ranges, hunting and fishing areas, hiking and horseback riding trails. 
(4)  Residential uses such as lawns, gardens, parking areas and play areas. 
(b)  Conditional uses. Any uses which involve placement of structures, factory-built homes, fill or other obstructions, storage of materials or equipment, excavation or alteration of a watercourse may be allowed only upon issuance of a conditional use permit by the board of adjustment as provided for in section 50-248(c). All such uses shall be reviewed by the department of natural resources to determine: 
(1)  Whether the land involved is either wholly or partly within the floodway or floodway fringe; and 
(2)  The 100-year flood level. 
The applicant shall be responsible for providing the department of natural resources with sufficient technical information to make the determination. 
(c)  Performance standards. 
(1)  All conditional uses, or portions thereof, to be located in the floodway as determined by the department of natural resources shall meet the applicable provisions and standards of the floodway (overlay) district (section 50-244). 
(2)  All conditional uses, or portions thereof, to be located in the floodway fringe as determined by the department of natural resources shall meet the applicable provisions and standards of the floodway fringe (overlay) district (section 50-245). 
(Code 1996, § 131.06; Ord. No. 2005-1642) 
Sec. 50-247. - Shallow Flooding (Overlay) District (SF). 
(a)  Permitted uses. All uses within the shallow flooding district shall be permitted to the extent that they are not prohibited by any other ordinance (or underlying zoning district) and provided they meet the applicable performance standards of the shallow flooding district. 
(b)  Performance standards. The performance standards for the shallow flooding district shall be the same as the performance standards for the floodway fringe district with the following exceptions: 
(1)  In shallow flooding areas designated as an AO zone on the flood insurance rate map, the minimum floodproofing/flood protection elevation shall be equal to the number of feet as specified on the FIRM (or a minimum of two feet if no number is specified) above the highest natural grade adjacent to the structure. 
(2)  In shallow flooding areas designated as an AH zone on the flood insurance rate map, the minimum floodproofing/flood protection elevation shall be equal to the elevation as specified on the FIRM. 
(Code 1996, § 131.07) 
Sec. 50-248. - Administration. 
(a)  Appointment, duties and responsibilities of zoning administrator. 
(1)  The city building official is appointed to implement and administer the provisions of this division and will herein be referred to as the administrator. 
(2)  Duties and responsibilities of the administrator shall include, but not necessarily be limited to, the following: 
a.  Review all floodplain development permit applications to ensure that the provisions of this division will be satisfied. 
b.  Review floodplain development applications to ensure that all necessary permits have been obtained from federal, state and local governmental agencies including approval when required from the department of natural resources for floodplain construction. 
c.  Record and maintain a record of: 
1.  The elevation (in relation to National Geodetic Vertical Datum) of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new or substantially improved structures; or 
2.  The elevation to which new or substantially improved structures have been floodproofed. 
d.  Notify adjacent communities/counties and the department of natural resources prior to any proposed alteration or relocation of a watercourse and submit evidence of such notifications to the federal emergency management agency. 
e.  Keep a record of all permits, appeals and such other transactions and correspondence pertaining to the administration of this division. 
f.  Submit to the federal insurance administrator an annual report concerning the community's participation, utilizing the annual report form supplied by the federal insurance administrator. 
g.  Notify the federal insurance administration of any annexations or modifications to the community's boundaries. 
h.  Review subdivision proposals to ensure such proposals are consistent with the purpose of this division and advise the city council of potential conflict. 
(b)  Floodplain development permit. 
(1)  Permit required. A floodplain development permit issued by the administrator shall be secured prior to any floodplain development (any manmade change to improved and unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations), including the placement of factory-built homes. Fees are as follows: 
7/1/16 7/1/17 7/1/18 Floodplain development permit $66.00 $68.00 $70.00  
(2)  Application for permit. Application shall be made on forms furnished by the administrator and shall include the following: 
a.  Description of the work to be covered by the permit for which application is to be made. 
b.  Description of the land on which the proposed work is to be done (i.e., lot, block, track, street address or similar description) that will readily identify and locate the work to be done. 
c.  Indication of the use or occupancy for which the proposed work is intended. 
d.  Elevation of the 100-year flood. 
e.  Elevation (in relation to National Geodetic Vertical Datum) of the lowest floor (including basement) of buildings or of the level to which a building is to be floodproofed. 
f.  For buildings being improved or rebuilt, the estimated cost of improvements and market value of the building prior to the improvements. 
g.  Such other information as the administrator deems reasonably necessary (e.g., drawings or a site plan) for the purpose of this division. 
(3)  Action on permit application. The administrator shall, within a reasonable time, make a determination as to whether the proposed floodplain development meets the applicable standards of this division and shall approve or disapprove the application. For disapprovals, the applicant shall be informed, in writing, of the specific reasons therefor. The administrator shall not issue permits for variances except as directed by the city board of adjustment. 
(4)  Construction and use to be as provided in application and plans. Floodplain development permits based on the approved plans and applications authorize only the use, arrangement, and construction set forth in such approved plans and applications and no other use, arrangement or construction. Any use, arrangement, or construction at variance with that authorized shall be deemed a violation of this division. The applicant shall be required to submit certification by a professional engineer or land surveyor, as appropriate, registered in the state, that the finished fill, building floor elevations, floodproofing, or other flood protection measures were accomplished in compliance with the provisions of this division, prior to the use or occupancy of any structure. 
(c)  Conditional uses, appeals and variances. 
(1)  Appointment and duties of board of adjustment. A board of adjustment is established which shall hear and decide: 
a.  Applications for conditional uses upon which the board is authorized to pass under this division; 
b.  Appeals; and 
c.  Requests for variances to the provisions of this division, and shall take any other action which is required of the board. 
(2)  Conditional uses. Requests for conditional uses shall be submitted to the administrator, who shall forward such to the board of adjustment for consideration. Such requests shall include information ordinarily submitted with applications as well as any additional information deemed necessary to the board of adjustment. 
(3)  Appeals. Where it is alleged there is any error in any order, requirement, decision, or determination made by an administrative official in the enforcement of this division, the aggrieved party may appeal such action. The notice of appeal shall be filed with the board of adjustment and with the official from whom the appeal is taken and shall set forth the specific reason for the appeal. The official from whom the appeal is taken shall transmit to the board of adjustment all the documents constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken. 
(4)  Variance. The zoning board of adjustment may authorize upon request in specific cases such variances from the terms of this division that will not be contrary to the public interest where, owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement of the provisions of this division will result in unnecessary hardship. Variances granted must meet the following applicable standards. 
a.  Variances shall only be granted upon: 
1.  A showing of good and sufficient cause; 
2.  A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant; and 
3.  A determination that the granting of the variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public or conflict with existing local codes or ordinances. 
b.  Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the 100-year flood would result. Consideration of the effects of any development on flood levels shall be based upon the assumption that an equal degree of development would be allowed for similarly situated lands. 
c.  Variances shall only be granted upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief. 
d.  In cases where the variance involves a lower level of flood protection for buildings than what is ordinarily required by this division, the applicant shall be notified in writing over the signature of the administrator that: 
1.  The issuance of a variance will result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up to amounts as high as $25.00 for $100.00 of insurance coverage; and 
2.  Such construction increases risks to life and property. 
e.  All variances granted shall have the concurrence or approval of the department of natural resources. 
(5)  Hearings and decisions of the board of adjustment. 
a.  Hearings. Upon the filing with the board of adjustment of an appeal, an application for a conditional use or a request for a variance, the board shall hold a public hearing. The board shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing and give public notice thereof, as well as due notice to parties in interest. At the hearing, any party may appear in person or by agent or attorney and present written or oral evidence. The board may require the appellant or applicant to provide such information as is reasonably deemed necessary and may request the technical assistance or evaluation of a professional engineer or other expert person or agency, including the department of natural resources. 
b.  Decisions. The board shall arrive at a decision on an appeal, conditional use or variance within a reasonable time. In passing upon an appeal, the board may, so long as such action is in conformity with the provisions of this division, reverse or affirm, wholly or in part, or modify the order, requirement, decision, or determination appealed from, and it shall make its decision, in writing, setting forth the findings of fact and the reasons for its decision. In granting a conditional use or variance, the board shall consider such factors as contained in this section and all other relevant sections of this division and may prescribe such conditions as contained in subsection (c)(5)d of this section. 
c.  Factors upon which the decision of the board of adjustment shall be based. In passing upon applications for variances, the board shall consider all relevant factors specified in other sections of this division and: 
1.  The danger to life and property due to increased flood heights or velocities caused by encroachments; 
2.  The danger that materials may be swept on to other land or downstream to the injury of others; 
3.  The proposed water supply and sanitation systems and the ability of these systems to prevent disease, contamination and unsanitary conditions; 
4.  The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner; 
5.  The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the city; 
6.  The requirements of the facility for a floodplain location; 
7.  The availability of alternative locations not subject to flooding for the proposed use; 
8.  The compatibility of the proposed use with existing development and development anticipated in the foreseeable future; 
9.  The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and floodplain management program for the area; 
10.  The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles; 
11.  The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment transport of the floodwater expected at the site; 
12.  The cost of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities (sewer, gas, electrical and water systems), facilities, streets and bridges; 
13.  Such other factors which are relevant to the purpose of this division. 
d.  Conditions attached to variances. Upon consideration of the factors listed above, the board of adjustment may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purpose of this division. Such conditions may include, but not necessarily be limited to: 
1.  Modification of waste disposal and water supply facilities; 
2.  Limitation of periods of use and operation; 
3.  Imposition of operational controls, sureties, and deed restrictions; 
4.  Requirements for construction of channel modifications, dikes, levees and other protective measures, provided such are approved by the department of natural resources and are deemed the only practical alternative to achieving the purpose of this division; 
5.  Floodproofing measures shall be designed consistent with the flood protection elevation for the particular area, flood velocities, duration, rate of rise, hydrostatic and hydrodynamic forces, and other factors associated with the regulatory flood. The board of adjustment shall require that the applicant submit a plan or document certified by a registered professional engineer that the floodproofing measures are consistent with the regulatory flood protection elevation and associated flood factors for the particular area. 
(6)  Appeals to the court. Any person or persons, jointly or severally, aggrieved by any decision of the board of adjustment may present to a court of record a petition, duly verified, setting forth that such decision is illegal, in whole or in part, specifying the grounds of the illegality. Such petition shall be presented to the court within 30 days after the filing of the decision in the office of the board. 
(Code 1996, § 131.08) 
Sec. 50-249. - Nonconforming uses. 
(a)  A structure or the use of a structure or premises which was lawful before the passage or amendment of this division, but which is not in conformity with the provisions of this division, may be continued subject to the following conditions: 
(1)  If such use is discontinued for six consecutive months, any future use of the building premises shall conform to this division. 
(2)  Uses or adjuncts thereof that are or become nuisances shall not be entitled to continue as nonconforming uses. 
(3)  If any nonconforming use or structure is destroyed by any means, including flood, it shall not be reconstructed if the cost is more than 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred, unless it is reconstructed in conformity with the provisions of this division. 
(b)  Except as provided in subsection (a)(2) of this section, any use which has been permitted as a conditional use or variance shall be considered a conforming use. 
(Code 1996, § 131.09) 
Sec. 50-250. - Penalties for violation. 
    Violations of the provisions of this division or failure to comply with any of the requirements (including violations of conditions and safeguards established in connection with grants of conditional uses or variances) shall constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who violates this division or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not more than $500.00 or imprisoned for not more than 30 days. Each day such violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the city from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy violation. 
(Code 1996, § 131.10) 
Sec. 50-251. - Amendments. 
    The regulations and standards set forth in this division may from time to time be amended, supplemented, changed, or repealed. No amendment, supplement, change, or modification is undertaken without prior approval of the department of natural resources. 
(Code 1996, § 131.11) 
Secs. 50-252-50-280. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 50-281. - Duties of zoning administrative officer, zoning board of adjustment, council and courts on matter of appeal. 
    It is the intent of this article that all questions of interpretation and enforcement shall be first presented to the administrative official, and that such questions shall be presented to the zoning board of adjustment only on review from the decision of the administrative official, and that recourse from the decisions of the zoning board of adjustment shall be to courts as provided by law. It is further the intent of this article that the duties of the council in connection with this article shall not include hearing and deciding questions of interpretation and enforcement that may arise. The procedure for deciding such questions shall be as stated in this article. Under this article, the council shall have only the duties of: 
(1)  Considering adopting or rejecting proposed amendments or the repeal of this article, as provided by law; 
(2)  Establishing fees by resolution; and 
(3)  Considering planned residential units as provided for in this article. 
(Code 1996, § 124.01) 
Secs. 50-282-50-310. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ZONING COMPLIANCE PERMITS 

Sec. 50-311. - Required. 
    It is unlawful to commence or to proceed with the erection, construction, reconstruction, conversion, alteration, enlargement, extension, razing or moving of any building or structure, or of any portion thereof, without first having applied in writing to the zoning administrative officer for a zoning compliance permit to do so. A separate permit is required for each building or structure unless the building or structure is part of a larger complex such as the display buildings of a lumber yard. A zoning compliance permit is also required for an automobile dealership license. A zoning compliance permit is not required for the following; however, the exemption shall not be deemed to grant authorization for any work to be done in any manner in violation of the provisions of this division or any other laws or ordinances of the city: 
(1)  A one-story detached accessory building used as a tool or storage shed, playhouse, or a similar use, provided the projected roof area does not exceed 120 square feet. 
(2)  Retaining wall. 
(3)  Essential service building or structure. 
(4)  Entrance platform no larger than five feet by five feet and no more than 30 inches above grade. 
(5)  Swimming pools less than two feet in water capacity depth. Swimming pools greater than two feet in water capacity depth require setbacks for accessory buildings in a R zone. 
(6)  Decks less than six inches above the average grade of the ground. 
(7)  Residential, unenclosed disabled ramp. 
(Code 1996, § 124.02) 
Sec. 50-312. - Application for permit. 
    To obtain a zoning compliance permit the applicant shall first file an application in writing on a form furnished by the zoning administrative officer. Each application shall include: 
(1)  A description of the land on which the proposed activity is to be done, including a legal description, street address, or similar description, that will readily identify and locate the proposed building or activity; 
(2)  A description of the proposed action, including the use and any proposed structures; 
(3)  A plot plan showing: 
a.  All existing and proposed buildings or additions to existing buildings; 
b.  Dimensions of existing and proposed buildings or additions thereto; 
c.  Dimensions between the property lines and the buildings or proposed additions; 
d.  Size and location of existing or proposed parking space; 
(4)  Signature of the applicant or his agent; 
(5)  Any other data or information as may be required by the zoning administrative officer. 
(Code 1996, § 124.03) 
Sec. 50-313. - Issuance of permit. 
    If, after reviewing the application, the zoning administrative officer finds that the building or structure in the proposed location complies with all the provisions of this division, he shall upon payment of the required fee issue a building permit therefor. The application shall be signed by either the owner, builder, or authorized agent. 
(Code 1996, § 124.04) 
Sec. 50-314. - Refusal of permit. 
    If, after reviewing the application, the zoning administrative officer finds that the building or structure in the proposed location does not comply with the provisions of this division, he shall furnish the applicant with a statement, signed by the enforcing officer, refusing to issue such permit and setting forth the reason for such refusal. The refusal by the zoning administrative officer to issue a permit may be appealed by the applicant to the zoning adjustment board in the manner provided herein. 
(Code 1996, § 124.05) 
Sec. 50-315. - Permit records; fees. 
    The zoning administrative officer shall keep a record in his office of all applications filed, permits issued, or refused, and if refused, and appealed, final action thereon. The city council shall establish a fee by resolution which shall be paid at the clerk's office for each zoning compliance permit issued. No refunds, or parts thereof, will be issued. 
(Code 1996, § 124.06) 
Sec. 50-316. - Expiration; extension of permits. 
    Any zoning compliance permit not used shall expire in 180 days. However, if new construction is required, the 180 days shall start on the date of issuance of occupancy certificate. A zoning compliance permit may be extended once for a period not exceeding 180 days by the zoning administrative officer. 
(Code 1996, § 124.07) 
Secs. 50-317-50-335. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION 

Sec. 50-336. - Established; member number and qualifications. 
    There shall be a city planning and zoning commission consisting of nine members. Seven members shall be residents of the city, appointed by the council. Two members shall be appointed by the county board of supervisors, one being a member of the board of supervisors, or the board's designee, and the other member shall be a resident of the area outside the city over which the zoning jurisdiction of the city has been extended. All commission members shall be qualified by knowledge or experience to act in matters pertaining to the development of a city plan and shall not hold any elective office in the city government. 
(Code 1996, § 120.01) 
State Law reference- Powers and duties of zoning commissions, Code of Iowa § 414.6; extending zoning authority to unincorporated areas outside city limits, Code of Iowa § 414.23. 
Sec. 50-337. - Term of office. 
    The term of office of the members of the commission shall be four years and shall commence on June 1. All commission members currently appointed by city council shall serve out their current terms in accordance with their original appointment. The terms of not more than one-third of the members will expire in any one year. 
(Code 1996, § 120.02;) 
Sec. 50-338. - Vacancies. 
    If any vacancy exists on the commission caused by resignation, or otherwise, a successor for the remainder of the term shall be appointed in the same manner as the original appointee. 
(Code 1996, § 120.03) 
Sec. 50-339. - Compensation. 
    All members of the commission shall serve without compensation, except their actual expenses, which are subject to the approval of the council. 
(Code 1996, § 120.04) 
Sec. 50-340. - Powers and duties. 
    The commission shall have and exercise the following powers and duties: 
(1)  Selection of officers. The commission shall choose annually at its first regular meeting one of its members to act as chairperson and another as vice-chairperson, who shall perform all the duties of the chairperson during the chairperson's absence or disability. 
(2)  Adopt rules and regulations. The commission shall adopt such rules and regulations governing its organization and procedure as it may deem necessary. 
(3)  Annual report. The commission shall each year make a report to the mayor and council of its proceedings, with a full statement of its receipts, disbursements and the progress of its work during the preceding fiscal year. 
(4)  Appointment of assistants. Subject to the limitations contained in this division as to the expenditure of funds, the commission may appoint such assistants as it may deem necessary and prescribe and define their respective duties and fix and regulate the compensation to be paid to the several persons employed by it. 
(5)  Comprehensive plan. The commission shall have full power and authority to make or cause to be made such surveys, studies, maps, plans, or charts of the whole or any portion of the city or of any land outside thereof which, in the opinion of the commission, bear relation to the comprehensive plan and shall bring its studies and recommendations to the attention of the council and may also publish such studies and recommendations. 
(6)  Comprehensive plan; preparation. For the purpose of making a comprehensive plan for the physical development of the city, the commission shall make careful and comprehensive studies of present conditions and future growth of the city and with due regard to its relation to neighboring territory. The plan shall be made with the general purpose of guiding and accomplishing a coordinated, adjusted and harmonious development of the city and its environs which will, in accordance with the present and future needs, best promote health, safety, morals, order, convenience, prosperity, and general welfare, as well as efficiency and economy in the process of development. 
(7)  Comprehensive plan: public hearing. Before adopting a comprehensive plan as referred to in the preceding subsection, or any part of it, or any substantial amendment thereof, the commission shall hold at least one public hearing thereon, notice of the time of which shall be given by one publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the city not less than seven nor more than 20 days before the date of hearing. However, in no case shall the public hearing be held earlier than the next regularly scheduled council meeting following the published notice. The adoption of the plan or part or amendment thereof shall be by resolution of the commission carried by the affirmative vote of not less than two-thirds of the members of the commission. After adoption of the plan by the commission an attested copy thereof shall be certified to the council and the council may approve the same. When the plan or any modification or amendment thereof shall receive the approval of the council, the plan until subsequently modified or amended as herein authorized shall constitute the official city plan. 
(8)  Comprehensive plan; amendments. When the comprehensive plan has been adopted, no substantial amendment or modification thereof shall be made without such proposed change first being referred to the commission for its recommendations. If the commission disapproves the proposed change it may be adopted by the council only by the affirmative vote of at least three-fourths of the members of the council. 
(9)  Recommendations of improvements. No statuary, memorial or work of art in a public place, and no public building, bridge, viaduct, street fixtures, public structure or appurtenances, shall be located or erected, or site therefor obtained, nor shall any permit be issued by any department of the city for the erection or location thereof until and unless the design and proposed location of any such improvement shall have been submitted to the commission and its recommendations thereon obtained, except such requirements and recommendations shall not act as a stay upon action for any such improvement when the commission after 30 days' written notice requesting such recommendations, shall have failed to file same. 
(10)  Review and comment on plats. All plans, plats, or re-plats of subdivision or re-subdivisions of land embraced in the city or adjacent thereto, laid out in lots or plats with the streets, alleys, or other portions of the same intended to be dedicated to the public in the city, shall first be submitted to the commission and its recommendations obtained before approval by the council. 
(11)  Review and comment of street and park improvements. No plan for any street, park, parkway, boulevard, traffic-way, river front, or other public improvement affecting the city plan shall be finally approved by the city or the character or location thereof determined, unless such proposal shall first have been submitted to the commission and the commission shall have had 30 days within which to file its recommendations thereon. 
(12)  Zoning. The commission shall have and exercise all the powers and duties and privileges in preparing and amending the city zoning code as provided by the Code of Iowa ch. 414. 
(13)  Fiscal responsibilities. The commission shall have full, complete and exclusive authority to expend for and on behalf of the city all sums of money appropriated to it, and to use and expend all gifts, donations or payments whatsoever which are received by the city for city planning and zoning purposes. 
(14)  Limitation on entering contracts. The commission shall have no power to contract debts beyond the amount of its original or amended appropriation as approved by the council for the present year. 
(Code 1996, § 120.05) 
State Law reference- Building restrictions, Code of Iowa § 414.1; powers and duties of zoning commission, Code of Iowa § 414.6. 
Secs. 50-341-50-368. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT 

Sec. 50-369. - Established. 
    There shall be a zoning board of adjustment, hereinafter referred to as the board, consisting of seven members. 
(1)  Five members shall be residents of the city, appointed by the council, and two members shall be residents of the area outside the city over which the zoning jurisdiction of the city has been extended, appointed by the county board of supervisors. 
(2)  Appointments to the board shall be for a term of five years. 
(3)  Any vacancy shall be filled in the same manner for the unexpired portion of the term. In the event of the absence from the city or the incapacity of a member, the council may appoint a substitute who shall serve as a member of the board, with the same powers and authority as the regular member, until such regular member has returned, or has become capacitated for further service. 
(4)  Terms of office to commence on June 1 of the year of the appointment. All board members currently appointed by city council shall serve out their current terms in accordance with their original appointment. 
(5)  No member may serve for more than two terms. 
(6)  All members of the board shall serve without compensation. 
(Code 1996, § 124.08) 
Sec. 50-370. - Secretary of board. 
    The clerk shall serve as the secretary of the board. In the absence of the secretary, the chairperson of the board may appoint one of the members of the board to act as secretary pro tem for the meeting. The board has the power to call on any city department for assistance in the performance of its duties, and it shall be the duty of such department to render such assistance as may be reasonably required. 
(Code 1996, § 124.09) 
Sec. 50-371. - Regulations of board. 
    The board may adopt, from time to time, subject to the approval of the council, such rules and regulations as it may deem necessary to carry into effect the provisions of this division. 
(Code 1996, § 124.10) 
Sec. 50-372. - Chairperson of board; meetings; quorum. 
    The board chairperson, meetings and quorum shall be set out as follows: 
(1)  The board shall annually elect its own chairperson at the first meeting on or after January 1 of each year. 
(2)  The chairperson, or in the chairperson's absence the acting chairperson, may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses. 
(3)  There shall be a fixed place of meeting and all meetings shall be open to the public. 
(4)  The presence of four members shall be necessary to constitute a quorum. 
(5)  The concurring vote of four members of the board is necessary on all matters upon which it is required to pass under the provisions of this division. 
(6)  It shall be the chairperson's responsibility to set all hearing dates and times at which time the board shall consider any appeals brought forth by any aggrieved person or company. 
(Code 1996, § 124.11) 
Sec. 50-373. - Records of board required. 
    The secretary of the board shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon each question. If a member is absent or fails to vote, the minutes shall indicate such fact. The board shall keep records of its official actions, which shall be on file in the office of the clerk as a public record. 
(Code 1996, § 124.12) 
Sec. 50-374. - Appeals to board authorized; procedure. 
    Appeals to the board may be taken by any person or company aggrieved by any decision of the enforcing officer. Such appeal shall be taken within a reasonable time, as provided by the rules of the board, by filing with the secretary of the board a written notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof and the publication of the notice of appeal in a paper of general circulation in the city as provided by the regulation of the board. The secretary of the board shall give prompt notice of such appeal to the enforcing officer who shall forthwith transmit to the board all papers and documents constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken. An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from, unless the enforcing officer certifies to the board after the notice of the appeal shall have been filed with him, that by reason of facts stated in the appeal a stay would, in his opinion, cause imminent peril to life or property. In such case, the proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than by a restraining order which may be granted by a court of record on application of notice to the enforcing officer and due cause shown. 
(Code 1996, § 124.13) 
Sec. 50-375. - Fee for appeals. 
    All appeals to the board filed with the secretary shall be accompanied by a filing fee payable to the city to cover costs of publishing notice of appeal and other incidental expenses. The council shall establish the fee by resolution. 
(Code 1996, § 124.14) 
Sec. 50-376. - Disposition of appeals. 
    The final disposition of any appeal shall be in the form of a resolution by the board, either reversing, modifying, or affirming the decision or determination appealed from. A copy of such resolution shall be filed with the enforcing officer. 
(Code 1996, § 124.15) 
Sec. 50-377. - Powers of the board. 
(a)  Variances. To authorize upon review in specific cases such variance from the terms of this division as will not be contrary to the public interest where owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement of the provisions of this division would result in unnecessary hardship. A variance from the terms of this division shall not be granted by the board unless and until: 
(1)  A written application for a variance is submitted demonstrating that one of the following conditions applies: 
a.  That special conditions and circumstances exist which are peculiar to the land, structure, or building involved, and which are not applicable to other lands, structures, or buildings in the same district. 
b.  That literal interpretation of the provisions of this division would deprive the applicant of rights commonly enjoyed by other properties in the same district under the terms of this division. 
c.  That the special conditions and circumstances do not result from the actions of the applicant. 
d.  That granting the variance requested will not confer on the applicant any special privilege that is denied by this division to other lands, structures or buildings in the same district. 
No nonconforming use of neighboring lands, structures, or buildings in the same district, and no permitted use of lands, structures, or buildings in other districts, shall be considered grounds for the issuance of a variance. 
(2)  Notice of public hearing shall be given in advance of the public hearing. The owner of the property for which the variance is sought or his agent and all affected property owners within 50 feet of the exterior boundaries of the property (intervening streets and alleys shall not be included in and computing the 50 feet) shall be notified by mail. The notice shall be given at least seven days in advance of hearing by placing notices in the United States mail, addressed to the last-known address of property owners. 
(3)  A public hearing shall be held duly advertised to the public according to the Code of Iowa ch. 362. Any party may appear in person, or by attorney. 
(4)  The board shall make findings that the requirements of this section have been met by the applicant for a variance. 
(5)  The board shall further make a finding that the reasons set forth in the application justify the granting of the variance. 
(6)  The board shall further make a finding that the granting of the variance will be in harmony with the general purpose and intent of this division, and will not be injurious to the neighborhood, or otherwise detrimental to the public welfare. 
In granting any variance, the board may prescribe appropriate conditions and safeguards in conformity with this division. Violation of such conditions and safeguards, when made a part of the terms under which the variance is granted, shall be deemed a violation of this division. Under no circumstances shall the board grant a variance to allow a use not permissible under the terms of this division in the district involved, or any use expressly or by implication prohibited by the terms of this division in the district. 
(b)  Special exceptions. To permit the following exceptions to the district regulations set forth in this division subject to the requirements of this section. 
(1)  To permit erection and use of a building or the use of premises or vary the height and the regulations in any location for a public service corporation for public utility purposes or for purposes of public communication, which the board determines is reasonably necessary for the public convenience or welfare. 
(2)  To permit the extension of a use into a district where it would be otherwise prohibited in a case where a district boundary line is so located that a lot or plot is in more than one district. 
(3)  To hear and decide only such other special exceptions as the board is specifically authorized to pass on by the terms of this division; to decide such questions as are involved in determining whether special exceptions should be granted; and to grant special exceptions with such conditions and safeguards as are appropriate under this division, or to deny special exceptions when not in harmony with the purpose and intent of this division. A special exception shall not be granted by the board unless and until: 
a.  A written application for special exception is submitted indicating the section of this division under which the special exception is sought and stating grounds on which it is requested. 
b.  Notice of public hearing shall be given in advance of public hearing. The owner of the property for which special exception is sought or his agent and all affected property owners within 200 feet of the property (intervening streets and alleys shall not be included in computing the 200 feet) shall be notified at least seven days in advance of the hearing by placing notice in the United States mail addressed to the last-known address of the property owners. 
c.  A public hearing shall be held duly advertised to the public according to the Code of Iowa ch. 362. Any party may appear in person, or by attorney. 
d.  The board shall make a finding that it is empowered under the section of this division described in the application to grant the special exception, and that the granting of the special exception will not adversely affect the public interest. 
In granting any special exception, the board may prescribe appropriate conditions and safeguards in conformity with this division. Violations of such conditions and safeguards, when made part of the terms under which the special exception is granted, shall be deemed a violation of this division. The board may prescribe a time limit within which the action for which the special exception is required shall be begun or completed, or both. Failure to begin or complete, or both, such action within the time limit set shall void the special exception. 
(c)  Special use permits authorized. The zoning board of adjustment may, by special permit after holding the required public hearing and subject to such protective restrictions that it deems necessary, authorize the location, construction, extension or structural alteration of uses and structures that are specifically listed as special exception uses within each district of this division. Notice of time and place of hearing shall be given to all affected property owners within 200 feet of the property (intervening streets and alleys shall not be included in computing the 200 feet) at least seven days in advance of hearing by placing notices in the United States mail, addressed to the last-known address of the property owners. All authorizations passed by the zoning board of adjustment for special permits shall expire 180 days after the date of its authorization unless a building permit has been issued and the actual construction started. Where unusual circumstances may prevent compliance with the time requirement for start of construction, the zoning board of adjustment may, upon written request by the affected party, extend the time for required start of construction an additional 60 days. Excavation shall not be considered construction for the purpose of enforcing this division. 
(d)  In exercising the above-mentioned powers, the board may, so long as such action is in conformity with the terms of this division, reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirement, decision, or determination appealed from and may make such order, requirement, decision, or determination as ought to be made, and to that end shall have powers of the administrative official from whom the appeal is taken. The concurring vote of four members of the board shall be necessary to reverse any order, requirement, decision, or determination of the administrative official, or to decide in favor of the applicant or any matter upon which it is required to pass under this division, or to effect any variation in the application of this division. 
(Code 1996, § 124.16) 
Sec. 50-378. - Appeals from decision of the board. 
    Any taxpayer or any officer, department, board or bureau of the city or any person or persons jointly or severally aggrieved by any decision of the zoning board of adjustment may present to a court of record a petition, duly verified, setting forth that such decision is illegal, in whole or in part, specifying the grounds of the illegality. Such petition shall be presented to the court within 30 days after the filing of the decision in the office of the board. The court may reverse or affirm, wholly or in part, or may modify the decision brought up for review. 
(Code 1996, § 124.17) 
Secs. 50-379-50-399. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - AMENDMENTS 

Sec. 50-400. - Amendments authorized. 
    The council may, from time to time, on its own initiative, on petition, or on recommendation by the planning commission, amend, supplement or change the regulations, districts, or official zoning map herein or subsequently established. The amendments may be of a nature that covers a complete district or use. The amendments, supplements or changes shall not be acted upon until after a report by the planning commission has been received or after 30 days' written notice to the commission and after public notice and hearings as provided by law. The notice of public hearing shall be published as provided by state law, except that at least seven days' notice must be given and in no case shall the public hearing be held earlier than the next regularly scheduled council meeting following the published notice. The amendment, supplement or change shall not become effective except by the favorable vote of a majority of all the members of the council. In the case of a written protest (filed before or at the public hearing) against a change or repeal which is filed with the clerk and signed by the owners of 20 percent or more of the area of the lots included in the proposed change or repeal, or by the owners of 20 percent or more of the property which is located within 200 feet of the exterior boundaries of the property for which the change or repeal is proposed, the change or repeal shall not become effective unless it receives the favorable vote of at least three-fourths of all the members of the council. 
(Code 1996, § 124.18) 
Sec. 50-401. - Petition for amendment. 
    Whenever any person desires that any amendment or change be made in this division, including the text or map, as to any property in the city or within the two-mile zoning jurisdiction, there shall be filed with the clerk a petition requesting the council to make such change or amendment and clearly describing the property and its boundaries as to which the change or amendment is desired, listing the names of all property owners within the affected property and within 200 feet from the exterior boundaries of the affected property. The city shall notify all property owners within the area proposed for change or amendment and within 200 feet of the outward boundaries of the area proposed for change of such proposal and public hearing prior to the required public hearing. These property owners shall be notified by mail. The city planning and zoning commission shall file its recommendations approving, disapproving, or modifying the proposed amendment, supplement or change with the council within 30 days thereafter. The planning and zoning commission may hold a public hearing on the proposal, but such public hearing shall not be used as the required public hearing on the part of the council. It shall be the duty of the council to vote upon such petition within 90 days after the filing of such petition with the clerk, subject, however, to the organization rules of the council. 
(Code 1996, § 124.19) 
Sec. 50-402. - Fee for petitions. 
    All petitions for amendment filed with the clerk will be accompanied by a filing fee payable to the city to cover costs of publishing notice of the proposed amendment and other incidental expenses. No refund shall be made of the fee or any part thereof. The council shall establish the fee by resolution. 
(Code 1996, § 124.20) 
Sec. 50-403. - Renewal of petition after denial. 
    When a petition requesting an amendment, supplement, or change of any regulation prescribed by this division has been denied by the council, such petition cannot be renewed for one year thereafter unless it is signed by at least 50 percent of the property owners who previously objected to the change. 
(Code 1996, § 124.21) 
Secs. 50-404-50-434. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENTS 

Sec. 50-435. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of development agreements is to allow the city and a person, persons, corporation or other legal entity having ownership of real property to enter into an agreement for the future development of real property that is intended to provide the city, the property owner and the community with predictability in the timing and intensity of development and application of development standards. 
(Code 1996, § 129.01) 
Sec. 50-436. - Authority. 
    Such type and form of agreement is an exercise of the city's police powers and contract authority. Such agreements may obligate a party to fund or provide services, infrastructure or other facilities. A development agreement shall reserve authority to impose new or different regulations to the extent required by a serious threat to public health or safety, or a change to state or federal laws that the city is mandated to enforce. 
(Code 1996, § 129.02) 
Sec. 50-437. - Contents. 
    A development agreement is a contract that shall set forth the development standards and other provisions that shall apply to and govern and vest the development, use and mitigation, if any, of the development of real property for the duration specified in the agreement. 
(Code 1996, § 129.03) 
Sec. 50-438. - Definition. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Development standards means: 
(1)  Project elements such as permitted uses, residential densities, and nonresidential densities and intensities of building sizes; 
(2)  The amount and payment of any fees, including impact fees, imposed or agreed to in accordance with any applicable provisions of state and local code, any reimbursement provisions, other financial contributions by the property owner, bonding or alternative sureties, inspection fees, or dedications and easements; 
(3)  Mitigation measures, development conditions, and other requirements and conditions of development; 
(4)  Design standards, if any, including maximum heights, setbacks, drainage requirements, road standards, landscaping and other development features; 
(5)  Parks or open space preservation; 
(6)  The type and extent of any public improvements that may be required, including the timing of construction and amount and type of surety; 
(7)  Development phasing, facility expansions and acquisition of additional property; 
(8)  Project and permit review procedures and the standards for decision making; 
(9)  A build-out or vesting period for applicable standards; 
(10)  Processes for resolving disputes once the agreement is in full force and effect, including review, modification or appeal of a provision; and 
(11)  Any other appropriate development requirements or procedures as may be required by law. 
(Code 1996, § 129.04) 
Sec. 50-439. - Initiation. 
    A development agreement may be initiated by the request of a person, persons, corporation or other legal entity having ownership of real property in the city. The request shall be submitted in writing to the zoning administrator and shall include information on the owner, the property and type of project. 
(Code 1996, § 129.05) 
Sec. 50-440. - Review procedures. 
    Development agreements shall be reviewed as follows: 
(1)  Once the city has negotiated a proposed development agreement, the city planning department shall prepare a report and recommendation. The city planning department shall send the report and the proposed agreement to the planning and zoning commission and schedule a public hearing. 
(2)  Upon holding a hearing on the proposed agreement, the planning and zoning commission shall deliberate upon the agreement and make a recommendation to the city council within 15 days. 
(3)  The planning and zoning commission shall either recommend approval, approval with conditions or denial based upon the decision criteria found in section 50-441. 
(4)  The recommendation of the planning and zoning commission shall be forwarded to the city council for their consideration. 
(5)  The city council may choose to hold a hearing on the proposed development agreement. 
(6)  The city council shall be required by resolution to accept, modify or deny the agreement based upon the decision criteria found in section 50-441. 
(7)  Upon having reached a favorable decision on the agreement, the council will by motion direct the mayor to sign the agreement on behalf of the city. 
(Code 1996, § 129.06) 
Sec. 50-441. - Decision criteria. 
    A development agreement may be adopted upon passage of a resolution with findings that: 
(1)  The proposed agreement is compatible with the goals and policies of the city's comprehensive plan; 
(2)  The proposed agreement is consistent with applicable zoning ordinances, development standards, subdivision regulations and any other applicable development regulations and standards at the time of the proposed agreement; 
(3)  The proposed agreement provides the city and the owners of real property with certainty and predictability about: 
a.  The timing and intensity of development; 
b.  The regulations that will be applied to the current project and any future developments and expansions; and 
c.  The financial obligations of each party in respect to mitigation, infrastructure and public services. 
(4)  The proposed agreement provides for adequate protection of the environment based upon the identified project and any future project phases as defined in the agreement; and 
(5)  The proposed agreement reserves the authority for the city to impose new or different regulations to the extent required by a serious threat to public health safety and welfare. 
(Code 1996, § 129.07) 
Sec. 50-442. - Recording required. 
    A development agreement shall be recorded with the real property records of the county auditor and shall be binding during its term on the parties and their successors and heirs. 
(Code 1996, § 129.08) 
Sec. 50-443. - Public records. 
    The proposed development and any future facility expansions or development phases planned thereto and governed by the development agreement shall be public records available for review; provided, however, that these records or parts thereof may be deemed confidential should they meet any of the definitions for confidential records that may be withheld as may be established by state or federal law. This includes, but is not limited to, trade secrets that are recognized and protected by law, as well as reports to government agencies that, if released, would give advantage to competitors and serve no public purpose. 
(Code 1996, § 129.09) 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - 1996 CODE 
    This table gives the location within this Code of those sections of the 1996 Code, as supplemented through February 5, 2018, that are included herein. Sections of the 1996 Code, as supplemented, not listed have been omitted as repealed, superseded, obsolete or not of a general and permanent nature. For the location of ordinances adopted subsequent thereto, see the table immediately following this table. 
1996 Code 
Section Section 

this Code 1.01 1-1 1.02 1-2 1.03 2-76 1.04 1-20 1.05 1-3 1.06 1-10 1.07 1-4 1.08 1-11 1.09 1-12 - 1-15 1.10 1-13 2.02 2-2 2.03 2-76 2.04 2-2 2.05 2-2 3.01 2-3 3.02 2-4 5.01 2-74 5.02 2-75 5.03 2-76 5.04 2-6 5.05 2-6 5.06 2-7 5.07 2-80 5.08 2-72 5.09 2-77 5.10 2-78 5.11 2-79 5.12 2-82 5.13 2-81 6.01 2-5 6.02 2-5 6.03 2-5 6.04 2-5 6.05 2-5 6.06 2-5 6.07 2-5 7.01 20-19 7.02 20-20 7.03 20-21 7.04 20-22 7.05 20-23 7.07 20-24 7.08 20-25 7.09 20-26 7.10 20-27 7.11 20-28 8.01 20-91 8.02 20-92 8.03 20-93 8.04 20-94 8.05 20-95 8.06 20-96 8.07 20-97 9.01 1-16 9.02 1-16 9.03 1-16 9.04 1-17 9.05 1-18 9.06 1-19 11.01 20-123 11.02 20-124 11.03 20-125 11.04 20-126 11.05 20-127 11.06 20-128 11.07 20-129 11.08 20-130 11.09 20-131 12.02 20-135 12.03 20-135 13.03 20-134 14.02 20-132 14.03 20-133 15.01 2-108 15.02 2-109 15.04 2-110 15.05 2-111 16.01 2-136 16.02 2-137 16.03 2-138 16.04 2-139 16.05 2-140 17.01 2-38 17.02 2-35 - 2-73 17.03 2-36 17.04 2-37 17.05 2-71 17.06 2-40 17.07 2-39 - 2-41 20.01 2-164 20.02 2-165 20.03 2-166 20.04 2-167 20.05 2-168 20.06 2-169 20.07 2-170 20.08 2-171 20.09 2-172 20.10 2-173 20.11 2-174 20.12 2-175 20.13 2-8 20.14 2-176 22.01 2-206 22.02 2-207 22.03 2-208 22.04 2-209 22.05 2-210 22.06 2-211 22.07 2-212 22.08 2-213 22.09 2-214 22.10 2-215 22.11 2-216 22.12 2-217 23.01 2-243 23.02 2-243 23.03 2-243 23.04 2-244 23.05 2-245 23.06 2-246 23.07 2-247 23.08 2-248 24.01 2-275 24.02 2-276 24.03 2-277 25.01 30-19 25.02 30-20 25.03 30-21 25.04 30-22 25.05 30-23 25.06 30-24 25.07 30-24 25.08 30-25 25.09 30-26 26.01 30-56 26.02 30-57 26.03 30-58 26.04 30-59 26.05 30-60 26.07 30-61 26.08 30-62 26.09 30-63 26.10 30-64 27.01 30-65 27.02 30-65 27.03 30-65 27.04 30-65 27.05 30-65 27.06 30-65 27.07 30-65 30.01 22-1 30.02 22-1 30.03 22-1 30.04 22-1 30.05 22-2 30.06 22-2 30.07 22-3 30.08 22-4 30.09 22-5 30.10 22-6 30.11 22-7 30.12 22-8 31.01 22-9 31.02 22-9 31.03 22-9 31.04 22-9 31.05 22-9 31.06 22-9 31.07 22-9 45.01 34-19 45.02 34-20 45.03 34-21 45.04 34-22 45.05 34-23 45.06 34-24 45.07 34-25 45.08 34-26 45.09 34-27 46.01 34-58 46.02 34-60 46.03 34-61 46.04 34-59 46.05 34-62 46.06(1) 12-198 46.06(2) 12-197 46.06(3)(B) 12-197 - 12-198 46.06(3)(C) 12-199 46.06(3)(D) 12-200 46.06(3)(E) 12-200 46.06(4) 12-201 47.01 34-83 47.02 34-84 47.03 34-85 48.01 34-114 48.02(1) 22-65 48.02(2)(I) 22-67 48.02(2) 22-66 48.02(3)(A)(1) 22-68 48.02(3)(A)(2) 22-68 48.02(3)(A)(3) 22-69 48.02(3)(B) 22-70 48.02(3)(C) 22-71 48.02(4) 22-72 48.02(5 22-73 48.03 34-115 48.04 34-116 48.05 34-117 48.06 34-118 48.07 34-119 48.09 34-120 48.10 34-121 48.11 34-122 48.12 42-27 48.15 34-123 48.16 34-124 48.17 34-126 48.18 34-125 48.19 34-121 48.20 34-127 48.21 10-51 49.01 34-154 49.02 34-155 49.03 34-156 49.04 34-157 49.05 22-37 49.06 34-158 49.07 34-159 49.08 34-160 49.09 14-13 49.10 34-153 49.11 34-161 49.12 46-30 50.01 34-191 50.02 34-192 50.03 34-193 50.04 34-194 50.05 34-195 52.01 34-214 52.02 34-215 52.03 34-216 52.04 34-217 52.05 34-218 52.06 34-219 53.01 2-323 53.02 2-324 53.03 2-325 53.04 2-326 55.01 32-1 55.02 32-2 55.02A 32-3 55.03 32-2 - 32-4 55.04 32-184 55.05 32-185 55.06 32-179 56.01 32-180 56.02 32-180 56.03 32-180 56.04 32-181 56.05 32-182 56.06 32-183 56.07 32-186 56.08 32-187 56.09 32-188 57.01 32-48 57.02 32-49 57.03 32-50 57-04 32-50 57.05 32-51 58.01 32-142 58.02 32-143 58.03 32-144 58.04 32-145 58.05 32-146 58.06 32-147 58.07 32-148 58.08 32-149 58.09 32-150 58.10 32-151 58.11 32-152 58.12 32-153 58.13 32-154 60.02 46-1 60.03 46-385 60.04 46-387 60.05 46-390 60.06 46-385 60.07 46-385 60.08 46-385 60.09 46-385 60.10 46-385 60.11 46-388 60.12 46-389 60.13 46-149 60.14 46-386 61.01 46-25 61.02 46-26 61.03 46-27 61.04 46-23 61.05 46-24 62.01 46-2 62.02 46-140 62.03 46-142 62.04 46-143 62.05 46-141 62.07 46-148 62.10 46-144 62.11 46-145 63.01 46-80 63.02 46-81 63.03 46-81 63.04 46-81 63.05 46-81 63.06 46-80 63.07 46-82 63.08 46-83 63.09 46-110 63.10 46-111 63.11 46-112 63.13 46-113 64.01 46-385 64.02 46-146 65.01 46-49 65.02 46-50 65.03 46-51 65.04 46-52 65.06 46-53 65.08 46-147 65.10 46-28 66.01 46-167 66.02 46-168 66.03 46-169 66.04 46-170 66.05 46-171 67.01 46-360 67.02 46-361 67.03 46-362 67.04 46-363 68.01 46-29 68.02 46-29 69.01 46-197 69.02 46-197 69.03 46-205 69.04 46-204 69.05 46-199 69.06 46-201 69.08 46-206 69.09 46-207 69.10 46-208 69.11 46-209 69.12 46-210 69.13 46-211 69.14 46-212 69.15 46-213 69.16. 46-214 69.17 46-200 69.18 46-198 69.19 46-202 69.20 46-203 69.21 46-216 69.22 46-215 69.23 46-196 70.01 46-241 70.02 46-242 70.03 46-243 70.04 46-244 70.05 46-245 70.06 46-246 70.07 46-247 70.08 46-248 71.01 46-409 71.02 46-410 71.03 46-411 71.04 46-412 71.05 46-413 71.06 46-414 75.01 46-309 75.02 46-310 75.03 46-312 75.04 46-313 75.05 46-311 75.06 46-314 75.07 46-315 75.08 46-316 75.09 46-317 75.10 46-318 75.11 46-319 75.12 46-320 75.13 46-321 75.14 46-322 75.15 46-323 75.16 46-324 75.17 46-325 75.18 46-326 75.19 46-327 75.20 46-328 80.02 46-275 80.03 46-276 80.04 46-277 80.05 46-278 80.06 46-279 80.07 46-280 85.01 8-1 85.02 8-25 85.03 8-26 85.04 8-27 85.05 8-29 85.06 8-41 85.07 8-30 85.09 8-31 85.10 8-31 85.11 8-32 85.12 8-35 85.13 8-37 85-14 8-41 85.15 8-39 85.16 8-39 85-16A 8-41 85.17 8-40 85-18 8-40 85-19 8-40 85.20 8-28 85.21 8-34 85.22 8-38 85-23 8-38 85.24 8-3 87.01 8-36 87.02 8-36 90.03 48-97 90.04 48-98 90.05 48-103 90.05A 48-100 90.05B 48-101 90.05D 48-102 90.05E 48-102 90.07 48-99 91.01 48-122 91.02 48-123 91.03 48-124 95.02 48-147 95.03 48-148 95.04 48-149 95.05 48-150 95.06 48-151 95.07 48-152 95.08 48-153 95.09 48-154 95.10 48-155 96.01 48-179 96.02 48-180 96.03 48-181 96.04 48-182 96.06 48-183 96.07 48-184 96.08 48-185 96.09 48-186 96.10 48-187 97.01 48-213 97.02 48-214 97.03 48-215 97.04 48-216 97.05 48-217 97.06 48-218 97.07 48-219 97.08 48-220 98.01 48-249 98.02 48-250 98.03 48-251 98.04 48-252 98.05 48-253 98.06 48-254 98.07 48-255 98.08 48-256 98.09 48-257 98.10 48-258 99.02 48-280 99.02.01 48-281 99.03 48-282 99.04 48-283 99.05 48-284 99.06 48-285 99.07 48-286 99.08 48-287 99.09 48-288 100.01 48-308 100.02 48-309 100.03 48-310 100.04 48-311 100.05 48-312 100.06 48-313 100.07 48-314 100.08 48-315 100.09 48-316 100.10 48-317 100.11 48-318 100.12 48-319 100.13 48-319 100.14 48-320 100.15 48-320 101.01 48-321 101.02 48-322 101.03 48-323 101.04 48-324 101.05 48-325 101.06 48-326 105.01 40-1 105.02 40-2 105.03 40-3 105.04 40-4 105.05 22-38 105.06 40-5 105.07 40-6 105.08 40-7 105.09 40-8 105.10 40-9 105.11 40-10 106.01 40-39 106.02 40-40 106.03 40-41 106.04 40-42 106.05 40-43 106.06 40-44 106.07 40-45 106.08 40-46 106.09 40-47 106.10 40-48 108.01 40-70 108.02 40-71 108.03 40-72 108.04 40-73 108.05 40-74 108.06 40-75 109.01 10-202 109.02 10-203 110.01 14-1 110.02 14-2 110.03 14-3 110.04 14-4 110.05 14-5 110.06 14-6 110.07 14-7 110.08 14-8 110.09 14-9 110.10 14-10 110.11 14-11 110.12 14-12 110.13 14-14 110.14 14-15 110.15 14-16 110.16 14-17 110.17 14-18 111.01 48-25 111.02 48-25 111.03 48-25 111.04 48-26 111.05 48-56 - 48-57 - 48-58 - 48-59 - 48-60 - 48-61 - 48-62 - 48-63 - 48-64 - 48-65 - 48-66 - 48-67 - 48-68 - 48-69 112.01 48-2 112.02 48-2 112.03 48-2 112.04 48-2 113.01 42-312 113.02 42-315 113.03 42-316 113.04 42-317 113.05 42-318 113.06 42-319 113.07 42-320 113.08 42-321 113.09 42-322 113.10 42-323 113.11 42-324 113.12 42-325 113.13 42-313 113.14 42-314 113.15 42-326 114.01 48-1 114.02 48-1 114.03 48-1 115.01 36-1 115.02 36-1 115.03 36-1 116.01 36-2 116.02 36-2 116.03 36-2 117.12 36-23 117.13 36-24 118.01 36-76 118.02 36-77 118.03 36-78 118.04 36-79 118.05 36-80 118.06 36-81 118.07 36-82 118.08 36-83 118.09 36-84 118.10 36-85 118.11 36-86 119.01 36-116 119.02 36-117 119.03 36-118 119.04 36-119 119.05 36-120 119A.01 36-139 119A.02 36-140 119A.03 36-141 119A.04 36-142 119B.01 36-168 119B.02 36-169 119B.03 36-170 119B.04 36-171 119B.05 36-172 119B.06 36-173 119B.07 36-174 120.01 50-336 120.02 50-337 120.03 50-338 120.04 50-339 120.05 50-340 121.02 50-1 121.03 50-52 121.04 50-53 121.05 50-21 121.05A 50-22 121.06 50-23 121.07 50-24 121.08 50-54 121.09 50-55 121.10 50-84 121.11 50-85 121.12 50-86 121.13 50-87 121.14 50-89 121.15 50-88 122.01 50-107 122.02 50-108 122.03 50-109 122.04 50-110 122.05 50-111 122.06 50-112 122.06A 50-113 122.07 50-114 122.08 50-115 122.09 50-116 122.10 50-117 123.01 50-149 123.02 50-150 123.03 50-151 123.04 50-152 123.05 50-153 123.06 50-154 123.07 50-155 123.08 50-156 123.09 50-157 123.10 50-158 123.11 50-159 123.12 50-160 123.13 50-161 123.14 50-162 123.15 50-184 123.16 50-185 123.17 50-186 123.18 50-187 123.19 50-188 123.20 50-215 123.21 50-216 123.22 50-163 123.23 50-164 123.24 50-165 124.01 50-281 124.02 50-311 124.03 50-312 124.04 50-313 124.05 50-314 124.06 50-315 124.07 50-316 124.08 50-369 124.09 50-370 124.10 50-371 124.11 50-372 124.12 50-373 124.13 50-374 124.14 50-375 124.15 50-376 124.16 50-377 124.17 50-378 124.18 50-400 124.19 50-401 124.20 50-402 124.21 50-403 125.01 44-1 125.02 44-2 125.03 44-3 125.04 44-4 125.05 44-5 125.06 44-6 125.07 44-7 125.08 44-8 125.09 44-9 126.01 44-37 126.01.1 44-38 126.01.2 44-38 126.01.3 44-38 126.01.9 44-39 126.02 44-67 126.03 44-68 126.04 44-69 126.05 44-70 126.06 44-71 126.07 44-72 126.08 44-103 126.09 44-104 126.10 44-105 126.11 44-106 126.12 44-107 126.13 44-108 126.14 44-109 126.15 44-110 126.16 44-110 126.17 44-134 126.18 44-135 126.19 44-136 126.20 44-137 126.21 44-138 126.22 44-139 126.23 44-162 126.24 44-163 127.01 44-195 127.02 44-196 127.03 44-197 127.04 44-198 127.05 44-199 127.06 44-200 127.07 44-201 127.08 44-202 127.09 44-228 127.10 44-229 127.11 44-230 127.12 44-231 127.13 44-232 127.14 44-233 127.15 44-234 127.16 44-270 127.17 44-271 127.18 44-291 127.19 44-292 127.20 44-293 127.21 44-294 127.22 44-235 127.23 44-236 127.24 44-237 127.25 44-238 128.01 38-1 128.02 38-2 128.03(1) 38-39 128.03(2) 38-40 128.03(3) 38-41 128.03(4) 38-42 128.03(5) 38-43 128.03(6) 38-44 128.03(7) 38-45 128.03(8) 38-46 128.03(9) 38-47 128.03(10) 38-48 128.04 38-3 128.05(1) 38-4 128.05(2) 38-7 128.05(3) 38-12 128.05(4) 38-5 - 38-8 128.05(6) 38-6 128.05(7) 38-9 128.06(1) 38-70 128.06(2) 38-71 128.06(3) 38-72 128.06(4) 38-70 128.06(5) 38-70 128.06(6) 38-73 128.06(7) 38-74 128.06(8) 38-75 128.06(9) 38-76 128.06(10) 38-77 128.07 38-99 128.07(1) 38-98 128.08 38-10 128.09 38-11 128.10 38-127 128.11 38-128 129.01 50-435 129.02 50-436 129.03 50-437 129.04 50-438 129.05 50-439 129.06 50-440 129.07 50-441 129.08 50-442 129.09 50-443 130.01 10-230 130.02 10-231 130.02 10-232 130.03 10-232 130.04 10-233 130.05 10-234 130.06 10-235 130.07 10-236 130.08 10-237 131.01 50-241 131.02 50-242 131.03 50-243 131.04 50-244 131.05 50-245 131.06 50-246 131.07 50-247 131.08 50-248 131.09 50-249 131.10 50-250 131.11 50-251 131.12 50-148 132.02 10-1 132.03 10-20 132.03(1) 10-21 132.03(2) 10-22 132.03(3) 10-23 132.03(4) 10-24 132.03(5) 10-25 132.03(6) 10-26 132.03(7) 10-27 132.03(8) 10-28 132.03(9) 10-29 132.03(10) 10-30 132.04 10-31 132.05 10-76 132.06 10-78 132.07 10-102 132.08 10-103 132.09 10-104 132.10 10-134 132.11 10-135 132.12 10-136 132.13 10-137 132.14 10-138 132.15 10-105 132.16 10-106 132.17 10-107 132.18 10-108 132.24 10-139 132.25 10-164 132.26 10-140 132.27 10-165 132.28 10-166 132.29 10-167 132.30 10-164 132.31 10-168 132.32 10-169 132.33 10-170 132.34 10-171 132.35 10-172 132.36 10-173 132.37 10-174 132.38 10-110 132.39 10-79 133.01 48-344 133.02 48-345 133.03 48-346 133.04 48-347 133.05 48-348 133.06 48-349 133.07 48-350 133.08 48-351 133.09 48-352 140.01 32-76 140.02 32-77 140.03 32-78 140.04 32-79 140.05 32-80 140.06 32-81 140.07 32-82 140.08 32-83 142.01 42-278 142.02 42-279 142.03 42-280 142.04 42-281 142.05 42-282 142.06 42-283 142.07 42-284 142.08 42-285 142.09 42-286 142.10 42-287 142.11 42-288 142.12 42-289 143.01 10-268 143.02 10-269 143.03 10-270 143.04 10-271 143.05 10-272 143.06 10-273 143.07 10-274 143.08 10-275 143.09 10-276 143.10 10-277 143.11 10-278 143.12 10-279 143.13 10-280 143.14 10-281 143.15 10-282 143.16 10-283 143.17 10-284 143.18 10-285 143.19 10-286 143.20 10-287 143.21 10-288 143.22 10-289 143.23 10-290 145.01 6-1 145.02 6-2 145.03 6-3 145.04 6-4 145.05 6-5 145.05 6-6 145.06 6-6 145.07 6-6 146.01 6-31 146.02 6-32 146.03 6-33 146.04 6-34 146.05 6-35 146.06 6-36 146.07 6-37 146.08 6-38 146.09 6-39 146.10 6-40 146.11 6-41 146.12 6-42 146.13 6-43 146.14 6-44 146.15 6-45 146.16 6-46 146.17 6-47 146.18 6-48 146.19 6-49 146.20 6-50 146.21 6-51 146.22 6-52 146.23 6-53 147.01 6-80 147.02 6-81 - 6-82 147.03 6-83 147.04 6-84 147.05 6-85 147.06 6-86 147.07 6-87 150.01 24-67 150.02 24-68 150.03 24-69 150.04 24-70 150.05 24-71 150.06 24-72 150.07 24-73 150.08 24-74 150.09 24-75 150.10 24-76 150.11 24-77 150.12 24-78 151.01 24-19 151.02 24-20 151.03 24-21 151.04 24-22 151.05 24-23 151.06 24-24 151.07 24-25 151.08 24-26 151.09 24-27 151.10 24-28 151.11 24-29 151.12 24-30 151.13 24-31 151.14 24-32 151.15 24-33 151.16 24-34 151.17 24-35 151.18 24-36 151.19 24-37 151.20 24-38 151.21 24-39 151.22 24-40 151.23 24-41 151.24 24-42 151.25 24-43 151.26 24-44 151.27 24-45 151.28 24-46 151.29 24-47 152.01 48-3 152.02 48-3 152.03 48-3 152.04 48-3 152.05 48-3 160.01 12-19 160.02 12-20 160.03 12-21 160.04 12-22 160.05 12-23 160.06 12-24 160.07 12-25 160.08 12-26 160.09 12-27 161.01 12-58 161.02 12-59 161.03 12-60 161.04 12-61 161.05 12-62 161.06 12-63 161.07 12-64 161.08 12-65 161.09 12-66 161.10 12-67 161.11 12-68 161.12 12-69 161.13 12-70 161.14 12-71 161.15 12-72 161.16 12-73 162.01 10-314 162.03 10-364 162.04 10-365 162.05 10-316 162.06 10-317 162.07 10-318 162.08 10-319 162.09 10-320 162.10 10-321 162.11 10-322 162.12 10-323 162.13 10-324 162.14 10-325 162.15 10-315 162.16 10-354 162.17 10-355 162.18 10-356 162.19 10-357 162.20 10-358 162.21 10-359 162.22 10-360 162.23 10-361 162.24 10-362 162.25 10-363 165.01 12-105 - 12-106 165.02 12-107 165.03 12-108 165.04 12-109 165.05 12-110 165.06 12-111 166.01 28-21 166.02 28-22 166.03 28-23 166.04 28-24 166.05 28-25 166.06 28-26 166.07 28-27 166.08 28-27 166.09 28-27 166.10 28-28 166.11 28-29 166.12 28-30 166.13 28-31 166.14 28-32 166.15 28-33 166.16 28-34 166.17 28-35 166.18 28-36 166.19 28-37 167.01 12-136 167.02 12-137 167.03 12-138 167.04 12-139 169.01 12-162 169.02 12-163 169.03 12-164 169.04 12-165 169.05 12-166 169.06 12-167 169.07 12-168 169.08 12-169 169.09 12-170 169.10 12-171 169.11 12-172 169.12 12-173 169.13 12-174 169.14 12-175 169.15 12-176 169.16 12-177 169.17 12-178 169.18 12-179 170.01 30-89 170.02 30-90 170.03 30-91 170.04 30-92 170.05 30-93 170.06 30-94 170.07 30-95 170.08 30-96 170.09 30-97 170.10 30-98 170.11 30-99 171.01 20-60 171.02 20-61 171.03 20-62 171.04 20-63 171.05 20-64 171.06 20-65 171.07 20-65 171.08 20-66 175.01 42-19 175.02 42-20 175.03 42-21 175.04 42-22 175.05 42-23 175.06 42-24 175.07 42-25 175.08 42-26 175.09 42-33 175.10 42-28 175.11 42-28 175.12 42-29 175.13 42-30 175.14 42-31 175.15 42-32 176.01 42-55 176.02 42-56 176.03 42-57 176.04 42-58 176.05 42-59 176.06 42-60 177.01 42-79 177.02 42-80 177.03 42-81 177.04 42-82 177.05 42-83 178.01 42-110 178.02 42-111 178.03 42-112 178.04 42-113 178.05 42-114 179.01 42-142 179.02 42-143 179.03 42-144 180.01 42-172 180.02 42-173 180.03 42-174 180.04 42-175 180.05 42-176 180.06 42-177 180.08 42-178 180.09 42-179 180.10 42-180 180.11 42-181 180.12 42-182 180.13 42-183 181.01 42-205 181.02 42-206 185.01 42-236 185.02 42-237 185.03 42-238 185.04 42-239 185.05 42-240 185.06 42-241 185.07 42-242 185.08 42-243 185.09 42-244 185.10 42-245 185.11 42-246 185.12 42-247 185.13 42-248 185.14 42-249 185.15 42-250 185.16 42-251 185.17 42-252 185.18 42-253 185.19 42-254 185.20 42-255 185.21 42-256 185.22 42-257 195.01 4-1 195.02 4-1 195.03 4-1 195.04 4-1 195.05 4-1 195.06 4-1 195.07 4-1 196.02 4-25 196.03 4-26 196.04 4-27 196.05 4-28 196.06 4-29 196.07 4-30 196.08 4-31 196.09 4-3 196.10 4-32 196.11 4-33 196.13 4-34 197.01 4-2 197.02 4-2 197.03 4-2 197.04 4-2 198.01 10-109 - 10-389 198.02 10-390 198.03 10-391 198.04 10-392 198.05 10-393 198.06 10-77 - 10-394 198.07 10-395 198.09 10-397 198.10 10-398  
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - LEGISLATION 
    This table gives the location within this Code of ordinances included herein. Ordinances not listed have been omitted as repealed, superseded or not of a general and permanent nature. 
Legislation Date Section Section 
this Code Ord. No. 93-1428 - 14-14 - 14-15 - 14-16 Ord. No. 96-1465 - 1-1 Ord. No. 97-1490 - 50-164 Ord. No. 97-1498 - 1-10 - 2-36 - 2-111 Ord. No. 99-1529 - 32-1 Ord. No. 2005-1640 - 50-86 - 50-89 Ord. No. 2005-1642 - 50-246 Ord. No. 2010-1720 - 2-275 - 2-276 - 2-277 Ord. No. 2014-1771 - 2-8 - 2-164 - 2-165 - 2-166 - 2-167 - 2-168 - 2-169 - 2-170 - 2-171 - 2-172 - 2-173 - 2-174 - 2-175 - 2-176 Ord. No. 2017-1804 - 48-26 Ord. No. 2018-1814 3-19-2018 1(85.12A) 8-33 Ord. No. 2018-1815 8-20-2018 1 40-48 Ord. No. 2018-1817 10-1-2018 1 48-281 2 48-288 Ord. No. 2019-1818 3-4-2019 1 20-91 2 20-92 3 20-93 4 20-94 5 20-95 6 20-96 7 20-97 Ord. No. 2019-1819 3-4-2019 1 42-245 Ord. No. 2019-1820 4-1-2019 1 32-1 - 32-2 - 32-3 - 32-4 - 32-179 Ord. No. 2019-1823 4-1-2019 1 48-321 - 48-322 - 48-323 - 48-324 - 48-325 - 48-326  
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 
    This table shows the location within this Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to the Iowa statutes. 
Code of Iowa 
Section Section 

this Code ch. 9C Ch. 12, Art. III 9C.4 12-65 ch. 17A 6-52 ch. 21 2-37 21.3 2-7 21.4 2-7 21.5 2-7 - 2-41 ch. 22 2-6 22.2 2-6 22.7 2-41 ch. 28E 48-2 28E.12 22-6 ch. 35C 2-245 ch. 44 2-5 ch. 45 2-5 ch. 49 2-4 63.1 2-74 ch. 63A 2-74 ch. 64 2-75 64.13 2-75 64.19 2-75 64.23 2-75 64.24 2-75 ch. 66 2-41 ch. 68A 2-41 ch. 68B 2-81 - 2-82 68B.22 2-81 69.16A 2-277 ch. 80D 30-56 80D.1 30-56 80D.2 30-57 80D.3 30-63 80D.4 30-63 80D.4a 30-63 80D.7 30-64 80D.9 30-59 ch. 100 22-7 100.19 22-70 100.41 22-7 ch. 114 44-2 ch. 123 6-44 - 6-53 ch. 123 et seq. 6-48 123.2 6-2 123.3 6-1 123.39 6-48 123.40 6-53 123.46 6-4 123.46(2) 6-85 123.47 6-3 - 6-5 - 6-49 - 6-87 123.49 6-47 123.49(2)(a) 6-49 123.49(2)(d) 6-49 123.49(2)(e) 6-49 123.49(2)(i) 6-49 123.122 6-31 123.122 et seq. Ch. 6, Art. II 123.171 6-31 123.171 et seq. Ch. 6, Art. II ch. 124 34-214 - 34-216-34-219 124.101 34-215 124.101(5) 32-2 124.414 34-215 125.34 6-6 ch. 169C 8-37 170.1 8-1 216.8 Ch. 28, Art. II - 28-23 216.10 28-24 216.11 28-25 216.12 28-26 232.19 6-4 257.19 20-130 - 20-131 298.2 20-128 - 20-129 - 20-130 - 20-131 317.6 32-49 317.10 32-48 ch. 321 32-1 321.1 32-1 - 40-2 - 46-1 - 46-142 321.89 Ch. 32, Art. II, 
Div. 3 321.229 46-389 321.231 46-82 321.234 46-311 321.241 Ch. 12, Art. IV 321.255 Ch. 46, Art. II 321.256 Ch. 46, Art. II 321.271 46-390 321.273 46-390 321.285 Ch. 46, Art. III, 
Div. 1 - 46-80 - 46-81 321.290 46-83 321.293 Ch. 46, Art. III, 
Div. 1 321.324A 46-148 321.325 et seq. Ch. 46, Art. VIII 321.326 46-360 321.328 46-362 321.330 46-362 321.331 46-361 321.345 Ch. 46, Art. II, 
Div. 2 321.347-321.349 Ch. 46, Art. II, 
Div. 2 321.361 46-197 321.397 46-327 321.472 Ch. 46, Art. IV, 
Div. 2 321.473 Ch. 46, Art. IV, 
Div. 2 321.485 46-409 321.492 46-388 ch. 321G Ch. 46, Art. VI - 46-276 321G.1 46-275 ch. 321I Ch. 46, Art. VI 321I.1 46-275 329.9 4-2 329.12 4-25 330.23 4-1 ch. 351 Ch. 8 (note) 351.28 8-37 351.37 8-31 351.38 8-39 351.39 8-39 351.40 8-39 354.6 44-67 - 44-135 354.12 44-67 - 44-135 355.7 44-38 359.42 22-6 ch. 362 50-377 362.2 1-2 362.5 2-80 ch. 364 2-35 364.1 2-76 364.2 24-77 364.3 1-15 364.7 42-59 364.12 Ch. 10, Art. V - 10-233 364.16 Ch. 22, Art. I - 22-1 364.22 1-16 - 1-17 - 1-18 - 1-19 ch. 372 2-2 372.6 Ch. 2, Art. III, 
Div. 6 - 2-2 - 2-38 372.13 2-35 - 2-76 372.15 2-78 376.2 2-38 376.8 2-5 ch. 380 2-36 380.2 1-10 - 1-11 380.5 Ch. 2, Art. III, 
Div. 2 384.16 20-23 384.18 20-24 384.21 2-176 384.22 20-26 384.22(2)(b) 20-26 ch. 386 20-91 - 20-94 ch. 392 4-1 392.1 4-1 ch. 400 28-1 400.13 30-24 403.9(1) 20-124 - 20-125 - 20-126 - 20-127 - 20-128 - 20-129 - 20-130 - 20-131 - 20-132 - 20-133 - 20-135 403.22 20-128 - 20-129 - 20-130 - 20-131 ch. 411 22-9 - 30-65 411.8 22-9 - 30-65 411.36 22-9 - 30-65 ch. 414 Ch. 50 (note) - 50-340 414.1 50-340 414.5 4-33 414.6 50-336 - 50-340 414.23 50-336 422B.8 24-77 423.1 20-60 423A.2 20-60 423A.4 Ch. 20, Art. III 423A.5 20-62 423A.6 20-63 ch. 453A 12-27 - 34-85 453A.2 34-85 453A.13 12-24 453A.36(6) 12-26 ch. 455B 1-16 455B.301 et seq. Ch. 40 (note) 455B.307 40-6 ch. 459, subch. II 1-16 ch. 459, subch. III 1-16 461A.42 Ch. 22, Art. II, 
Div. 2 476.1B 48-26 ch. 480 42-323 ch. 481A 48-99 ch. 523I 14-18 523I.101 et seq. Ch. 14 (note) - 14-18 523I.502 14-18 523I.508 14-1 ch. 601A 28-22 613.16 Ch. 34, Art. IV 624.38 Ch. 34, Art. IV ch. 657 8-32 - Ch. 32 (note) 657.1 32-4 657.2 32-4 657.4 Ch. 32, Art. IV 657.7 32-186 657A.1 10-232 chs. 687-747 1-16 708.1 34-19 708.4 34-20 708.6 34-27 708.7 34-21 709.9 34-62 - 34-127 709A.1 Ch. 34, Art. IV 712.5 34-121 712.7 34-116 712.8 34-122 714.1 34-194 - 34-195 716.1 34-153 - 34-160 716.7 34-191 ch. 717B 8-27 717B.2 8-25 717B.3 8-25 717B.8 8-26 ch. 717D 8-30 ch. 717E 8-2 ch. 717F 8-1 - 8-2 - 8-41 718.2 34-117 718.3 34-22 718.6 34-115 719.1 34-118 719.2 34-119 721.2 2-82 - 20-28 723.1 34-24 723.2 34-25 723.3 34-26 723.4 34-23 724.1 2-324 724.4 2-324 - 34-125 725.1 34-58 725.2 34-60 725.3 34-61 725.4 34-59 727.1 34-114 727.2 Ch. 22, Art. II, 
Div. 2 - 22-65 - 22-73 727.3 34-120 727.8 34-192 ch. 728 Ch. 12, Art. VII 728.5 Ch. 12, Art. VII 801.4 6-4 804.5 6-4 804.17 30-25 804.18 30-26 ch. 805 22-7 805.6 46-409 805.8 46-410 805.8A(14)(e) 6-5 903.1(1)(a) 1-15  
