6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 1/349
PREFACE
This City Code of the City of West Liberty, as supplemented, contains ordinances up to and including
ordinance 20180619-03, passed July 17, 2018. Ordinances of the City adopted after said ordinance
supersede the provisions of this City Code to the extent that they are in conflict or inconsistent
therewith. Consult the City office in order to ascertain whether any particular provision of the Code has
been amended, superseded or repealed.
Sterling Codifiers
Coeur d'Alene, Idaho
ADOPTING ORDINANCE
Ordinance # 1-99
AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING THE CITY CODE OF WEST LIBERTY, IOWA
BE IT ORDAINED by the City Council of the City of West Liberty, Iowa:
Section 1.Pursuant to notice published in the West Liberty Index newspaper on July 15th, as required
by Section 362.3 of the Code of Iowa, a public hearing was held by the City Council of the City of
West Liberty, Iowa at the West Liberty Council Chambers at City Hall, West Liberty, Iowa.
Section 2.From and after the date of passage of this Ordinance, the Code of Ordinances of the City of
West Liberty, Iowa, containing a compilation of all Ordinances of a general nature, together with the
changes made to said Ordinances, under the direction of the governing body of the City, the City Code
shall be accepted in all courts without question as the official Code and law of the City of West Liberty,
as enacted by the City Council, and shall hereinafter be referred to as the "City Code".
Section 3.An official copy of the City Code, as adopted, including certification by the City Clerk as to
its adoption effective date is on file at City Hall. Copies of the Code shall be kept available at City Hall
for public inspection and sale.
Section 4.Copies of the Code shall be kept available at City Hall for public inspection and sale.
Section 5.It is hereby adopted that as a method of perpetual codification, the loose-leaf type of binder,
together with the continuous supplement service, provided by Sterling Codifiers, whereby each newly
adopted Ordinance of a general and permanent nature amending, altering, adding or deleting
provisions of the official City Code is properly identified and is inserted in the proper place in each of
the official copies of the Code, certified as to correctness and available for inspection at any and all
times that said office is regularly open.
Section 6.It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to change or amend, by additions or
deletions, any part of portion of the City Code, or to insert or delete pages or portions thereof, or to
alter or tamper with the City Code in any manner to cause the law of the City to be misinterpreted.
Section 7.All Ordinances or parts of Ordinances in conflict herewith are, to the extent of such conflict,
hereby repealed.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 2/349
Section 8.Severability. If any section, provision or part of this Ordinance shall be adjudged invalid or
unconstitutional, such adjudication shall not affect the validity of the Ordinance as a whole or any
section, provision or part thereof not adjudged invalid or unconstitutional.
Section 9.This Ordinance shall be in effect after its final passage, approval and publication as required
by law.
PASSED by the City Council of West Liberty, Iowa on the 6th day of July, 1999 and APPROVED this
6th day of July, 1999.
Clerk's Certification: I hereby certify that the foregoing was published as Ordinance Number 1-99 on July 15,
1999.
Title 1
ADMINISTRATION
Chapter 1
OFFICIAL CITY CODE
1-1-1: TITLE:
A. City Code: This Code of ordinances of the City of West Liberty shall be treated and considered as a
new and comprehensive original ordinance which shall completely supersede all other ordinances
passed by the City Council, except those expressly saved from repeal herein as referred to in
Section 1-2-1 of this Title. Hereafter, this Code shall be cited and shall be known as the City Code
of the City of West Liberty, Iowa. (1975 Code § 1-1-1; amd. 1998 Code)
B. References To Code: Any reference made to the number of any section contained herein shall be
understood to refer to the position of the same under its appropriate chapter and title heading, and
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 3/349
to the general penalty clause relating thereto, as well as to the section itself, when reference is
made to this City Code by title in any legal document.
C. Code On File: An official copy of the Municipal Code as adopted, bearing the signature of the
Mayor and certificate of the City Clerk as to its adoption and effective date is on file at the City Hall.
(1975 Code § 1-1-1)
1-1-2: ACCEPTANCE:
This City Code, as hereby presented in printed form, shall hereafter be received without further proof
in all courts and in all administrative tribunals of the City of general and permanent effect. (1975 Code
§ 1-1-2)
1-1-3: AMENDMENTS:
A. Compliance With Statutory Requirements: Any ordinance amending this City Code shall set forth
the title, chapter and section number of the section or sections to be amended, and this shall
constitute a sufficient compliance with any statutory requirements pertaining to the amendment or
revision by ordinance of any part of this City Code. All such amendments or revisions by ordinance
shall be properly identified, inserted in their designated place in each copy of the City Code within
thirty (30) days from the date of their final passage. (1975 Code § 1-1-3)
B. Form Of Amendment: All ordinances of the City Council passed hereafter shall be in the form of an
addition or amendment to the West Liberty City Code and shall include proper references to title,
chapter and section to maintain the orderly codification of ordinances. (1975 Code § 1-1-3; amd.
1998 Code)
C. Section Numbers: Each section number of this Code shall consist of three (3) parts separated by
dashes; the figure before the first dash shall refer to the title; the figure between the dashes shall
refer to the chapter, and the figure after the last dash shall refer to the section. (1975 Code § 1-1-3)
1-1-4: INTENT:
All general provisions, terms, phrases and expressions contained in this Code shall be liberally
construed in order that the true intent of the City Council may be fully carried out. (1975 Code § 1-1-4)
1-1-5: CODE ALTERATIONS:
A. Alterations Prohibited; Replacing Pages: It shall be deemed unlawful for any person to alter,
change, replace or deface in any way any section or any page of this City Code in such a manner
that the meaning of any phrase or order may be changed or omitted. Replacement pages may be
inserted according to the official instructions when so authorized by the City Council. The City
Clerk shall see that the replacement pages are properly inserted in the official copies maintained in
the office of said City Clerk.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 4/349
B. Maintenance Of Official Codes: Any person having in his custody an official copy of this City Code
shall make every effort to maintain said Code in an up-to-date and efficient manner. Such person
shall see to the immediate insertion of new or replacement pages when such are delivered or
made available through the office of the City Clerk. Said Code books, while in actual possession of
officials and other interested persons, shall be and remain the property of the City and shall be
returned to the office of the Clerk when directed to do so by order of the City Council. (1975 Code
§ 1-1-5)
1-1-6: CODE AVAILABLE FOR INSPECTION OR PURCHASE:
Copies of the Code shall be available at City Hall for public inspection and for sale at cost to the
public. (1975 Code § 1-1-6)
Chapter 2
SAVING CLAUSE
1-2-1: REPEAL OF GENERAL ORDINANCES; SEVERABILITY:
A. Repealer; Ordinances Excluded: All general ordinances or parts thereof heretofore adopted by the
City Council and not included in this Code are repealed, except the following ordinances which are
not hereby repealed: tax levy ordinances; appropriation ordinances; ordinances relating to
boundaries and annexations; franchise ordinances and other ordinances granting special rights to
persons or corporations; contract ordinances and ordinances authorizing the execution of a
contract or the issuance of warrants; salary ordinances; ordinances establishing, naming or
vacating streets, alleys or other public places; improvement ordinances; bond ordinances;
ordinances relating to elections; ordinances relating to the transfer or acceptance of real estate by
or from the City; and all special ordinances. (1975 Code § 1-2-1; amd. 1998 Code)
B. Exceptions To Repeal: Such repeal shall not affect any act done; any right accrued, accruing, or
established; the tenure or emoluments of office of any person holding office at the time these
ordinances take effect; any forfeiture or penalty heretofore incurred under or by virtue of any prior
existing ordinance; or any prosecution, suit, or proceedings pending at the time of such repeal.
C. Severability: Each section, paragraph, sentence, clause, and provision of this Code is severable,
and if any provision is held unconstitutional or invalid for any reason, such decision shall not affect
the remainder of this Code or any part thereof, other than that part affected by such decision.
(1975 Code § 1-2-1)
1-2-2: PUBLIC WAYS AND PUBLIC UTILITY ORDINANCES:
No ordinance relating to railroads or railroad crossings with streets and other public ways, or relating
to the conduct, duties, service or rates of public utilities shall be repealed by virtue of the adoption of
this City Code or by virtue of the preceding Section, excepting as this City Code may contain
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 5/349
provisions for such matters, in which case this City Code shall be considered as amending such
ordinance or ordinances in respect to such provisions only. (1975 Code § 1-2-2)
1-2-3: COURT PROCEEDINGS:
A. Prior Acts: No new ordinance shall be construed or held to repeal a former ordinance, whether such
former ordinance is expressly repealed or not, as to any offense committed against such former
ordinance or as to any act done, any penalty, forfeiture or punishment so incurred, or any right
accrued or claim arising under the former ordinance, or in any way whatever to affect any such
offense or act so committed or so done, or any penalty, forfeiture or punishment so incurred or any
right accrued or claim arising before the new ordinance takes effect, save only that the
proceedings thereafter shall conform to the ordinance in force at the time of such proceeding, so
far as practicable. If any penalty, forfeiture or punishment be mitigated by any provision of a new
ordinance, such provision may be, by the consent of the party affected, applied to any judgment
announced after the new ordinance takes effect.
B. Extend To All Repeals: This Section shall extend to all repeals, either by express words or
implication, whether the repeal is in the ordinance making any new provisions upon the same
subject or in any other ordinance.
C. Pending Actions: Nothing contained in this Chapter shall be construed as abating any action now
pending under or by virtue of any general ordinance of the City herein repealed and the provisions
of all general ordinances contained in this City Code shall be deemed to be continuing provisions
and not a new enactment of the same provision; nor shall this Chapter be deemed as
discontinuing, abating, modifying or altering any penalty accrued or to accrue, or as affecting the
liability of any person, firm or corporation, or as waiving any right of the City under any ordinance
or provision thereof in force at the time of the adoption of this City Code. (1975 Code § 1-2-3)
Chapter 3
DEFINITIONS
1-3-1: CONSTRUCTION OF WORDS:
A. Whenever any word in any section of this City Code importing the plural number is used in
describing or referring to any matters, parties or persons, any single matter, party or person shall
be deemed to be included although distributive words may not have been used. (1975 Code § 1-3-
1)
B. When any subject matter, party or person is referred to in this City Code by words importing the
singular number only, or a particular gender, several matters, parties or persons and the opposite
gender and bodies corporate shall be deemed to be included; provided, that these rules of
construction shall not be applied to any section of this City Code which contains any express
provision excluding such construction or where the subject matter or context may be repugnant
thereto. (1975 Code § 1-3-1; amd. 1998 Code)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 6/349
1-3-2: DEFINITIONS, GENERAL:
Whenever the following words or terms are used in this City Code, they shall have the meanings
herein ascribed to them, unless the context makes such meaning repugnant thereto:
The word "shall" is mandatory and not merely directory. The word "may" is permissive.
AGENT: A person acting on behalf of another with authority conferred, either expressly or by
implication.
CITY: The City of West Liberty, Muscatine County, Iowa.
CODE: Unless otherwise specifically stated, this City Code.
COUNCIL: The City Council of West Liberty, Iowa.
COUNTY: County of Muscatine, State of Iowa.
EMPLOYEE: Whenever reference is made in this Code to a City employee by title only, this shall be
construed as though followed by the words "of the City of West Liberty" and shall be taken to mean
the employee of the City performing the duties indicated.
FEE: A sum of money charged by the City for the carrying on of a business, profession or occupation.
FISCAL YEAR: The "fiscal year" for the City for which taxes are collected through the office of the
County Treasurer and for all departments, boards, and commissions thereof shall begin on July 1
each year and shall end on June 30 following.
GENDER: A word importing either the masculine or feminine gender only shall extend and be applied
to the other gender and to persons.
KNOWINGLY: Imports only a knowledge that the facts exist which bring the act or omission within the
provisions of this Code. It does not require any knowledge of the unlawfulness of such act or
omission.
LICENSE: The permission granted for the carrying on of a business, profession or occupation.
MISDEMEANOR: Unless another definition and penalty is expressly provided by this Code for any
particular provision, section or chapter, the word "misdemeanor" shall mean any offense punishable
as provided in Section 1-4-1 of this Title.
NEGLIGENT: Imports a want of such attention to the nature of probable consequences of the act or
omission as a prudent man ordinarily bestows in acting in his own concern.
NUISANCE: Whatever is injurious to health, indecent, or offensive to the senses, or an obstruction to
the free use of property, so as essentially to interfere with the comfortable enjoyment of life or
property.
OCCUPANT: As applied to a building or land, shall include any person who occupies the whole or any
part of such building or land whether alone or with others.
OFFENSE: Any act forbidden by any provision of this Code or the omission of any act required by the
provisions of this Code.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 7/349
OFFICERS: Whenever reference is made in this Code to a City officer by title only, this shall be
construed as though followed by the words "of the City of West Liberty" and shall be taken to mean
the officer of the City having the title mentioned.
OPERATOR: The person who is in charge of any operation, business or profession.
OWNER: As applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common,
joint tenant or lessee of the whole or of a part of such building or land.
PERSON: Any individual, partnership, corporation, joint stock association or the State of Iowa or any
subdivision thereof, and includes any trustee, receiver, assignee or personal representative thereof.
PERSONAL PROPERTY: Includes every description of money, goods, chattels, effects, evidence of
rights in action and all written instruments by which any pecuniary obligation, right or title to property is
created, acknowledged, transferred, increased, defeated, discharged or diminished and every right or
interest therein.
RETAILER: Unless otherwise specifically defined, shall be understood to relate to the sale of goods,
merchandise, articles or things in small quantities direct to the consumer.
STATE: State of Iowa.
STREET: Includes alleys, lanes, courts, boulevards, public squares, public places and sidewalks.
TENANT: As applied to a building or land, shall include any person who occupies the whole or any
part of such building or land whether alone or with others.
WHOLESALER: Unless otherwise specifically defined, shall be understood to relate to the sale of
goods, merchandise articles or things in quantity to persons who purchase for the purpose of resale.
WILFULLY: When applied to the intent with which an act is done or omitted, implies simply a purpose
or willingness to commit the act or make the omission referred to. It does not require any intent to
violate law, or to injure another, or to acquire an advantage.
WRITTEN, IN WRITING: May include printing and any other mode of representing words and letters,
but when the written signature of any person is required by law to any official or public writing or bond,
it shall be in the proper handwriting of such person, or in case he is unable to write, by his proper
mark. (1975 Code § 1-3-2; amd. 1998 Code)
1-3-3: CATCHLINES:
The catchlines of the several sections of the City Code are intended as mere catchwords to indicate
the content of the section and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections, nor be
deemed to govern, limit, modify or in any manner affect the scope, meaning or intent of the provisions
of any section hereof, nor unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such
sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. (1998 Code)
Chapter 4
GENERAL PENALTY
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 8/349
1-4-1: PENALTY, GENERAL:
A. Misdemeanors: Unless another penalty is expressly provided by this Code for any particular
provision, section, or chapter, any person failing to perform a duty or obtain a license required by
or violating any provision of this Code, any rule or regulation adopted or issued pursuant thereto,
or any provision of any code adopted herein by reference, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and,
upon conviction, shall be subject to a fine of not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00) or
imprisonment not to exceed thirty (30) days1. (1975 Code § 1-4-1)
B. Municipal Infractions:
1. Violations: A violation of this Code or any ordinance or code herein adopted by reference or the
omission or failure to perform any act or duty required by the same, with the exception of those
provisions specifically provided under State law as a felony, an aggravated misdemeanor, a
serious misdemeanor or a simple misdemeanor under chapters 687 through 747 of the Code of
Iowa is a Municipal infraction punishable by a civil penalty as provided herein.
2. Penalties: A Municipal infraction is punishable by the following civil penalties:
a. First offense: Not to exceed seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00).
b. Each repeat offense: Not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00).
3. Civil Citation: Any officer authorized by the City to enforce this Code or regulations thereof may
issue a civil citation to a person who commits a Municipal infraction. The citation may be served
by personal service as provided in Iowa Rule of Civil Procedure 56.1, by certified mail addressed
to the defendant at the defendant's last known mailing address, return receipt requested, or by
publication in the manner provided in Iowa Rule of Civil Procedure 60 and subject to the
conditions of Iowa Rule of Civil Procedure 60.1. A copy of the citation shall be retained by the
issuing officer, and one copy shall be sent to the Clerk of the District Court.
4. Civil Citation Content: The Municipal infraction citation shall serve as notification that a civil
offense has been committed and shall contain the following information:
a. The name and address of the defendant.
b. The name or description of the infraction attested to by the officer issuing the citation.
c. The location and time of the infraction.
d. The amount of civil penalty to be assessed or alternative relief sought, or both.
e. The manner, location and time in which the penalty may be paid.
f. The time and place of court appearance.
g. The penalty for failure to appear in court.
5. Alternative Relief: Seeking a civil penalty as authorized in section 364.22, Code of Iowa, does
not preclude the City from seeking alternative relief from the court in the same action. Such relief
may include the imposition of a civil penalty by entry of a personal judgment against the
defendant, directing that the payment of the civil penalty be suspended or deferred under
conditions imposed by the court, ordering the defendant to abate or cease the violation or
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 9/349
authorizing the City to abate or correct the violation, or ordering that the City's cost for
abatement or correction of the violation be entered as a personal judgment against the
defendant or assessed against the property where the violation occurred, or both. If a defendant
willfully violates the terms of an order imposed by the court, the failure is contempt.
6. Criminal Sanctions Not Precluded: This subsection B does not preclude a peace officer from
issuing a criminal citation for violation of a City code or regulation if criminal penalties are also
provided for the violation, nor does it preclude or limit the authority of the City to enforce the
provisions of this Code by criminal sanctions or other lawful means. Each day that a violation
occurs or is permitted to exist by the defendant constitutes a separate offense. The violation of
any provision of this Code or any regulation promulgated thereunder shall also constitute a
simple misdemeanor punishable by a fine of one hundred dollars ($100.00) or by imprisonment
in the County Jail for a term not to exceed thirty (30) days. (Ord. 2010-01, 1-19-2010)
1-4-2: LICENSE REVOCATION:
When any person is convicted of a violation of any section of this Code, any license previously issued
to such person by the City may be revoked by the court or by the City Council. (1975 Code § 1-4-2)
1-4-3: APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS:
A. Application Of Penalty: The penalty provided in this chapter shall be applicable to every section of
this Code the same as though it were a part of each and every separate section. Any person
convicted of a violation of any section of this Code where any duty is prescribed or obligation
imposed, or where any action which is of a continuing nature is forbidden or declared to be
unlawful, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. A separate offense shall be deemed
committed upon each day such duty or obligation remains unperformed or such act continues,
unless otherwise specifically provided in this Code.
B. One Recovery Only: In all cases where the same offense is made punishable or is created by
different clauses or sections of this Code, the prosecuting officer may elect under which to
proceed; but not more than one recovery shall be had against the same person for the same
offense; provided, that the revocation of a license or permit shall not be considered a recovery or
penalty so as to bar any other penalty being enforced.
C. Breach Of Provisions: Whenever the doing of any act or the omission to do any act constitutes a
breach of any section or provision of this Code and there shall be no fine or penalty specifically
declared for such breach, the provisions of this chapter shall apply and a separate offense shall be
deemed committed upon each day during or on which a breach or violation occurs or continues.
(1975 Code § 1-4-3)
1-4-4: LIABILITY OF OFFICERS:
No provision of this Code designating the duties of any officer or employee shall be so construed as to
make such officer or employee liable for any fine or penalty provided for a failure to perform such duty,
unless the intention of the City Council to impose such fine or penalty on such officer or employee is
specifically and clearly expressed in the section creating the duty. (1975 Code § 1-4-4)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 10/349
Chapter 5
CITY CHARTER
1-5-1: CITY CHARTER:
A. Form Of Government: The form of government of the City is the Mayor-Council with appointed
Manager.
B. Powers And Duties: The Council and Mayor and other City officers have such powers and shall
perform such duties as are authorized or required by State law and by the ordinances, resolutions,
rules and regulations of the City.
C. Number And Term Of Council: The Council consists of five (5) Councilmembers elected at large
and elected for terms of four (4) years.
D. Term Of Mayor: The Mayor is elected for a term of two (2) years.
E. Copies On File: The City Clerk shall keep an official copy of this Charter on file with the official
records of the City Clerk, shall immediately file a copy with the Secretary of State of Iowa, and
shall keep copies of the Charter available at the City Clerk's office for public inspection. (1975
Code § 1-5-1)
Chapter 6
MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL
1-6-1: COUNCIL POWERS AND DUTIES:
A. Powers: All legislative and other powers granted cities shall be exercised by the City Council,
except those conferred upon some officer by law or ordinance. Neither the Council nor the
members thereof shall exercise any executive function unless expressly conferred by law or
ordinance.
B. Duties: The City Council shall have such duties as may be prescribed or provided by law or
ordinance. (1954 Code Ch. 3)
1-6-2: MAYOR:
A. Office Space Provided; Keep Corporate Seal: The Mayor shall keep an office at some convenient
place in the City to be provided by the City Council and shall keep the Corporate Seal of the City in
his charge. (1975 Code § 1-8-1)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 11/349
B. Powers And Duties:
1. Executive Authority: The Mayor shall be the chief executive officer of the City and shall take care
that the criminal laws of the State and of the provisions of this Code are duly respected,
observed and enforced. He shall be the conservator of the peace and within the corporate limits
shall have all the powers conferred upon sheriffs to suppress disorders. He may, upon view,
arrest anyone guilty of a violation of any provision of this Code or any crime under the laws of
the State of Iowa. (1975 Code § 1-8-2)
2. Presiding Officer: The Mayor shall be present at the meetings of the Council and shall be the
presiding officer thereof. (1975 Code § 1-8-3; amd. 1998 Code)
3. Call Meetings: The Mayor may, and upon the written request of three (3) or more
Councilmembers shall, call special meetings of the Council. Notice thereof shall be given
personally or left at the usual place of residence of each member of the Council, and a record of
the services of notice made by the Clerk. (1975 Code § 1-8-4)
4. Neglect Of Officers Or Employees: The Mayor shall report to the Council the violation or neglect
of duty on the part of any City officer or employee which shall come to his knowledge, and when
he believes the City funds or property are about to be lost, injured or endangered, he shall
immediately convene the Council for the purpose of taking action in relation thereto. (1975 Code
§ 1-8-5)
5. Signature: The Mayor shall sign all warrants, commissions, licenses and permits granted by the
authority of the Council or authorized by ordinance and do such other acts as by law or
ordinance requires his signature or certificate. (1975 Code § 1-8-6)
6. Contracts: The Mayor or his appointed representative shall sign, on the behalf of the City, all
contracts between the City and other parties which have been authorized by the Council. He
shall sign all orders upon the City Treasurer, except those paid out of the Library Fund or the
Park Fund, and all conveyances of property and other papers and documents whenever
authorized thereto by the Council. (1975 Code § 1-8-7)
7. Report: The Mayor shall, at the first regular meeting of the newly elected Council and at such
other times as he may deem expedient, report to the Council concerning the Municipal affairs of
the City and recommend such measures as to him may seem advisable. (1975 Code § 1-8-8)
8. Signing Ordinances; Passing Over Veto: The Mayor shall sign every ordinance or resolution
passed by the Council before the same shall be in force and, if he refuses to sign any such
ordinance or resolution, he shall call a meeting of the Council within fourteen (14) days
thereafter and return the same, with his reasons therefor. If he fails to call the meeting within the
time fixed above or fails to return the ordinance or resolution with his reasons as herein required,
such ordinance or resolution shall become operative without such signature and the City Clerk
shall record it in the ordinance book, with a minute of the facts making it operative. Upon the
return of any such ordinance or resolution by the Mayor to the Council, it may pass the same
over his objections upon a call of the yeas and nays, by not less than a two-thirds (2/3) vote of
the Council, and the Clerk shall certify on said ordinance or resolution that the same was passed
by a two-thirds (2/3) vote of the Council, and sign it officially as Clerk. (1975 Code § 1-8-9)
9. Supervision:
a. City Offices: The Mayor, as often as he deems it expedient, may examine into the conditions
of the various City offices, the books, papers and records therein or the manner of conducting
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 12/349
City business, and may call upon any officer or employee of the City for information in relation
to any matter pertaining to said officer or employees of office of employment.
b. City Manager: The Mayor shall monitor the City Manager's supervision and management of
the police officers (force) and all City officers and employees. The Mayor, otherwise, shall not
be responsible for the day-to-day administration of the City's affairs. (Ord. 7-93, 9-7-1993)
1-6-3: MEETINGS:
A. Regular; Open Meetings: All regular meetings of the City Council shall be held at seven thirty
o'clock (7:30) P.M. on the first and third Tuesdays in each month. All meetings of the Council shall
convene at the City Hall; provided, that the time and place of meetings may be changed by a fourfifths
(4/5) majority of all members elected to the Council voting in the affirmative. All meetings shall
at all times be open to the public, pursuant to Iowa Code section 21.1 et seq. (1975 Code § 1-7-3;
amd. 1998 Code)
B. Special: The Mayor or any three (3) members of the Council may call a special meeting of the
Council. Written notice thereof shall be given personally or left at the usual place of residence of
each member of the Council and a record of the service of notice shall be made by the Clerk. Said
notice shall state the time and place of such special meeting. (1975 Code § 1-7-3)
C. Rules Of Procedure: The following rules shall be observed by the Council:
1. Roll Call: At the hour appointed for the meeting of the Council, the Mayor shall take the chair (if
present or in the absence, the Mayor Pro Tem shall take the chair) and cause the roll of
members to be called and announce whether a quorum be present. Upon the appearance of a
quorum, the Council shall be called to order; and they shall then proceed to the business before
them.
2. Order Of Business: The order of business shall be as follows:
a. The reading of the minutes of the last meeting, amended and approved.
b. Petitions and remonstrances presented.
c. Bills audited or referred.
d. Resolutions presented.
e. Reports from standing committees.
f. Reports from special committees.
g. Unfinished business of preceding meeting.
h. Notices to bring in ordinances.
i. Ordinances to be introduced.
j. Ordinances on their second reading.
k. Ordinances on their passage.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 13/349
l. New business.
3. Disorderly Conduct: In cases of disturbance or disorderly conduct in the Council chamber, the
Mayor shall have the power to have the same cleared of all disorderly persons.
4. Member May Be Called To Order: If any member, in speaking or otherwise, transgresses the
rules of the Council, the Mayor shall, or any member may, call him to order, in which case the
member so called to order shall take his seat, but may be permitted, with leave of the Council, to
explain; and the Council shall, if appealed to, decide the case but without debate; if there be no
appeal, the decision of the Mayor shall be final. If the decision be in favor of the member called
to order, he is at liberty to proceed; if otherwise, he shall not be permitted to go on without leave
of the Council and if the case requires it, he shall be liable to the censure of the Council.
5. Members Must Vote: Every member present shall vote upon all questions put to the Council
unless for special reasons he shall be excused.
6. Interested Members May Not Vote: No member shall vote on any question in the result of which
he is immediately interested, except as provided by State law.
7. Questions Stated By Mayor: When a motion is made and seconded, it shall be stated by the
Mayor, and if in writing handed to the Clerk and by him read aloud before debate; and after a
motion be stated by the Mayor or read by the Clerk, it shall be deemed to be in possession of
the Council, and open to debate, but may be withdrawn by leave of the Council.
8. Division May Be Called: The division of any question may be called for by any member, if it
includes questions so distinct that, one part taken away, the remainder may stand alone for the
action of the Council; and a motion to strike out being lost shall not preclude motion to amend
nor motion to strike out and insert.
9. Commitment: Motions, reports and resolutions may be committed or recommitted at the
pleasure of the Council.
10. Mover's Name Entered: In all cases where a resolution or motion is entered on the minutes of
a meeting of the Council, the name of the member moving the same shall also be entered.
11. Motions And Resolutions Reduced To Writing: Every resolution shall be reduced to writing; and
any motion, upon request therefor by the Mayor or any member, shall be reduced to writing.
12. Amendment; When Not Allowed: No motion or proposition on a subject different from that
under consideration shall be admitted under color of amendment.
13. Yeas And Nays Taken: Except as specifically provided by law, the vote upon all ordinances and
resolutions shall be taken by yea and nay and entered upon the journal and concurrence of a
majority of the whole number of members elected to the Council shall be required for adoption
thereof. (1975 Code § 1-7-9)
14. Three Readings: All ordinances must be considered and voted on for passage at two (2)
Council meetings prior to the meeting at which an ordinance is to be finally passed, unless four
(4) members of the Council shall dispense with the rule, and shall be acted upon in the order in
which they were introduced unless the Council shall direct otherwise; and after an ordinance has
been read the second time, it shall be subject to amendment or commitment, if the Council so
directs.
15. Notice To Introduce Ordinances: At least one week's notice shall be given of the introduction of
ordinances, except that the Committee on Finance and Ordinances may, at any regular meeting
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 14/349
of the Council, report ordinances. (1975 Code § 1-7-9; amd. 1998 Code)
16. Question In Order Of Priority: When a question is under debate no motion shall be in order
except:
a. To adjourn.
b. To lay on the table.
c. For the previous questions.
d. To postpone to a certain day.
e. To commit or refer.
f. To postpone indefinitely.
g. To amend.
And such several motions should have precedence in the order in which they are herein
arranged; the first three (3) to be decided without debate.
17. Previous Question: When the previous question is moved and seconded, it should be in this
form: "Shall the main question be now put?" If this carries, all further motions and debate shall
be excluded and the question put in this order; first, upon the amendments pending and then
upon the main proposition.
18. Indefinite Postponement: When a question is postponed indefinitely, it should not again be
introduced into, or acted upon by the Council for the ensuing two (2) months.
19. Move For Reconsideration: Any member voting with the majority on any question may move for
a reconsideration thereof during the meeting at which the same was passed, if the question to
be reconsidered be on final passage of an ordinance or resolution, or if any other question, it
may be at the same or next regular meeting of the Council.
20. Adjournment Motion: A motion to adjourn shall always be in order, except when a member is
speaking or the Council is voting when it has been decided that the previous question shall be
taken.
21. Amendment To Adjournment Motion: A motion to adjourn simply cannot be amended, but a
motion to adjourn to a given day may be amended and is open to debate. (1975 Code § 1-7-9)
D. Duties And Privileges Of Mayor: The Mayor shall preserve order and decorum, and shall have the
right to rule on and decide points of order, rising from his seat for the purpose, subject to an appeal
to the Council, when called for by two (2) members thereof. He shall cast his vote upon all
questions upon which the Council is equally divided, but not otherwise, and only as permitted by
State law. (1975 Code § 1-7-10)
E. Suspension Of Rules: Except as otherwise provided by law or ordinance, no rules of the Council
shall be suspended except by vote of three-fourths (3/4) or more of the members elected to the
Council. (1975 Code § 1-7-12)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 15/349
F. Parliamentary Rules: The rules of parliamentary practices set forth in Robert's Rules of Order
Revised, shall govern the sessions of the Council in all cases in which they are applicable and not
inconsistent with the standing rules of the Council, the provisions of this Code or the laws of the
State of Iowa. (1975 Code § 1-7-13)
1-6-4: VACANCY, DISABILITY OF MAYOR OR CLERK; QUORUM:
A. Mayor: In the case of any vacancy in the office of Mayor, or in the case of his disability or absence,
the Mayor Pro Tem shall exercise the office of Mayor until such vacancy is filled or such disability is
removed, or in the case of temporary absence, until the Mayor returns.
B. City Clerk: In the case of any vacancy in the office of the Clerk, or in the case of his disability or
absence, the Deputy City Clerk shall exercise the office of Clerk until such vacancy is filled or such
disability is removed, or in the case of temporary absence, until the Clerk returns.
C. Quorum: The majority of the whole number of members to which the corporation is entitled by law
shall be necessary to constitute a quorum. (1975 Code § 1-7-4)
1-6-5: OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES:
A. Powers Of Officers: The City Council shall prescribe by ordinance the powers to be exercised and
duties performed by officers insofar as such powers and duties are not defined by law. (1975 Code
§ 1-7-5)
B. Defense Of Employees: The Council shall have power to employ an attorney to defend any
Municipal officer or employee in any cause of action arising out of or in the course of the
performance of the duties of his office or employment, and to pay the costs of such defense. (1975
Code § 1-7-6)
C. Liability Insurance: The Council shall have power to purchase and pay the premiums on liability and
property damage insurance covering and insuring Municipal employees while in the performance
of their duties and operating an automobile, truck, road grader, machinery or other vehicles owned
or used by the Municipal corporation, which insurance shall insure, cover and protect against any
liability the Municipal employee or the Municipal corporation may incur. (1975 Code § 1-7-7)
D. Surety Bond: The Council shall have power to purchase a surety bond running to the Municipal
corporation and covering all Municipal officers and employees for the purpose of indemnifying the
Municipal corporation against any loss occasioned through embezzlement of municipal funds by
any municipal officer or employee. (1954 Code Ch. 3)
1-6-6: COMMITTEES:
All committees shall be appointed by the mayor unless otherwise specially directed by the city council,
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 16/349
and when motions are made to refer the same subjects to different committees, the motion to refer to
a standing committee shall have precedence over a motion to refer to a special committee.
A. Standing Committees: The standing committees of the council shall be appointed biennially at the
first regular meeting in January after election, and shall consist of not less than two (2) members
each; and the first person named on the committee shall be chairperson thereof. The following
shall be the standing committees of the council: (1975 Code § 1-7-11)
Committee on building, grounds and cemetery
Committee on finance and ordinances
Committee on public safety and grievances
Committee on streets, alleys, sidewalks and weeds
Committee on waterworks and sewer
(1975 Code § 1-7-11; amd. Ord. 1-78, 1-3-1978; Ord. 04-02, 6-15-2004)
B. Special Committees: All special committees shall consist of two (2) members each, unless some
other number be named. (1975 Code § 1-7-11)
Chapter 7
CITY OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
1-7-1: TIME OF ELECTION:
The regular Municipal election shall be held on the Tuesday next after the first Monday in November
of odd-numbered years, and elective officers shall be chosen biennially to succeed officers whose
terms expire at twelve o'clock (12:00) noon of the second secular day of January following said
election. (Ord. 30, 10-3-1961)
1-7-2: ELECTION PROCEDURE:
The Municipal election shall be conducted in the manner provided by the Code of Iowa for conducting
general elections. (1975 Code § 1-6-2)
A. Nomination Method; Compliance With Statute: The provisions of Iowa Code section 376.3, as
amended, are hereby adopted as the method for making nominations for Municipal elections. The
City Clerk shall forward the petitions of all candidates that have been properly filed with the City
Clerk to the County Commissioners of Elections who shall then do all things necessary for
conducting the Municipal election.
B. Election: In a regular Municipal election, the candidates receiving the greatest number of votes cast
for each office on the ballot are elected, to the extent necessary to fill the positions open for
election (Ord. 3-77, 9-6-1977)
1-7-3: VOTING PLACES:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 17/349
The voting place or places for all regular and special City elections shall be fixed by the City Council.
The City Clerk shall prepare the voting place or places selected for the election and shall see that the
same are properly lighted and heated. (Ord. 30, 10-3-1961)
1-7-4: QUALIFICATION OF OFFICERS:
Every officer elected or appointed, except the City Manager, shall meet the residence requirements to
reside within a twenty five (25) minute drive of the corporate limits if hired after October 1, 2003 and
qualify by taking an oath prescribed by law and by giving, when required, a bond, which qualification
shall be perfected prior to their assumption of the office to which they have been elected or appointed.
The City Manager must qualify as a voter within one hundred eighty (180) days of his appointment.
(Ord. 2009-04, 10-6-2009, eff. 10-16-2009)
1-7-5: ELECTED OFFICERS:
A. Qualified Voter: Every officer elected shall be a qualified voter of the City and qualify by taking the
oath prescribed by law and by giving, when required, a bond, which qualification shall be perfected
prior to his assumption of the office to which he has been elected.
B. Mayor And Council; Terms: The Mayor shall be elected for a term of two (2) years and there shall
be five (5) Councilmembers elected at large by the entire electorate for a term of office of four (4)
years. The terms of offices of Councilmembers shall be staggered so that one-half (1/2) of the
members of the Council, as nearly as may be, are elected at each regular Municipal election.
C. Vacancies:
1. In case a vacancy shall occur in any elective office caused by resignation, death or otherwise,
and a quorum of the members of the Council remain, the Council shall, within sixty (60) days
following the vacancy, by either special or regular meeting, fill said vacancy. The Council shall
vote by ballot and the person receiving a majority vote of the whole number of members of the
Council shall be declared appointed to fill said vacancy.
2. Prior to appointing any individual in accordance with subsection C1 of this section, the Council
shall publish notice of its intention to fill the vacancy in a newspaper of general circulation in the
City not less than four (4) nor greater than twenty (20) days prior to the date the Council
proposes to make the appointment. The notice shall state the Council intends to fill the vacancy
by appointment, but the electors have the right to file a petition requiring the vacancy be filled by
special election. If within fourteen (14) days after the publication of notice or the appointment is
made, whichever is later, there is filed with the City Clerk a valid petition, the Council shall call a
special election to fill the vacancy in accordance with subsection C4 of this section. If the Council
has appointed an individual to fill the vacancy, the individual shall fill the vacancy temporarily
until the special election can be held.
3. The term of the appointed individual shall be from the day of appointment until the next regular
City election, unless there is an intervening special election, in which event the election for office
shall be placed on the ballot at such election.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 18/349
4. If a valid petition is filed under subsection C2 of this section, or if there is not a quorum in the
Council, then a special election shall be held to fill the office for the remaining balance of the
unexpired term.
D. Compensation:
1. Mayor: The Mayor shall receive a salary of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) per annum,
payable quarterly.
2. Council: Each Councilmember shall receive for compensation the sum of fifty dollars ($50.00)
for each regular or special Council meeting and for each agendized committee meeting, payable
quarterly. (Ord. 20160405-2, 6-7-2016)
1-7-6: APPOINTIVE OFFICERS:
A. Creation Of Offices: There are hereby created the following appointive officers: Mayor Pro Tem,
City Clerk, City Manager, Deputy City Clerk, Treasurer, Chief of Police, Police Officers, Attorney,
Fire Chief and City Inspector. (1975 Code § 1-6-7; amd. 1998 Code; Ord. 20130305-1, 3-19-2013)
B. Appointment:
1. The Mayor shall appoint a Councilmember as Mayor Pro Tem.
2. The Mayor shall appoint the Chief of Police and all other police officers.
3. The Mayor shall appoint the Treasurer with the approval of the Council.
4. The Fire Chief shall be appointed by the Volunteer Fire Department with the approval of the
Council.
5. All other appointive officers shall be appointed or selected by the Council unless otherwise
provided by law. (1975 Code § 1-6-8)
C. Terms; Vacancies:
1. The term of appointive officers, not otherwise fixed by law or ordinance, shall be two (2) years.
2. A vacancy in an appointive office shall be filled in the same manner as the original appointment.
(1975 Code § 1-6-9)
1-7-7: BONDS OF OFFICERS:
Each of the following officers will give bond in the following amounts:
Mayor $ 5,000.00
Mayor Pro Tem 5,000.00
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 19/349
Clerk-City Manager 50,000.00
Deputy Clerk 50,000.00
Treasurer 50,000.00
Chief of Police 5,000.00
Police Officers 5,000.00
City Inspector 1,000.00
The cost of the bond of any City official required to give bond shall be paid for by the City; and all
official bonds shall, after approval and proper record, be filed with the City Clerk except the bond of
the Clerk-City Manager, which shall be filed with and preserved by the Mayor. (1975 Code § 1-6-12;
amd. 1998 Code)
1-7-8: OFFICERS, OTHER DUTIES:
All officers of the City shall do and perform such other duties as may be provided by ordinance or by
the City Manager and/or the City Council, together with such duties as set forth in this Code or as
prescribed by State law. (1975 Code § 1-6-13)
1-7-9: RESIDENCY REQUIREMENT FOR CITY EMPLOYEES:
A. Residence Requirement Established: There is hereby established a residence requirement for all
full-time employees of the City.
B. Type Of Residence: The residence (which may be a single-family home, trailer, condominium,
apartment, or houseboat) where the taxpayer resides most of the time.
C. Area Of Residence: The area of residence shall be within the West Liberty telephone "627"
exchange and/or the West Liberty School District.
D. Applicability: This residence requirement is applicable to all new employees hired after February 1,
1996, and all current employees living outside the area of residence when they relocate or move
from their current residence as of February 1, 1996. (Ord. 2-96, 2-6-1996)
Chapter 8
CITY CLERK
1-8-1: APPOINTMENT/REMOVAL/COMPENSATION:
The City Council shall appoint, by majority vote, a City Clerk to serve at the pleasure of the Council.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 20/349
The City Clerk may be removed by a majority vote of all members of the Council, at a regular or
special meeting thereof, and said Council shall appoint, by majority vote, any successor or interim City
Clerk, at the same meeting or subsequent meeting, who shall also be subject to removal, by majority
vote of all members of the Council. The City Clerk shall receive such compensation as established by
the City Council from time to time. (Ord. 20130305-1, 3-19-2013)
1-8-2: OATH:
Before discharging the Clerk's duties, the appointed City Clerk shall take an official oath that the Clerk
will support the Constitution of the United States, the Constitution of the State of Iowa, and faithfully
uphold the laws and ordinances of the State of Iowa and City of West Liberty and perform the duties of
the office as assigned. (Ord. 20130305-1, 3-19-2013)
1-8-3: POWERS AND DUTIES:
The Clerk, or in the Clerk's absence or inability to act, the Deputy Clerk shall have the powers and
duties as provided in this chapter and as otherwise provided by law. Additionally, the duties of the City
Clerk shall be as follows:
A. The Clerk shall attend all regular and special City Council meetings and within fifteen (15) days
following a regular or special meeting shall cause the minutes of the proceedings thereof to be
published. Such publication shall include a list of all claims allowed and a summary of all receipts
shall show the gross amount of the claim.
B. The Clerk shall promptly record each measure considered by the City Council and record a
statement with the measure, where applicable, indicating whether the Mayor signed, vetoed or
took no action on the measure, and whether the measure was repassed after the Mayor's veto.
C. The Clerk shall cause to be published all ordinances, enactments, proceedings and official notices
requiring publication as provided by law.
1. If notice of an election, hearing or other official action is required by this Code or the Code of
Iowa, the notice shall be published as provided by law.
2. A publication required by this Code or the Code of Iowa must be in a newspaper published at
least once weekly and having general circulation in the City. (Ord. 20130305-1, 3-19-2013)
1-8-4: AUTHENTICATION:
The Clerk shall authenticate all measures, except motions, with the City Clerk's signature, certifying
the time and manner of publication when required. (Ord. 20130305-1, 3-19-2013)
1-8-5: CERTIFIED MEASURES:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 21/349
The City Clerk shall certify all measures establishing any zoning districts, building lines, fire limits and
a plat showing the fire district, lines or limits to the Recorder of the County containing the affected
parts of the City, or as otherwise required by law or deemed necessary for the efficient operations of
the City. (Ord. 20130305-1, 3-19-2013)
1-8-6: RECORDS:
The City Clerk shall maintain the specified City records in the following manner:
A. Ordinances and codes shall be maintained and made available for public use.
B. The Clerk shall have custody and be responsible for the safekeeping of all writings or documents in
which the City is a party in interest, unless otherwise specifically directed by law or ordinance.
C. The City Clerk shall maintain all records and documents, or accurate reproductions, for at least five
(5) years. Ordinances, resolutions, Council proceedings, records, documents or accurate
reproductions relating to the issuance, cancellation, transfer, redemption or replacement of public
bonds or obligations shall be kept for at least eleven (11) years following the final maturity of the
bonds or obligations. Ordinances, resolutions, Council proceedings, records and documents or
accurate reproductions relating to real property transactions shall be maintained permanently.
D. The City Clerk shall furnish, upon request, to any Municipal officer a copy of any record, paper or
public document under the Clerk's control, when it may be necessary to such officer in the
discharge of the officer's duty; furnish a copy to any citizen when requested upon payment of the
fee set by Council resolution; under the direction of the Mayor or other authorized officer, affix the
Seal of the City to those public documents or instruments which, by ordinance or State law, are
required to be attested by the affixing of the seal.
E. The City Clerk shall keep and file all communications and petitions directed to the City Council or to
the City generally. (Ord. 20130305-1, 3-19-2013)
1-8-7: ATTENDANCE AT MEETINGS:
At the direction of the Council, the City Clerk shall attend meetings of committees, boards and
commissions. The Clerk shall record and preserve a correct record of the proceedings of such
meetings. (Ord. 20130305-1, 3-19-2013)
1-8-8: ISSUE LICENSES AND PERMITS:
The Clerk shall issue or revoke licenses and permits when authorized by this Code or State law or
when directed by action of the City Council. The Clerk shall also keep a record of licenses and permits
issued, which shall show the date of issuance, license or permit number, official receipt number, name
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 22/349
of the person to whom the document was issued, term of license or permit and purpose for which it
was issued. (Ord. 20130305-1, 3-19-2013)
1-8-9: NOTIFY APPOINTEES:
The Clerk shall inform all persons appointed by the Mayor or Council to offices in the City government
of their position and the time at which they shall assume the duties of their office or position. (Ord.
20130305-1, 3-19-2013)
1-8-10: ELECTIONS:
The Clerk shall perform the following duties relating to elections and nominations:
A. In the event of a change in the method of nomination process used by the City, certify to the
Commissioner of Elections, the type of nomination process used by the City no later than seventy
seven (77) days before the date of the regular City election.
B. Accept the nomination petition of a candidate for City office for filing, if, on its face, it appears to
have the requisite number of signatures and is timely filed.
C. Designate other employees or officials of the City who are ordinarily available to accept petition
papers if the Clerk is not readily available during normal working hours.
D. The Clerk shall note upon each petition and affidavit accepted for filing, the date and time that the
petition was filed.
E. The Clerk shall deliver all nomination petitions, together with the text of any public measure being
submitted by the Council, to the County Commissioner of Elections not later than five o'clock (5:00)
P.M. on the day following the last day on which nomination petitions can be filed. (Ord. 20130305-
1, 3-19-2013)
1-8-11: CITY SEAL:
The City Seal shall remain in the care and custody of the City Clerk, and said seal shall be attached
by the City Clerk to all transcripts, orders and certificates which may be necessary or proper to
authenticate. (Ord. 20130305-1, 3-19-2013)
Chapter 8A
CITY MANAGER
1-8A-1: APPOINTMENT/REMOVAL/COMPENSATION:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 23/349
The City Council shall appoint, by majority vote, the City Manager. The City Manager shall be
appointed at the first Council meeting subsequent to the signing of an employment contract. The City
Manager may be removed by a majority vote of all members of the Council at a regular or special
Council meeting. The Council shall appoint, by a majority vote, at a regular or special Council meeting,
a successor or interim City Manager who shall be subject to removal by a majority of all members of
the Council at any time. (Ord. 20130305-2, 3-19-2013)
1-8A-2: OATH:
Before discharging the Manager's duties, the appointed City Manager shall take an official oath, in
writing, to support the Constitution of the United States, the Constitution of the State of Iowa and
faithfully uphold the laws and ordinances of the State of Iowa and City of West Liberty and perform the
duties of the office as assigned. (Ord. 20130305-2, 3-19-2013)
1-8A-3: POWERS AND DUTIES:
The duties of the City Manager shall be as follows:
A. Perform all duties imposed or hereafter imposed upon such Manager by law or any of the
provisions of this Code.
B. Supervise enforcement and execution of all City ordinances.
C. Attend all meetings of the City Council, unless excused by the Mayor or majority of the City
Council.
D. Recommend to the City Council such measures that the Manager may deem necessary or
expedient for the welfare of the City.
E. Generally administer the operations of the City and may appoint, with the approval of the City
Council, such administrative assistants as may be deemed advisable.
F. Supervise the performance of all contracts for work to be done for the City, make purchases of
material and supplies as approved by the Council, and see that such material and supplies are
received and are of the quality and character called for by the contract.
G. Supervise the construction, improvements, repair, maintenance and management of all City
property, capital improvements and undertakings of the City, including the making and preservation
of all surveys, maps, plans, drawings, specifications and estimates for capital improvements.
H. Employ, reclassify or discharge employees of the City, except Council or Mayoral appointees.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 24/349
I. Be directly responsible to the Council for the administration of the City as directed by the Council.
J. Be responsible for the cleaning, sprinkling and lighting of streets, alleys and public places and the
collection and disposal of waste.
K. Have charge of all obsolete materials kept for sale by the City and sell the same.
L. Manage, control and bill all customers of Municipal water, electric and sewer systems. Supervise
the reading of meters and otherwise determine the amount of water and electricity sold.
M. Maintain an office in City Hall and office hours as the Council may direct from time to time.
N. Supervise and direct, through the established procedures, all officers, departments and employees
of the City, specifically including but not limited to police, fire, streets, sewers, waste disposal and
central administration. To effectuate this responsibility, the City Manager shall have the power and
authority to recommend employment of such assistants and other employees of the City for which
the Council has approved.
O. Represent the City, as directed by the Council, in all negotiations and relations with employees,
contractors, consultants, other governmental units and civic organizations in which the City may
have an interest.
P. Procure all necessary books, stationery and postage for the use of City officers and members of the
Council in the discharge of their duties.
Q. Be the Chief Accounting Officer of the City and keep separate accounts for every appropriation,
department, public improvement or undertaking, and for every public utility owned or operated by
the City. Each account shall be kept in the manner required by law. Following the Council adoption
of the budget, the Manager shall certify the necessary tax levy for the following year to the County
auditor and the County Board of Supervisors. The Manager shall balance all funds with the
Treasurer at the end of each month. The Manager shall prepare the annual public report, publish it
and send a certified copy to the State auditor and other State officers as required by law.
R. The Manager shall draw all warrants for the City upon the vote of the Council and shall show on
every warrant the fund on which it is drawn and the claim to be paid. The Manager shall keep a
warrant record in a form approved by the Council, showing the number, date, amount, payee's
name, upon which fund drawn and for what claim each warrant is issued.
S. Permit the Manager's account and vouchers to be inspected by the public at any time during office
hours.
T. Cooperate with, assist and advise all administrative agencies, City boards and commissions and act
as the Council's liaison and representative to such entities.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 25/349
U. Investigate the performance and conduct of any department, agency, officer or employee of the
City as deemed appropriate.
V. Keep the Council fully advised of the financial condition and other conditions of the City and of the
City's future needs.
W. Supervise and assist City boards, commissions and all City departments in the preparation,
administration and operation of the City's annual budget.
X. Make periodic reports to the City Council of the general condition of the City and at such other
intervals as the Council may direct.
Y. Advise, assist and consult with the City Attorney on all City legal matters.
Z. Formulate and recommend employment and personnel policies, compensation schedules and
benefits; prepare and maintain job descriptions for all City employees, all with the approval of the
City Council; supervise and direct negotiations in all matters relating to collective bargaining.
AA. Compile and maintain current and up-to-date information regarding all funding sources of the City,
including State and Federal grant and local programs; to plan, develop, prepare and submit, with
the approval and at the discretion of the City Council, applications for grants, loans and other
sources of funding and to administer all such funding.
BB. Make recommendations to the City Council and participate in projects and endeavors to support
and promote economic growth and development in the City.
CC. Faithfully represent the Council and the City in intergovernmental relations.
DD. Have the power to employ, reclassify, discipline or suspend any employee under the Manager's
direct control. The City Manager shall also have the power to employ, reclassify, discipline,
suspend or discharge any employee under the supervision and control of any department head,
but only after consultation with the department head. The City Manager shall not have the authority
to employ or appoint, reclassify, discipline, suspend or discharge the Police Chief, Fire Chief,
Public Works Director, City Clerk or City Attorney. However, the City Manager shall, when
appropriate, recommend to the Council action regarding such appointed officers or employees of
the City and shall also recommend to and seek direction from the City Council when the Manager
and a department head are not in agreement in regard to the employment, reclassification,
suspension, discipline or discharge of a City employee.
EE. Perform such other duties as the Mayor or Council may direct.
FF. Perform duties as Zoning Administrator as prescribed in this Code.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 26/349
GG. Ensure that the laws of the City are faithfully enforced and executed and report to the Mayor any
violations thereof.
HH. Perform such other duties compatible with the office as may be provided by law, ordinance or
resolution. (Ord. 20130305-2, 3-19-2013)
1-8A-4: QUALIFICATIONS:
The City Manager shall be a person competent by education and/or experience to perform the duties
imposed upon such person by this chapter. The City Manager:
A. Shall possess a college degree in public administration or related field and have three (3) years of
experience in City administration or shall have a minimum of eight (8) years of practical experience
in City administration. (Ord. 20130305-2, 3-19-2013)
B. Except as provided in section 1-8A-5 of this chapter, following appointment shall reside within the
corporate City limits of the City of West Liberty (the "City limits"). (Ord. 20160607-7, 7-5-2016)
C. Shall devote full time to the diligent and faithful performance of the duties set forth herein and shall
not, during the term as Manager, engage in any other employment or self-employment activities or
endeavors or hold any other office or position, except with the approval of the majority of the entire
City Council.
D. Shall not, during the term as City Manager, hold any position as officer or director of any "for profit"
organization which does business with or carries on any activities in the City, or own more than five
percent (5%) of the outstanding stock of any corporation which does business with or carries on
activities within the City. (Ord. 20130305-2, 3-19-2013)
1-8A-5: GRANDFATHER CLAUSE:
If the City Manager has been appointed by the City Council, is the acting City Manager on or prior to
June 7, 2016, and is living outside of the City limits, the City Manager shall be allowed to continue
living outside of the City limits so long as the City Manager continues to reside within the West Liberty
School District. Any City Manager who is appointed by the City Council following June 7, 2016, shall
be required to comply with the residency provisions of subsection 1-8A-4B of this chapter. (Ord.
20160607-7, 7-5-2016)
Chapter 9
CITY TREASURER
1-9-1: POWERS AND DUTIES:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 27/349
The duties of the City Treasurer shall be as follows:
A. General Duties: Collect, receive and safely keep all money payable or belonging to the City and
shall disburse the same only upon the warrants authorized by the City Council, signed by the
Mayor and countersigned by the City Clerk, except the Library Fund which he shall disburse upon
warrants or orders of the Board of Library Trustees signed by its president and secretary. (1975
Code § 1-10-1; amd. 1998 Code)
B. Monthly Returns: Make returns monthly or more often if required by the Council to the officer
drawing such warrants, showing the warrants paid and the amount of principal and interest paid.
(1975 Code § 1-10-2)
C. Receipts: Prepare receipts in duplicate for all monies paid to him as Treasurer, retaining one copy
thereof in his files and delivering the other copy to the person who paid said monies. Said receipt
shall specify the date, the amount and upon what account credited. (1975 Code § 1-10-3)
D. Records:
1. Accounts: Keep a full and accurate account of all monies, credits and securities received by him
in behalf of the City, showing the account of each fund separately, and specifying when, from
whom and upon what account received; he shall in like manner keep a true account of all
disbursements of money by him, specifying when, to whom, from what fund and upon what
account disbursement is made, and shall hold said accounts ready at all times for the inspection
of the Council or its duly authorized committee or representative. (1975 Code § 1-10-4)
2. Bonds: Keep a full and accurate account of all bonds issued and outstanding by the City, an
account of the interest payments on such bonds, and an account of the maturity thereof and the
payment of said bonds when made. (1975 Code § 1-10-5)
E. Reports:
1. Report Of Financial Condition: Make a written report under oath to the Council at its first regular
meeting in each month, showing the balance in each fund of the City at the end of the preceding
month; and such other reports as may be required by the Council. (1975 Code § 1-10-6)
2. Report Filed With Clerk: Within thirty (30) days from the expiration of the Municipal fiscal year on
June 30, file with the Clerk a detailed report in writing showing the receipts and disbursements of
all funds in each department of the City for said fiscal year. (1975 Code § 1-10-7)
1-9-2: DEPOSIT OF PUBLIC FUNDS:
The City Treasurer shall deposit all funds of the City in a bank or banks previously approved by the
City Council. The approval of a bank as a depository shall be by written resolution or order, which shall
be entered of record in the minutes of the Council, and which shall distinctly name each bank
approved and specify the maximum amount which may be kept on deposit in each such bank. No
funds of the City shall be deposited in any bank located outside of the City unless and until the
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 28/349
balance of funds on deposit with approved depository banks located in the City has reached the
maximum approved by the Council. (1975 Code § 1-10-8)
1-9-3: PRIVATE USE OF FUNDS:
The City Treasurer shall not loan or in any manner use for private purposes any funds coming into his
hands as Treasurer. (1975 Code § 1-10-9)
Chapter 10
CORPORATE LIMITS
1-10-1: CORPORATE LIMITS ESTABLISHED:
The corporate limits of the City are established, confirmed and declared to be such as are on file with
the Muscatine County Courthouse. (1998 Code)
Chapter 11
VOTING PRECINCTS
1-11-1: DESCRIPTION OF PRECINCTS:
The precincts shall be described as the following areas:
A. West Liberty One Precinct (WL1):
West Liberty One Precinct begins on the west corporate limits at the starting point of the Iowa
Interstate Railroad right of way. The boundary will continue southeast along the right of way until
meeting at the intersection of the Iowa Interstate Railroad and West Prairie Street. The precinct
boundary will continue north along West Prairie Street until the end of West Prairie Street at West
Fourth Street. The boundary then continues back West to Elm Street and at that point heads North
until the intersection of North Elm Street and West Sixth Street. The boundary line continues east
along Sixth Street until the West Liberty Corporate Limits. All of the area within the corporate limits
of the City of West Liberty North of this designated line shall be designated West Liberty One
Precinct (WL1).
B. West Liberty Two Precinct (WL2):
West Liberty Two Precinct begins on the west corporate limits at the starting point of the Iowa
Interstate Railroad right of way. The boundary will continue southeast along the right of way until
meeting at the intersection of the Iowa Interstate Railroad and West Prairie Street. The precinct
boundary will continue north along West Prairie Street until the end of West Prairie Street at West
Fourth Street. The boundary then continues back West to Elm Street and at that point heads North
until the intersection of North Elm Street and West Sixth Street. The boundary line continues east
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 29/349
along Sixth Street until the West Liberty Corporate Limits. All of the area within the corporate limits
of the City of West Liberty south of this designated line including the park shall be designated West
Liberty Two Precinct (WL2).
(Ord. 2011-04, 8-16-2011)
Title 2
BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
Chapter 1
PARKS AND RECREATION COMMISSION
2-1-1: PARKS AND TREE COMMISSION RENAMED:
The parks and tree commission hereinafter referred to as the board, consists of seven (7) members.
All members of the board shall be residents of the city of West Liberty. All board members are to be
appointed by the mayor with the approval of the council. The board is hereby renamed as: parks and
recreation commission. (Ord. 04-01, 6-15-2004)
2-1-2: DUTIES:
The duties of the board will include making policies for park operations, recreational activities and
trees within public rights of way. (Ord. 04-01, 6-15-2004)
2-1-3: STANDARDS AND RULES:
The policies passed by simple majority by this board will be referred to the West Liberty city council for
final approval. (Ord. 04-01, 6-15-2004)
Chapter 2
PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION
2-2-1: COMMISSION ESTABLISHED:
Under and by virtue of the authority conferred by Iowa Code chapter 414, a City Planning and Zoning
Commission is hereby created and established. (Ord. 5-93, 4-20-1993)
2-2-2: MEMBERS:
The City Planning and Zoning Commission shall consist of five (5) members who shall be citizens of
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 30/349
the City and qualified by knowledge or experience to act in matters pertaining to the development of a
City plan and who shall not hold any elective office in the Municipal government. Said members shall
be appointed by the Mayor, subject to the approval of the City Council. (1975 Code § 2-2-2; amd. Ord.
5-93, 4-20-1993)
2-2-3: TERM OF OFFICE:
The term of office of the members of said Commission shall be three (3) years. (1975 Code § 2-2-3;
amd. Ord. 5-93, 4-20-1993; 1998 Code)
2-2-4: VACANCIES:
If any vacancy shall exist on said Commission caused by resignation, or otherwise, the Mayor shall
appoint a successor for the residue of said term, subject to the approval of the Council. (1975 Code
§ 2-2-4)
2-2-5: COMPENSATION:
All members of the Commission shall serve without compensation, except their actual expenses,
which shall be subject to the approval of the Council. (1975 Code § 2-2-5)
2-2-6: DUTIES AND POWERS:
The Planning And Zoning Commission shall:
A. Annually choose, at its first regular meeting, one of its members to act as chairman of this
Commission and another as vice chairman, who shall perform all the duties of the chairman during
his absence or disability.
B. Adopt such rules and regulations governing its organization and procedure as it may deem
necessary.
C. On or before August 1 of each year, make a report to the Mayor and Council of its proceedings, etc.
D. On direction of the City Council, make or cause to be made such surveys, studies, maps, plans or
charts of the whole or any portion of the City or of any land outside the limits, which in the opinion
of the Commission bears relation to the Comprehensive Plan and shall bring this to the attention of
the Council and may publish its studies and recommendations.
E. Make recommendations. All plans, plats or replats of subdivisions or resubdivisions of land
embraced within the City or adjacent thereto, laid out in lots or plats with the streets, alleys or other
portions of the same intended to be dedicated to the public in the City, shall first be submitted to
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 31/349
the Planning and Zoning Commission and its recommendations obtained before approval by the
Council.
F. Have full, complete and exclusive authority to expend for and on behalf of the City all sums of
money appropriated as hereinafter provided, and to use and expend all gifts, donations or
payments whatsoever which are received by the City for City plan purposes.
G. Have no power to contract debts beyond the amount of its income for the present year.
H. Comprehensive Plan:
1. For the purpose of making a comprehensive plan for the physical development of the City, make
careful and comprehensive studies of the present conditions and future growth of the City and
with due regard to its relation to neighboring territory. The plan shall be made with the general
purpose of guiding and accomplishing a coordinated, adjusted and harmonious development of
the City and its environs which will, in accordance with the present and future needs, best
promote health, safety, morals, order, convenience, prosperity and general welfare, as well as
efficiency and economy in the process of development.
2. Before adopting a comprehensive plan as referred to in the preceding subsection, or any part of
it, or any substantial amendment thereof, hold at least one public hearing thereon, notice of the
time of which shall be given by one publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the City
not less than ten (10) nor more than twenty (20) days before the date of hearing. The adoption of
the plan or part or amendment thereof shall be by resolution of the Commission carried by the
affirmative vote of not less than two-thirds (2/3) of the members of the Commission. After
adoption of said plan by the Commission, an attested copy thereof shall be certified to the
Council and the Council may approve the same, and when said plan or any modification or
amendment thereof shall receive the approval of the Council, the said plan until subsequently
modified or amended as hereinbefore authorized shall constitute the official City plan.
3. When such comprehensive plan as hereinbefore provided has been adopted, no substantial
amendment or modification thereof shall be made without such proposed change first being
referred to the Planning and Zoning Commission for its recommendations. If the Commission
disapproves the proposed change, it may be adopted by the Council only by the affirmative vote
of at least three-fourths (3/4) of the members of the Council. (1975 Code § 2-2-6; amd. Ord. 5-
93, 4-20-1993)
Chapter 3
BOARD OF HEALTH
2-3-1: COMPLIANCE WITH STATUTE:
A Board of Health for the City shall be provided pursuant to Iowa Code section 137.5 et seq. (1998
Code)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 32/349
Chapter 4
LIBRARY BOARD
2-4-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this Chapter is to establish the powers, duties and authority of the City Library Board
of Trustees. (1975 Code § 2-5-1)
2-4-2: LIBRARY TRUSTEES:
The Board of Trustees of the Carnegie Public Library, hereinafter referred to as the Board, consists of
seven (7) members. All Boardmembers shall be appointed by the Mayor with the approval of the
Council. (1975 Code § 2-5-2)
2-4-3: QUALIFICATIONS OF TRUSTEES:
All of the members of the Board shall be bona fide citizens and residents of the City, and all shall be
over the age of eighteen (18). (1975 Code § 2-5-3)
2-4-4: ORGANIZATION OF BOARD:
A. Terms Of Office: All appointments to the Board shall be for six (6) years, except to fill vacancies.
Each term shall commence on January 1. Appointments shall be made every two (2) years of onethird
(1/3) the total number as near as possible, to stagger the terms. (The present incumbents are
confirmed in their appointments and terms.)
B. Vacancies: The position of any Trustee shall be vacant if he moves permanently from the City or if
he is absent from six (6) consecutive regular meetings of the Board, except in the case of sickness
or temporary absence from the City. Vacancies in the Board shall be filled by appointment of the
Mayor, with approval of the Council, and the new Trustee shall fill out the unexpired term for which
the appointment is made.
C. Compensation: Trustees shall receive no compensation for their services. (1975 Code § 2-5-4)
2-4-5: POWERS AND DUTIES:
The Board shall have and exercise the following powers and duties:
A. To meet and elect from its members a president, a vice president, a secretary, and such other
officers as it deems necessary.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 33/349
B. To have charge, control and supervision of the public library, its appurtenances, fixtures and rooms
containing the same.
C. To direct and control all the affairs of the library.
D. To employ a librarian, and authorize the librarian to employ such assistants and employees as may
be necessary for the proper management of the library, and fix their compensation; provided,
however, that prior to such employment, the compensation of the librarian, assistants and
employees shall have been fixed and approved by a majority of the members of the Board voting
in favor thereof.
E. To remove by a majority vote of the Board the librarian and provide procedures for the removal of
assistants or employees for misdemeanor, incompetency or inattention to duty, subject, however,
to the provisions of Iowa Code chapter 35C.
F. To select, or authorize the librarian to select, and make purchases of books, pamphlets, magazines,
periodicals, papers, maps, journals, other library materials, furniture, fixtures, stationery and
supplies for the library within budgetary limits set by the Board.
G. To authorize the use of the library by nonresidents of the City and to fix charges therefor.
H. To make and adopt, amend, modify or repeal rules and regulations, not inconsistent with
ordinances and the law, for the care, use, government and management of the library and the
business of the Board, fixing and enforcing penalties for violations.
I. To have exclusive control of the expenditure of all funds allocated for library purposes by the
Council, and of all monies available by gift or otherwise for the erection of library buildings, and of
all other monies belonging to the library including fines and rentals collected, under the rules of the
Board.
J. To accept gifts of real property, personal property, or mixed property, and devises and bequests,
including trust funds; to take the title to said property in the name of the library; to execute deeds
and bills of sale for the conveyance of said property; and to expend the funds received by them
from such gifts, for the improvement of the library.
K. To keep a record of its proceedings.
L. To enforce the performance of conditions on gifts, donations, devises and bequests accepted by the
City by action against the City Council.
M. To have authority to make agreements with the local County historical associations, where such
exists, and to set apart the necessary room and to care for such articles as may come into the
possession of the association. The Trustees are further authorized to purchase necessary
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 34/349
receptacles and materials for the preservation and protection of such articles as are in their
judgment of a historical and educational nature and pay for the same out of funds allocated for
library purposes. (1975 Code § 2-5-5)
2-4-6: POWER TO CONTRACT FOR USE OF LIBRARY:
A. Contracting: The Board may contract with any other boards of trustees of free public libraries, any
other city, school, corporation, private or semi-private organization, institution of higher learning,
township, or county, or with the trustees of any county library district for the use of the library by
their respective residents. (1975 Code § 2-5-6)
B. Termination: Such a contract may be terminated at any time by mutual consent of the contracting
parties. (1975 Code § 2-5-6; amd. 1998 Code)
2-4-7: NONRESIDENT USE OF LIBRARY:
The Board may authorize the use of the library by nonresidents in any one or more of the following
ways:
A. By lending the books or other materials of the library to nonresidents on the same terms and
conditions as to residents of the City, or upon payment of a special nonresident library fee.
B. By establishing depositories of library books or other materials to be loaned to nonresidents.
C. By establishing bookmobiles or a traveling library so that books or other library materials may be
loaned to nonresidents. (1975 Code § 2-5-7)
2-4-8: LIBRARY ACCOUNT:
All money appropriated by the Council from the General Fund for the operation and maintenance of
the library shall be set aside in an account for the library. Expenditures shall be paid for only on orders
of the Board, signed by two (2) of the three (3) officers mentioned in subsection 2-4-5A of this
Chapter. The warrant writing officer is the librarian. (1975 Code § 2-5-8)
2-4-9: ANNUAL REPORT:
The Board shall make a report to the City Council immediately after the close of the Municipal fiscal
year. This report shall contain statements of the condition of the library, the number of books added
thereto, the number circulated, the amount of fines collected, and the amount of money expended in
the maintenance of the library during the year, together with such further information required by the
Council. (1975 Code § 2-5-9)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 35/349
Title 3
BUSINESS REGULATIONS
Chapter 1
GENERAL LICENSING PROVISIONS
3-1-1: APPLICATIONS:
Applications for all licenses and permits required by this Code shall be made in writing to the City
Clerk, unless otherwise specifically provided by law. Each application shall state the name of the
applicant, the permit or license desired, the location to be used, if any, the time covered and the fee to
be paid; and each application shall contain such additional information as may be required by the
issuing official. (1998 Code)
3-1-2: PERSONS SUBJECT TO LICENSE:
Whenever in this Code a license or permit is required for the maintenance, operation or conduct of
any business or establishment or for doing business or engaging in any activity or occupation, any
person or corporation shall be subject to the requirement if, by himself or through an agent, employee
or partner, he holds himself forth as being engaged in the business or occupation; or solicits
patronage therefor, actively or passively; or performs or attempts to perform any part of such business
or occupation in the City. (1998 Code)
3-1-3: FORMS:
Forms for all licenses and permits, and applications therefor, shall be prepared and kept on file by the
City Clerk. (1998 Code)
3-1-4: SIGNATURES:
Each license or permit issued shall bear the signatures of the Mayor and the City Clerk in the absence
of any provision to the contrary. (1998 Code)
3-1-5: INSPECTIONS OR INVESTIGATIONS:
Upon the receipt of an application for a license or permit where laws of the City necessitate an
inspection or investigation before the issuance of such permit or license, the City Clerk shall refer such
application to the proper officer for making such investigation within forty eight (48) hours of the time
of such receipt. The officer charged with the duty of making the investigation or inspection shall make
a report thereon, favorable or otherwise, within ten (10) days after receiving the application or a copy
thereof. For the protection of health, the City Inspector shall make or cause to be made any such
inspections relative to the construction of buildings or other structures. All other investigations, except
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 36/349
where otherwise provided, shall be made by the Chief of Police or by some other officer designated by
the Mayor. (1998 Code)
3-1-6: TERM OF LICENSE:
All annual licenses shall terminate on the last day of the calendar year, where no provision to the
contrary is made. (1998 Code)
3-1-7: BUILDING AND PREMISES:
No license shall be issued for the conduct of any business and no permit shall be issued for any thing
or act if the premises and building to be used for the purpose do not fully comply with the
requirements of the City. (1998 Code)
3-1-8: CHANGE OF LOCATION:
In the absence of any provision to the contrary, the location of any licensed business or occupation or
of any permitted act may be changed, provided ten (10) days' notice thereof is given to the City Clerk;
provided, the building requirements of this Code are complied with. (1998 Code)
3-1-9: NUISANCES:
No business, licensed or not, shall be conducted or operated so as to amount to a nuisance in fact.
(1998 Code)
3-1-10: POSTING OF LICENSE:
It shall be the duty of any person conducting a licensed business in the City to keep his license posted
in a prominent place on the premises used for such business at all times. (1998 Code)
3-1-11: REVOCATION OF LICENSE OR PERMIT; HEARING:
Any license or permit, for a limited time, may be revoked by the Mayor and City Council during the life
of such license or permit for the violation by the licensee or permittee of any provision relating to the
license or permit, the subject of the license or permit, or the premises occupied; such revocation may
be in addition to any fine imposed. The Mayor and the City Council shall be authorized to summarily
order the cessation of business, the closing of the premises, and the suspension of any business
license or permit for a period not to exceed fifteen (15) days.
A. Hearing: Within ten (10) days after the City officials have so acted, the Mayor shall call a hearing for
the purpose of determining whether or not the license or permit should be revoked.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 37/349
B. Notice Of Hearing: Notice of hearing for revocation of a license or permit shall be given in writing
setting forth specifically the grounds of the complaint and the time and place of hearing. Such
notice shall be sent to the licensee or permittee by certified mail at his last known address or
personally served at least five (5) days prior to the date of the hearing.
C. Hearing Procedures: At the hearing, the licensee or permittee shall be permitted counsel and shall
have the right to submit evidence and cross-examine witnesses. The Mayor shall preside and shall
render the decision and recommendation.
D. Causes For Revocation: Business licenses and permits issued under the ordinances of the City,
unless otherwise provided, may be revoked by the Mayor and City Council after notice and hearing
as provided in subsections B and C of this Section for any of the following causes:
1. Any fraud, misrepresentation or false statement contained in the application for the license or
permit;
2. Any violation by the licensee or permittee of ordinance provisions or State law relating to the
license or permit, the subject matter of the license or permit, or the premises occupied;
3. Conviction of the licensee or permittee of any felony or of a misdemeanor involving moral
turpitude;
4. Failure of the licensee or permittee to pay any fine or penalty owing to the City;
5. Refusal to permit an inspection or investigation or any interference with a duly authorized City
officer or employee while in the performance of his duties in making such inspections, as
provided in the City Code. (1998 Code)
3-1-12: APPEAL PROCEDURE:
A. Right To Appeal: Any applicant aggrieved by the refusal of the City to issue a license or permit or by
the revocation of a license or permit shall have the right to appeal the City's decision to the City
Council. Such appeal shall be requested by submitting a written request to the Mayor within five (5)
days of the action of the City which is appealed.
B. Council Consideration: The City Council shall consider the appeal at its next regularly scheduled
meeting, at which time the applicant shall be entitled to present his appeal orally or in writing. The
Council shall act on the appeal within seven (7) days of the hearing and shall either uphold the
action of the City or shall direct the issuance of a license or permit which the City has denied or the
reissuance of a license or permit which the City had revoked. (1998 Code)
Chapter 2
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
3-2-1: PURPOSE:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 38/349
The purpose of this Chapter is to provide administration of licenses and permits and for local
regulations and procedures for the conduct of the sale and consumption of alcoholic liquor, wine, and
beer, for the protection of the health, peace, safety, morals and general welfare of this community.
(1975 Code § 3-1-1; amd. 1998 Code)
3-2-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this Chapter, the definitions appearing in Iowa Code section 123.3 of the Iowa
Alcoholic Beverages Control Act shall apply. (1975 Code § 3-1-2; amd. 1998 Code)
3-2-3: ELIGIBILITY FOR LICENSE OR PERMIT:
Upon meeting the requirements imposed by State law and the ordinances of the City, a person who is
of "good moral character" as defined by State law, may apply for a liquor control license, or a wine, or
beer permit. In the case of a club, corporation or partnership, the officers and directors of the club or
corporation and the partners of a partnership shall be persons of "good moral character" as defined by
State law. (1975 Code § 3-1-3; amd. 1998 Code)
3-2-4: CONDITIONS FOR APPROVAL OF LICENSE OR PERMIT; PREMISES:
An applicant for a liquor control license or wine or beer permit, as a further condition for approval by
the City Council, must give consent in writing on the application, that members of the Fire and Police
Departments and the Building Inspector may enter upon the premises without warrant to inspect for
violations of the provisions of State law and of this Chapter.
A. Conformance With Laws, Regulations: No liquor control license or wine, or beer permit shall be
approved for premises which do not conform to all applicable laws, ordinances, resolutions, and
health and fire regulations.
B. Living Quarters Permit: No licensee shall have or maintain any interior access to residential or
sleeping quarters unless permission is granted by the State Administrator of the Alcoholic
Beverages Division (as provided in Iowa Code chapter 123) in the form of a living quarters permit.
C. Allowed By Zoning Provisions: The premises for which a Class B wine or beer permit is sought
must be located within areas where such businesses are, or hereafter are, permitted by a valid
zoning ordinance.
D. Adequate Tables And Seats: The premises of a Class B wine or beer permit shall, at the time of the
application, and thereafter, continue to be equipped with sufficient tables and seats to
accommodate twenty five (25) persons at one time.
E. Location Restricted: No State liquor store nor any building used for the sale of liquor, wine, or beer
consumption on the premises shall be located within three hundred feet (300') of a public or private
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 39/349
educational institution unless a lesser distance is specifically authorized by ordinance.
F. Booth Restrictions: No booths shall be permitted or used unless they are entirely open at one side
with an unobstructed view therein from the rest of the room. The total height of any booth structure
shall not exceed forty inches (40"). (1975 Code § 3-1-4; amd. 1998 Code)
3-2-5: BEER PERMITS; CLASSES:
Beer permits shall be classed as follows:
A. Class B: A Class B beer permit shall allow the holder to sell beer at retail for consumption on or off
the premises. For sales on premises, the premises must provide sufficient tables and seats to
accommodate not less than twenty five (25) persons.
B. Class C: A Class C beer permit shall allow the holder to sell beer at retail for consumption off the
premises only. Such sales shall be in original containers only. No Class C permit shall be issued to
any person except the owner or proprietor of a grocery store or pharmacy. (1975 Code § 3-1-5;
amd. 1998 Code)
3-2-6: LIQUOR CONTROL LICENSES; CLASSES:
Liquor control licenses shall be classed as follows:
A. Class A: A Class A liquor control license issued to a club shall authorize the holder to purchase
alcoholic liquors from those persons identified in Iowa Code section 123.30(3)(a) only, and to sell
such liquors, wine and beer, to bona fide members and their guests by the individual drink for
consumption on the premises only.
B. Class B: A Class B liquor control license issued to a hotel or motel shall authorize the holder to
purchase alcoholic liquors from the persons identified in Iowa Code section 123.30(3)(b) only, and
to sell such liquors, wine and beer to patrons by the individual drink for consumption on the
premises only; however, beer may also be sold for consumption off the premises.
C. Class C: A Class C liquor control license issued to a commercial establishment must be issued in
the name of the individual or individuals who actually own the entire business and shall authorize
the holder or holders to purchase alcoholic liquors from the persons identified in Iowa Code section
123.30(3)(c) only, and to sell such liquors, wine and beer to patrons by the individual drink for
consumption on the premises only; however, beer may also be sold for consumption off the
premises. (1975 Code § 3-1-6; amd. 1998 Code)
3-2-7: CLASS B WINE PERMIT:
A Class B wine permit shall allow the holder to sell wine at retail for consumption off the premises.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 40/349
(1998 Code)
3-2-8: PROHIBITED INTEREST:
It shall be unlawful for any person to be either directly or indirectly interested in more than one class of
wine or beer permit. (1975 Code § 3-1-7; amd. 1998 Code)
3-2-9: SEPARATE LOCATIONS; CLASS B OR C BEER PERMITS:
Every person holding a Class B or Class C beer permit having more than one place of business where
such beer is sold shall be required to have a separate license for each separate place of business,
except as otherwise prohibited by State law. (1975 Code § 3-1-8; amd. 1998 Code)
3-2-10: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE; FEE:
A. Filing Of Application: A verified application for the original issuance or the renewal of a liquor
control license, a wine permit, or a beer permit shall be filed at such time, in such number of
copies, and in such form as the State Administrator shall prescribe, on forms prescribed by him.
B. Fee: The application shall be accompanied by the required fee and be filed with the City Council at
least thirty (30) days prior to the expiration of the old permit for approval or disapproval. (1998
Code)
3-2-11: INVESTIGATION OF APPLICANT:
Upon receipt of an original application for a liquor license, wine permit, or beer permit by the City
Council, it shall be forwarded to the Chief of Police, who shall conduct an investigation and shall
submit a written report on the applicant as to the truth of the facts averred in the application and a
recommendation to the City Council as to the approval of the license or permit. It shall be the duty of
the Building Inspector and the Fire Chief to inspect the premises to determine if they conform to the
requirements of the City, and no license or permit shall be approved until or unless an approving
report has been filed with the City Council by such officers. (1975 Code § 3-1-10; amd. 1998 Code)
3-2-12: SIMPLIFIED APPLICATION FOR RENEWAL:
Upon receipt of an application for the renewal of a liquor license, wine permit, or beer permit, it shall
be forwarded to the Chief of Police only, who shall conduct an investigation and shall submit a written
report on the applicant as to the truth of the facts answered in the application and a recommendation
to the City Council as to the approval of the license or permit. (1975 Code § 3-1-11; amd. 1998 Code)
3-2-13: LIABILITY INSURANCE:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 41/349
Every liquor control licensee and Class B beer permittee shall furnish proof of financial responsibility
by the existence of a liability insurance policy in such amount as determined by the State Alcoholic
Beverages Division. (1975 Code § 3-1-12; amd. 1998 Code)
3-2-14: LICENSE AND PERMIT FEES:
The license and permit fees to be paid by any applicant shall be those fees set forth in Iowa Code
chapter 123, as amended. (1998 Code)
3-2-15: NATURE OF LICENSE OR PERMIT:
A license or permit shall be a purely personal privilege and is revocable for cause. It shall not
constitute property nor be subject to attachment and execution nor be alienable nor assignable, and in
any case, such license or permit shall cease upon the death of the permittee or licensee. However, the
State Administrator may, in his discretion, allow the executor or administrator of a permittee or
licensee to operate the business of the decedent for a reasonable time not to exceed the expiration
date of the permit or license. Every permit or license shall be issued in the name of the applicant and
no person holding a permit or license shall allow any other person to use same. (1975 Code § 3-1-14;
amd. 1998 Code)
3-2-16: ACTION BY COUNCIL:
Action taken by the City Council shall be so endorsed on the application and thereafter the application,
the fee, the dram shop liability certificate of insurance, and the sketch of the premises shall be
forwarded to the State Division for such further action as is provided by law. (1975 Code § 3-1-15;
amd. 1998 Code)
3-2-17: EXPIRATION OF LICENSE OR PERMIT:
All liquor control licenses, wine permits, and beer permits, unless sooner suspended or revoked, shall
expire one year from date of issuance. Also sixty (60) days' notice of such expiration must be given in
writing by the State Administrator. Six (6) or eight (8) month seasonal licenses, wine permits, or beer
permits or fourteen (14) day permits may be issued for license or permit fee as provided in Iowa Code
chapter 123. No seasonal license or permit shall be renewed except after a period of two (2) months.
Seasonal licensing shall be only as permitted by State regulation. (1975 Code § 3-1-16; amd. 1998
Code)
3-2-18: REFUNDS:
Any such licensee or permittee, his executor or administrator, or any person duly appointed by the
court to take charge of and administer the property or assets of the licensee or permitted for the
benefit of his creditors, may surrender such license or permit to the State Administrator and shall
notify the City, and the State Administrator and the City, or the City by itself in the case of a retail wine
or beer permit, shall refund to the person so surrendering the license or permit a proportionate amount
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 42/349
of the fee paid for such license or permit as follows: if surrendered during the first three (3) months of
the period for which said license or permit was issued, the refund shall be three-fourths (3/4) of the
amount of the fee; if surrendered more than three (3) months but not more than six (6) months after
issuance, the refund shall be one-half (1/2) of the amount of the fee; if surrendered more than six (6)
months but not more than nine (9) months after issuance, the refund shall be one-fourth (1/4) of the
amount of the fee. No refund shall be made, however, for a liquor control license, wine, or beer permit
surrendered more than nine (9) months after issuance. No refund shall be made to any licensee or
permittee, upon the surrender of his license or permit, if there is, at the time of said surrender, a
complaint filed with the State Division or the City, charging him with a violation of this Chapter or
provisions of the Iowa Alcoholic Beverages Control Act. If, upon hearing on any such complaint, the
license or permit is not revoked or suspended, then the licensee or permittee shall be eligible, upon
surrender of his license or permit, to receive a refund as herein provided. But if his license or permit is
revoked or suspended upon such hearing, he shall not be eligible for the refund of any portion of his
license or permit fee. No refund shall be made for seasonal licenses or permits. (1975 Code § 3-1-17;
amd. 1998 Code)
3-2-19: TRANSFER OF LICENSE; FEE:
The Council will, in its discretion, authorize a licensee or permittee to transfer the license or permit
from one location to another within the City; provided, that the premises to which the transfer is to be
made would have been eligible for a license or permit in the first instance and such transfer will not
result in the violation of any law or ordinance. An applicant for such a transfer shall file, with
application for transfer, the fee as set by the State Division for transfer. (1975 Code § 3-1-18)
3-2-20: PROHIBITED SALES AND ACTS:
No person or club holding a liquor license, wine, or beer permit nor his agents or employees shall do
any of the following:
A. Sales To Intoxicated Persons: Sell, dispense or give to any intoxicated person, or one simulating
intoxication, any alcoholic liquor, wine, or beer.
B. Sales On Credit: Sell alcoholic liquor, wine, or beer to any person on credit, except with bona fide
credit card. This provision shall not apply to sales by a club to its members nor to sales by a hotel
or motel to bona fide registered guests.
C. Employment Of Underage Persons: Employ any person under the age of eighteen (18) years in the
sale or serving of alcoholic liquor, wine, or beer for consumption on the premises where sold.
D. Sales To Persons Under Legal Age: Sell, give or otherwise supply any alcoholic beverage, wine, or
beer to any person knowing or having reasonable cause to believe him to be under legal age, or
permit any person, knowing or having reasonable cause to believe him to be under legal age, to
consume any alcoholic beverage, wine, or beer.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 43/349
E. Wine Or Beer Sales: In the case of a retail wine or beer permittee, knowingly allow the mixing or
adding of alcohol or any alcoholic beverage to wine or beer or any other beverage in or about his
place of business.
F. Criminal Activity: Knowingly permit or engage in any criminal activity on the premises covered by
the license or permit. (1975 Code § 3-2-19; amd. 1998 Code)
G. Hours:
1. Sell or dispense any alcoholic beverage, wine, or beer on the premises covered by the license
or permit, or permit the consumption thereof between the hours of two o'clock (2:00) A.M. to six
o'clock (6:00) A.M. on weekdays, or between the hours of two o'clock (2:00) A.M. on Sunday
and six o'clock (6:00) A.M. on the following Monday; provided, however, that a holder of liquor
control license or Class B wine or beer permit granted the privilege of selling alcoholic liquor,
wine, or beer on Sunday may sell or dispense such liquor, wine, or beer between the hours of
eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. and twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight on Sunday. Sunday sales shall be
allowed between the hours of eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. to two o'clock (2:00) A.M. on the following
Monday, when that Monday is New Year's Day. (Ord. 2-85, 7-2-1985; amd. 1998 Code)
2. The doors of said premises shall not be locked after two o:clock (2:00) A.M. weekdays and
Saturdays, twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight on Sundays, as long as any patrons or business
invitees are present in the business establishment, and the City police shall have the right to
inspect the premises whenever the same is open for business purposes. (Ord. 2-85, 7-2-1985)
3-2-21: OBSTRUCTION TO VIEW:
Every Class B permittee and Class C liquor licensee shall provide a means of viewing at least eighty
percent (80%) of the total interior of the area within which beer, wine, or liquor is sold or consumed.
The means of viewing shall be clear glass, unobstructed, no less than eighteen inches (18") square,
and shall be located in such a manner that an individual of average height can observe activities
within, from the exterior of the area within which beer, wine, and/or liquor is sold or consumed. (1975
Code § 3-1-20; amd. 1977; 1998 Code)
3-2-22: SIGN RESTRICTIONS:
No signs or other matter advertising any brand of alcoholic liquor, wine, or beer shall be erected or
placed upon the outside of any premises occupied by a licensee or permittee authorized to sell
alcoholic liquor, wine, or beer at retail, unless such signs are located inside a fence or other enclosure
which wholly or partially surrounds the licensed premises. (1975 Code § 3-1-21; amd. 1998 Code)
3-2-23: CONSUMPTION IN PUBLIC PLACES; INTOXICATION:
A. Public Places: It is unlawful for any person to use or consume alcoholic liquor, wine, or beer upon
public streets or highways or alcoholic liquors, wine, or beer in any public places, except premises
covered by a liquor control license, or to possess or consume alcoholic liquors, wine, or beer on
any public school property or while attending any public or private school related functions, and no
person shall be intoxicated nor simulate intoxication in a public place. As used in this Section,
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 44/349
"school" means a school or that portion thereof which provides teaching for any grade from
kindergarten through grade twelve (12). Any person violating any provisions of this subsection
shall be fined an amount not to exceed one hundred dollars ($100.00) or sentenced to a period of
imprisonment not to exceed thirty (30) days. (Ord. 13-79, 8-7-1979; amd. 1998 Code)
B. Motor Vehicle: Consumption of alcoholic beverages, liquors, wine, or beer within or upon a licensed
motor vehicle shall be prohibited within the City limits. Any person violating any provisions of this
subsection shall be fined ninety nine dollars ($99.00) per incident. (Ord. 3-92, 12-15-1992; amd.
1998 Code)
3-2-24: PERSONS UNDER LEGAL DRINKING AGE:
A. Sale And Use Restrictions; Penalty:
1. No person shall sell, give or otherwise supply alcoholic liquor, wine, or beer to any person
knowing or having reasonable cause to believe that the person is age eighteen (18), nineteen
(19), or twenty (20). A person age eighteen (18), nineteen (19), or twenty (20) shall not purchase
or possess alcoholic liquor, wine, or beer. However, a person age eighteen (18), nineteen (19),
or twenty (20) may possess alcoholic liquor, wine, or beer given to the person within a private
home with the knowledge, presence, and consent of the person's parent or guardian, or with the
signed, written consent of the parent or guardian specifying the date and place for the
consumption and displayed by the person upon demand, and a person age eighteen (18),
nineteen (19), or twenty (20) may handle alcoholic liquor, wine, and beer during the course of the
person's employment by a liquor control licensee, or wine or beer permittee. A person, other
than a licensee or permittee, who commits a first offense under this subsection commits a
scheduled violation of Iowa Code section 805.8 subsection 10.
2. A person, other than a licensee or permittee, who commits a second or subsequent violation of
this subsection, commits a simple misdemeanor. A licensee or permittee who violates this
subsection with respect to a person who is age nineteen (19) or twenty (20) is guilty of a simple
misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not more than fifty dollars ($50.00). The penalty provided
under this subsection against a licensee or permittee who violates this subsection with respect to
a person who is age nineteen (19) or twenty (20) is the only penalty which shall be imposed
against a licensee or permittee who violates this Section. A licensee or permittee who violates
this subsection with respect to a person who is age eighteen (18) commits a simple
misdemeanor, and is subject to the criminal and civil penalties provided pursuant to Iowa Code
sections 123.49 and 123.50 with respect to selling, giving, or otherwise supplying alcoholic
liquor, wine, or beer to persons under legal age.
3. For the purpose of determining if a violation charged is a second or subsequent offense, a
conviction or plea of guilty to a violation of this subsection shall be counted as a previous
offense. (1998 Code)
B. Certain Businesses, Restrictions:
1. It shall be unlawful for a person under "legal drinking age", as defined by Iowa law, to enter any
place of business holding a Class B wine or beer permit, a Class B beer permit and a Class B
liquor control license; or a Class C beer and Class C liquor control license where the selling of
alcoholic beverages constitutes more than fifty percent (50%) of the gross business transacted
therein, except when the person under legal drinking age is accompanied by his or her parents
or legally appointed guardian and prior to the hour of nine o'clock (9:00) P.M. It shall be unlawful
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 45/349
for the holder of the above mentioned permits and licenses, his agent or employee, or the parent
or guardian of any person under legal drinking age, knowingly to allow a person under legal
drinking age to violate this provision.
2. None of the above prohibitions shall be applicable to places of business where the sale of
alcoholic beverages constitutes less than fifty percent (50%) of the gross business transacted
therein. (1975 Code § 3-1-27; amd. 1998 Code)
3-2-25: SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION:
Following written notice and hearing, a liquor license, wine permit, or beer permit may be suspended
for a period up to one year for violations of this Chapter, or suspended for a period up to one year or
revoked for any of the following causes:
A. Misrepresentation of any material fact in the application for such license or permit.
B. Violation of any of the provisions of the Iowa Alcoholic Beverage Control Act.
C. Any change in the ownership or interest in the business operated under a Class A, Class B, or
Class C liquor control license, or any wine or beer permit which change was not previously
reported to and approved by the City and the State Division.
D. An event which would have resulted in disqualification from receiving such license or permit when
originally issued.
E. Any sale, hypothecation or transfer of such license or permit.
F. The failure or refusal on the part of any licensee or permittee to render any report or remit any taxes
to the State Division under State law. (1975 Code § 3-1-22; amd. 1998 Code)
3-2-26: EFFECT OF REVOCATION:
Any liquor control licensee, wine permittee, or beer permittee whose license or permit is revoked
under the Iowa Alcoholic Beverage Control Act shall not thereafter be permitted to hold a liquor control
license, wine permit, or beer permit in the State of Iowa for a period of two (2) years from the date of
such revocation. The spouse and business associates holding ten percent (10%) or more of the
capital stock or ownership interest in the business of a person whose license or permit has been
revoked shall not be issued a liquor control license, wine permit, or beer permit, and no liquor control
license, wine permit, or beer permit shall be issued which covers any business in which such person
has a financial interest for a period to two (2) years from the date of such revocation. In the event a
license or permit is revoked, the premises which has been covered by such license or permit shall not
be relicensed for one year. (1975 Code § 3-1-23; amd. 1998 Code)
3-2-27: HEARING ON SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 46/349
The Council shall conduct its hearing on suspension or revocation in the following manner:
A. Written Notice: The permit holder shall be served with written notice containing a copy of the
complaint against him, the ordinance provision(s) or State statute(s) allegedly violated, and the
date, time and place for a hearing on the matter.
B. Hearing Before Council: The City Council shall conduct a hearing, at which both the permit holder
and the complainant(s) shall be present, the purpose of which is to determine the truth of the facts
alleged in the complaint. Should the permit holder or his authorized representative fail to appear
without good cause, the Council may proceed to a determination on the complaint.
C. Right To Representation: The permit holder shall have the right to be represented by counsel to
testify and present witnesses in his own behalf, and to cross-examine adverse witnesses.
D. Reliable Evidence: The Council shall admit only reliable and substantial evidence into the
revocation or suspension proceeding, and shall give all admitted evidence its natural probative
value.
E. Criminal Charges: In the event that criminal charges have been brought against the permit holder
on the same facts and circumstances as are the basis for the revocation or suspension complaint,
the Council shall await a judgment in the criminal action before conducting the revocation or
temporary suspension hearing required by this Section. Neither a conviction nor an acquittal in the
criminal action shall be conclusive for purposes of the revocation or suspension proceeding held
under this Section.
F. Findings Of Fact: The Council shall make and record findings of fact and conclusions of law, and
shall revoke or suspend a permit under this Section only when, upon review of the entire record, it
finds clear and convincing evidence of a substantial violation of this Chapter or State law. (1975
Code § 3-1-29)
3-2-28: PENALTIES:
A. Any person who violates any of the provisions of this Chapter shall be subject to the penalties as
provided in Section 1-4-1 of this Code.
B. The conviction of any liquor control licensee, wine permittee, or beer permittee for a violation of any
of the provisions of Section 3-2-20 of this Chapter shall, subject to subsection C of this Section, be
grounds for the suspension or revocation of the license or permit by the Division or the City.
However, if any liquor control licensee is convicted of any violation of Iowa Code chapter 123.49
subsection (2) paragraphs a, d, or e, or any wine or beer permittee is convicted of a violation of
subsection (2), paragraphs a or e of said section, the Iowa wine or beer permit shall be revoked
and shall immediately be surrendered by the holder.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 47/349
C. If any licensee, wine permittee or beer permittee, or employee of such licensee or permittee shall
be convicted of a violation of Section 3-2-20 of this Chapter, or a retail wine or beer permittee shall
be convicted of a violation of subsection E of said Section, the City shall, in addition to the other
penalties fixed for such violations by this Section, assess a penalty as follows:
1. Upon a first conviction, the violator's liquor control license, wine permit, or beer permit shall be
suspended for a period of fourteen (14) days.
2. Upon a second conviction within a period of two (2) years, the violator's liquor control license,
wine permit, or beer permit shall be suspended for a period of thirty (30) days.
3. Upon a third conviction within a period of five (5) years, the violator's liquor control license, wine
permit, or beer permit shall be suspended for a period of sixty (60) days.
4. Upon a fourth conviction within a period of five (5) years, the violator's liquor control license,
wine permit, or beer permit shall be revoked. (1975 Code § 3-1-28; amd. 1998 Code)
Chapter 3
PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS AND TRANSIENT
MERCHANTS
3-3-1: DEFINITIONS:
For use in this chapter the following terms are defined:
PEDDLER: Any person carrying goods or merchandise who sells or offers for sale for immediate
delivery such goods or merchandise from house to house or upon the public street.
SOLICITOR: Any person who solicits or attempts to solicit from house to house or upon the public
street an order for goods, subscriptions or merchandise to be delivered at a future date.
TRANSIENT MERCHANT: A person, firm or corporation which engages in a temporary or itinerant
merchandising business and in the course of such business hires, leases or occupies any building or
structure whatsoever. Temporary association with a local merchant, dealer, trader or auctioneer, or
conduct of such transient business in connection with, as a part of, or in the name of any local
merchant, dealer, trader or auctioneer, shall not exempt any person, firm or corporation from being a
transient merchant. The term transient merchant does not apply to vendors providing or selling food,
beverages or other merchandise in West Liberty in connection with the 2006 RAGBRAI event. (Ord.
06-04, 6-6-2006)
3-3-2: LICENSE REQUIRED:
Any person engaging in peddling, soliciting or in the business of a transient merchant in this city
without first obtaining a license as herein provided shall be in violation of this chapter. (Ord. 06-04, 6-
6-2006)
3-3-3: EXEMPTIONS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 48/349
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to vendors that are distributing items at no cost to
patrons. (Ord. 06-04, 6-6-2006)
3-3-4: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
An application in writing shall be filed with the city manager for a license under this chapter. Such
application shall set forth the applicant's name, permanent and local address, business address, if
any, and physical description. The application shall also set forth the applicant's employer, if any, and
the employer's address, the nature of the applicant's business, the last three (3) places where
business was conducted and the length of time sought to be covered by the license. (Ord. 06-04, 6-6-
2006)
3-3-5: ISSUANCE OF LICENSE:
If the city manager finds that the application is truthful and in conformance with section 3-3-4 of this
chapter, the clerk shall issue the license upon payment of the license administrative fee and the
posting of the bond as required. (Ord. 06-04, 6-6-2006)
3-3-6: DISPLAY OF LICENSE:
Each peddler or solicitor shall, at all times while doing business in the city, keep the license in his or
her possession. Each transient merchant shall publicly display the license within the merchant's place
of business. (Ord. 06-04, 6-6-2006)
3-3-7: LICENSE NONTRANSFERABLE:
Licenses issued under the provisions of this chapter are not transferable in any situation and are
personal to the applicant. (Ord. 06-04, 6-6-2006)
3-3-8: REBATES ON LICENSES:
There shall be no rebates or refunds on the license fees paid to the city. (Ord. 06-04, 6-6-2006)
3-3-9: REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
The city council, after notice and hearing, may revoke any license issued under this chapter when it
has been determined that the licensee is conducting business in violation of this code or has made
fraudulent or incorrect statements in the obtaining of the license or has conducted business in any
unlawful manner. (Ord. 06-04, 6-6-2006)
3-3-10: PENALTY:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 49/349
Anyone violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a simple misdemeanor and
shall be punishable by a criminal citation or municipal infraction citation. (Ord. 06-04, 6-6-2006)
Chapter 4
HOUSE MOVERS
3-4-1: DEFINITIONS:
For use in this Chapter, the following terms are defined:
HOUSE MOVER: Any individual, group, association, or corporation that has been issued a permit to
transport any structure.
STRUCTURE: A house, building, or other facility ten feet (10') or more in width, which is to be moved
from one location to another upon, along, across, over, or near any street, avenue, alley, highway,
sidewalk, or other public ground of the City. (1998 Code)
3-4-2: PERMIT REQUIRED; FEE:
A. Permit Required: No person shall hereafter use the streets, alleys, or public places of the City for
the purpose of moving structures from one location to another, without first having obtained a
permit from the City therefor as hereinafter provided.
B. Permit Fee: No permit shall be granted until the person applying therefor shall have paid to the City
a permit fee of four hundred dollars ($400.00).
C. Restoration Of Facilities: The permittee shall place any and all streets, alleys, sidewalks, trees, and
public grounds in as good a condition as before the permit was issued and shall comply with the
other provisions hereinafter specified. (1998 Code)
3-4-3: INSURANCE AND BOND REQUIRED:
A. Insurance: The applicant shall show evidence that he is insured for not less than one million dollars
($1,000,000.00) for personal injuries and one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) for property damage.
B. Bond: The applicant must, prior to the issuance of a permit, file with the City a corporate surety
bond executed to the City in the amount of two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) with
sureties approved by the City Clerk, conditioned that all work done under such license shall be
done in a good, competent manner and in accordance with the ordinances of the City relating
thereto; and that the applicant or a surety will pay to the City, or any person injured, all damages
for injuries to persons or property caused by the negligence, fault or mismanagement of said
applicant, or due to any other cause, in doing any work under said license or any permit issued for
such work; and will pay to the City any cost or expense incurred in repairing or restoring any
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 50/349
pavement, curbs, sidewalks, electric facilities, trees or other public works injured and of restoring
such work to its previous condition. (1998 Code)
3-4-4: CITY MANAGER TO CONTROL:
The City Manager shall have entire control and supervision of the moving of any structure along or
across any street, alley, or public ground. He shall have the right to require such additional security as
he may see fit to indemnify the City against any and all claims against the City and to pay any
resulting damage to the City because of the moving and shall have the right to prescribe rules to
minimize inconvenience to the traveling public as well as rules for the safety of City property. (1998
Code)
3-4-5: DUTY OF PERMITTEE:
Every permittee under this Chapter shall:
A. Move any structure only over streets designated for such use in the approved, written permit.
B. Conduct the move on the date and time stated in the approved permit. Failure to move on the date
and time shall require the applicant to reapply for a moving permit and receive new signatures of
approval. At the discretion of the City Manager, the requirement to reapply may be waived
provided a minimum of twenty four (24) hours' advance notice is given of the intent of the mover to
not move the structure on the stated date and time.
C. Notify the City, in writing, of any and all damage done to public or private property within twenty four
(24) hours after the damage or injury has occurred.
D. Comply with the building code, the electrical code, the plumbing code, and other such applicable
codes and ordinances.
E. Pay the costs and expenses of the City occasioned by the movement of the structure.
F. Remove all debris and materials and fill all excavations to existing grade at the original site of the
structure so that the premises are left in a safe and sanitary condition within ten (10) calendar days
of the moving date. The old basement of any excavation on the original site shall be fenced in
immediately upon removal of the building and shall remain fenced until the excavation can be
filled.
G. Plug the sanitary sewer line at the original site with a concrete stopper unless otherwise directed by
the City. The plugged line shall be inspected by the City prior to the backfilling of the hole. The
permittee shall arrange to have water service shut off at the property line and the meter returned to
the City. The permittee shall notify all utilities, including the City, to disconnect all services at least
forty eight (48) hours in advance of said moving.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 51/349
H. Notify all utility companies and railroad companies as applicable at least forty eight (48) hours in
advance of the moving of any structure that will interfere with the facilities owned or utilized by
such utilities, specifying in such notice the highest part of the building above the surface of the
street and the proposed route and time of moving. The utility shall furnish, at the expense of the
permittee, a competent person to superintend the removal and replacement of wires, poles,
conduit, cables, and other property. The permittee shall, at their own expense, furnish all the labor,
materials and equipment necessary and shall remove and replace the property as directed by the
appropriate utility company. Only authorized personnel of the utility company shall remove or
replace any wires, poles, conduit, cables and other property. (1998 Code)
3-4-6: COMPLIANCE:
No moving permit shall be issued unless the structure, if moved to another location in the City, will
comply with the Zoning Ordinance1, building code2, and all other ordinances of the City. (1998 Code)
3-4-7: LIMITATIONS ON BUILDINGS TO BE MOVED:
A. No structure shall be prepared for a move or shall be moved upon or through any of the streets of
the City if the building exceeds twenty eight feet (28') loaded width, including overhang, or which
exceeds twenty four feet (24') loaded height. Said size limitations may be waived by the City
Manager if the building may be safely moved along the proposed route without danger to property
or public improvements.
B. No structure shall be moved upon or through the streets of the City to another location within the
City if the value of such building is less than forty percent (40%) of the value of a new building of
the same type.
C. No structure shall be moved in or through the streets of the City if such building is in such
deteriorated condition that, in the opinion of the City, it is unsafe and constitutes a safety hazard.
(1998 Code)
3-4-8: LIABILITY OF PERMITTEE:
The permittee shall be liable for any expense, damages, or costs in excess of deposited amounts or
securities, and the City Attorney shall prosecute an action against the permittee in a court of
competent jurisdiction for the recovery of such amounts, if appropriate. (1998 Code)
Title 4
FIRE REGULATIONS
Chapter 1
FIRE DEPARTMENT
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 52/349
4-1-1: MEMBERS:
The Fire Department of the City shall consist of one volunteer fire company of as many members as
the City Council shall, from time to time by resolution, direct. (1975 Code § 4-1-1)
4-1-2: APPLICATION FOR MEMBERSHIP:
Any able-bodied person who works and/or lives within the City limits desiring to become a member of
the Fire Department shall make application in writing to the secretary of the Fire Department who shall
submit the same to the Fire Department for approval or rejection. (1975 Code § 4-1-2; amd. 1998
Code)
4-1-3: ORGANIZATION:
The Fire Department may adopt such constitution, bylaws, rules and regulations for its government as
the members thereof may deem best adapted to accomplish the objects of the Department, subject to
the approval of the City Council and subject to the laws of the State and the provisions of this Code.
(1975 Code § 4-1-3)
4-1-4: OFFICERS:
A. Fire Chief: The City Council shall elect from the members of the Fire Department a Chief of the Fire
Department, and in so doing shall elect such person as may be recommended by the members of
the Department, provided such recommendation commends itself to the judgment of the Council.
B. Officers Of Department: The members of the Department shall elect annually from among their own
number an Assistant Chief or Chiefs, secretary, treasurer and such other officers as they may
require in accordance with the constitution or bylaws of the Department and in the manner
provided therein. (1975 Code § 4-1-4)
4-1-5: CHIEF OF FIRE DEPARTMENT, DUTIES:
A. General Supervision: The Chief of the Fire Department shall have the general supervision of the
Department, subject to such limitations as the City Council may prescribe.
B. Annual Report To Council: He shall report in writing to the Council, within the first quarter of each
year, everything in connection with the Department which will be of interest to the Council, the
condition of the hose, hooks and ladders, chemical engine and other fire apparatus, and shall
recommend such alterations, repairs and additions to such apparatus as he shall deem expedient.
C. Furnish List Of Members; Years Of Service: He shall furnish the Council at the same time a list of
the members of the Department in good standing. He shall report at the same time the names of
all persons who have served as members for ten (10) years.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 53/349
D. Equipment Maintenance; Report To City Manager: He shall, whenever he finds any hydrant, hose
or other fire apparatus out of order or in need of repair, forthwith report the fact to the City
Manager.
E. Dismissal Of Members: He may dismiss any member of the Department for insubordination or
inefficiency, and such dismissal shall be final unless revoked by the Council. (1975 Code § 4-1-5;
amd. 1998 Code)
4-1-6: ASSISTANT CHIEF, DUTIES:
It shall be the duty of the Assistant Chief to assist the Chief, obey his orders and in the absence of the
Chief to take command and perform the duties imposed upon the Chief by law, ordinance, regulation
or the bylaws of the Department. (1975 Code § 4-1-6)
4-1-7: DEPARTMENT MEMBERS, DUTIES:
It shall be the duty of the Fire Department to attend to and keep in proper order and repair the fire
apparatus committed to its charge and the room in which the same is kept. All hoses, ladders,
buckets, engines and other apparatus, when not in use, shall be kept in the fire station and in no other
place. (1975 Code § 4-1-7)
4-1-8: AUTHORITY TO REQUIRE AID:
It shall be lawful for the Chief of the Fire Department or Assistant Chief or officers in command of any
hose, hook and ladder, wagon or engine or for the Mayor, and Councilperson or any member of the
Fire Department to require the aid of any driver with a vehicle or any bystander, citizen or other person
in conveying any hose, truck or engine or other fire apparatus to or from a fire, or otherwise assist in
the removal, care or preservation of property at any fire. The bill for utilization of mutual aid in the
amount reasonable under the circumstances will be paid by the City upon approval of the person
ordering the same. (1975 Code § 4-1-9; amd. 1998 Code)
4-1-9: RULES FOR FIREFIGHTERS, PEDESTRIANS AND DRIVERS:
A. Compliance With Traffic Regulations: All fire trucks when proceeding to a fire shall not exceed such
speed as set by the State Traffic Code, and when returning to the station shall comply with the
traffic rules applicable to all other vehicles.
B. Sounding Sirens; Right Of Way: When proceeding to a fire, the firefighters shall sound their sirens
or bells and shall have the right of way on all streets, avenues or alleys over any automobiles,
wagons, locomotives or other vehicles or conveyances. When the siren or bell is sounded, drivers
of all vehicles shall immediately stop as near the curb as possible and clear of any intersection and
remain in that position until the right of way of the fire trucks has been assured.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 54/349
C. Pedestrians: All pedestrians along the streets on which the trucks are passing shall remain on the
sidewalks and away from the street intersections. (1975 Code § 4-1-11; amd. 1998 Code)
4-1-10: PARKING DISTANCE FROM FIRE:
No person shall follow closer than five hundred feet (500') or park within the block where the fire
apparatus is stopped or while the Fire Department of the City is engaged there in performance of its
duties of extinguishing a fire. (1975 Code § 4-1-12; amd. 1998 Code)
4-1-11: PROHIBITED ACTS:
A. Removal Of Apparatus Prohibited: No member of the Fire Department shall take or permit to be
taken away from the engine room, and no other person shall take away from the engine room with
or without permission, any of the apparatus provided for use in case of fire, except to be used in
case of fire or in practice work of the Department. (1975 Code § 4-1-8)
B. Injury To Fire Equipment: No person shall wilfully offer any hindrance to any officer or firefighter in
the performance of his duties. No person shall wilfully deface, injure or destroy any of the fire
equipment or apparatus whether the same be then in use or not. (1975 Code § 4-1-10)
C. Private Use Of Fire Equipment: No person shall take or use any truck, equipment or apparatus
belonging to the Fire Department for private use. No member of the Department shall take any fire
truck outside the City limits without orders to that effect from the Chief of the Fire Department.
(1975 Code § 4-1-13)
D. False Alarms: No person shall give, make or cause to be made any false alarm of fire or police, or
ring or cause to be rung any fire bell, siren or gong by which a false alarm of fire may be given.
Anyone violating this provision shall, upon conviction, be subject to a misdemeanor. (1975 Code
§ 4-1-14)
E. Driving Over Fire Hose: No person shall drive or run any automobile, wagon, truck, locomotive or
other vehicle across or upon any fire hose. (1975 Code § 4-1-15)
Chapter 2
FIRE PREVENTION
4-2-1: DUTY OF OWNERS AND TENANTS:
It shall be the duty of all owners, occupants and tenants of property in the City to so erect or maintain
the buildings upon the premises owned or occupied by them as to keep the same in safe condition,
and to use all precautions reasonable under the circumstances to prevent accident by fire or electrical
apparatus. (1975 Code § 4-2-1)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 55/349
4-2-2: STOVES AND STOVEPIPES:
A. Platform Or Plate Beneath: It shall be unlawful to use any wood or coal stove upon a floor of wood
in any house, store, shop, or other building unless the same have placed beneath it a platform or
plate of brick, iron, zinc or other incombustible material of such size as to protect the floor from all
danger of fire from said stove.
B. Ventilator Required: All stovepipes, at their intersection with any floor, ceiling or partition of which
wood is a component part, shall be made to pass through a ventilator of metal, earth or other
fireproof material.
C. Permission From Council: It shall be unlawful to construct or maintain any stovepipe or metallic
chimney flue through the roof, window or side of any house or building unless special permission
be granted previously by the City Council. (1975 Code § 4-2-2)
4-2-3: CHIMNEY FLUES:
A. Construction: All chimney flues shall be well built of either well burned, whole brick, or cement
concrete, and shall be coated on the inside with plaster, fireproof earthen tile, asbestos, cement or
other equivalent thereof.
B. Projection Through Roof: Where such flues pass through the ridge of the roof, they shall project not
less than three and one-half feet (31/2') above the same, and where such flues pass through the
slope of the roof, they shall project not less than two feet (2') above the roof measuring from the
top of the chimney to the nearest point of the roof. (1975 Code § 4-2-3)
4-2-4: PROHIBITED ACTS:
A. Ashes: It shall be unlawful to deposit any ashes next to any inflammable material in any building or
in any inflammable receptacle nearer than twenty feet (20') to any building, fence or other wooden
structure or materials. (1975 Code § 4-2-4)
B. Artificial Light In Barn Or Stable: It shall be unlawful to use in any barn or stable, or in any other
place where combustibles are stored, any artificial light except electric light unless the same be
secured within a metal and glass lantern which is carried by hand. (1975 Code § 4-2-5)
4-2-5: INSPECTION OF PREMISES:
It shall be the duty of all owners, tenants and occupants of property to permit and allow the Fire
Warden or his duly authorized representatives at any time during daylight hours to have access to
every part of the premises owned, leased or occupied by them and to permit and allow such officer to
inspect said premises and all apparatus and appliances used in lighting and heating the same. (1975
Code § 4-2-6)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 56/349
4-2-6: ABATEMENT OF VIOLATION; PAYMENT OF COSTS:
A. Notice To Remedy Violation: Whenever any person is served with notice, by the Fire Warden, of the
fact that any violation of the provisions of this Chapter is occurring upon the premises of such
person, it shall be the duty of that person, within three (3) days after the service of such notice, to
make such alterations and repairs as will comply with this Chapter.
B. Failure To Abate; City Abatement; Payment Of Costs: Should such person fail to make such
alterations or repairs within the time above named, said alterations or repairs will be made by the
Fire Warden or his duly authorized representatives, and the costs and expense thereof shall be
paid by the person in default, to be recovered in any court having jurisdiction, or the Council may
by resolution assess such costs and expenses as a special tax against such person in default and
against his property in the manner authorized by law for collection of special assessments. (1975
Code § 4-2-7)
Chapter 3
INFLAMMABLES; EXPLOSIVES
4-3-1: APPLICATION FOR PERMIT:
Anyone desiring a permit to sell gasoline and to erect and maintain a magazine for storing gasoline or
other inflammable oils, commonly called a storage tank, a filling station or a curb pump, shall file with
the City Council an application for a permit, accompanied by a plat drawn to scale showing the size
and location of the magazine or storage tanks installed or to be installed and all other structures
thereon, and the location and present use of each building within one hundred fifty feet (150') of such
premises. (1975 Code § 4-3-1)
4-3-2: COUNCIL ACTION:
The City Council shall investigate such application and at its discretion may grant, or may refuse, a
permit for any particular location. (1975 Code § 4-3-2)
4-3-3: PERMIT CONDITIONS AND RESTRICTIONS:
A. Consent Of Property Owners: The City Council shall not grant a permit to install a magazine for
storing inflammable oils, commonly called a storage tank, a filling station or a curb pump, unless
the application for such permit is accompanied by the written consent of three-fourths (3/4) of the
owners of real estate within one hundred fifty feet (150') of the proposed location of the magazine if
the magazine is installed above ground and within seventy five feet (75') if the magazine is located
under ground, except the owners of real estate any part of which is used for gasoline filling station
purposes.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 57/349
B. Compliance With Planning And Zoning Regulations: No permit shall be granted that conflicts with
existing planning and zoning regulations. (1975 Code § 4-3-3)
4-3-4: TANK VEHICLE PARKING:
A. Definition: A "tank vehicle" is defined as any vehicle, the primary purpose of which is to transport
bulk liquids (for use other than to provide fuel for the engine of that vehicle) in quantities exceeding
one hundred ten (110) gallons.
B. Industrial Districts:
1. A tank vehicle may be left unattended, for any length of time, on private property if that private
property is in an area which is zoned either M-1 Light Industrial, or M-2 Heavy Industrial.
2. A tank vehicle shall not be left unattended within five hundred feet (500') of any residential
structure, apartment complex, church, educational facility, hospital, care facility, or nursing home,
public park, or other recreational facility, restaurant, or movie theater, unless that tank vehicle is
left unattended in an M-1 or M-2 Industrial District.
C. Residential Districts: A tank vehicle shall not be left unattended on any public place or public street
in any area which is zoned residential.
D. Time Limit: A tank vehicle shall not be left unattended on any public street or other public place
(even in M-1 or M-2 Industrial Districts) within the City limits for more than twenty four (24) hours.
E. Threat To Public Safety Prohibited: A tank vehicle may not be left unattended at any time on either
private property or public property within the City limits, whether said storage of said vehicle is
within or without a structure, unless said storage can be accomplished in a manner that does not
cause an unreasonable threat to the health and welfare of the general public.
F. Exemptions: Tank vehicles which are intended for, and used exclusively for, the transport of water or
milk are exempt from this Section. (Ord. 3-92, 12-15-1992)
G. Penalty: Violators of this Section shall be subject to a fine as provided in Section 1-4-1 of this Code
per violation. Each separate incident shall be a separate violation. If a tank vehicle is unattended in
violation of this Section for more than twenty four (24) hours, then each subsequent twenty four
(24) hour period or part thereof shall be a separate incident. (Ord. 3-92, 12-15-1992; amd. 1998
Code)
Chapter 4
LIQUEFIED PETROLEUM GAS
4-4-1: DEFINITION:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 58/349
The term "liquefied petroleum gas" as used in this Chapter shall mean and include any material which
is composed predominantly of any of the following hydrocarbons or mixtures thereof: propane,
propylene, butane (normal butane or isobutane) and butylene. (1975 Code § 4-4-1)
4-4-2: APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS:
Liquefied petroleum gas equipment as herein referred to shall be construed to embrace all devices,
piping and equipment pertinent to the use of liquefied petroleum gas, except gas burning appliances
intended for use with liquefied petroleum gas. (1975 Code § 4-4-2)
4-4-3: LOCATION OF CONTAINERS:
A. Underground Storage Prohibited: Interstate commerce containers and regulating equipment shall
not be buried below ground; however, this shall not prohibit the installation in a compartment or
recess below grade level such as a niche in a slope or terrace wall which is used for no other
purpose; provided, that the container and regulating equipment is not in contact with the ground
and the compartment or recess is drained and ventilated horizontally to the outside air from its
lowest level, with the outlet at least five feet (5') away from any building opening which is below the
level of such outlet. The discharge safety reliefs shall be located not less than five feet (5') away
from any building opening which is below the level of such discharge.
B. Firm Foundation Required: Containers shall be set upon firm fire resistant foundations or otherwise
firmly secured. The possible effect of settling shall be guarded against by a flexible connection or
special fitting. Cylinders or containers cannot be set on porches or roofs.
C. Portable Containers: Portable liquefied petroleum gas containers shall not be stored or installed,
whether full or empty, in a store or place of business frequented by the public or in public property.
All cylinders except twenty (20) pound cylinders shall be transported and connected by the dealer,
or his agent.
D. Hoods Required: All liquefied petroleum gas cylinders and utilization equipment must be equipped
with hoods or their equivalent, approved by the National Board of Fire Underwriters or the State
Fire Marshal.
E. Weeds And Dry Grass Prohibited: Readily inflammable material such as weeds, dry grass or trash
shall not be kept within ten feet (10') of liquefied petroleum gas cylinders or containers.
F. Valves Closed: All liquefied petroleum gas cylinder valves shall be tightly closed, whether the
container be full or empty, when not in service.
G. Filling Containers: Portable liquefied petroleum gas containers shall be filled only at a place
specifically designated and permanently constructed for the purpose and approved by the State
Fire Marshal.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 59/349
H. Testing For Gas Leaks: Testing of any piping system for gas leaks shall not be made with a flame;
soapy water shall be used for this purpose. (1975 Code § 4-4-3)
4-4-4: USE OF APPROVED APPLIANCES:
All domestic and commercial liquefied petroleum gas consuming appliances shall have their
correctness as to design, construction and performance certified to by one of the following agencies:
A. Testing and listing as approved for use of liquefied petroleum gas by the AGA Testing Laboratory
and should bear the AGA seal of approval for liquefied petroleum gases.
B. Approved through tests by any other competent laboratory recognized by the endorsing authority.
C. Approval by the State Fire Marshal. (1975 Code § 4-4-4)
4-4-5: EQUIPMENT USED:
A. Service Pipe: The service pipe leading into the building in each original installation shall be of not
less than three-eighths inch (3/8") copper in diameter and there shall be not more than three (3)
take-offs therefrom which shall be three-eighths inch (3/8") copper pipe.
B. Regulator: No regulator shall be permitted which will allow the use of over twelve (12) ounces of
pressure to any appliance.
C. Testing Devices: All installers shall use an approved manometer or other similar device approved
by the National Board of Fire Underwriters for testing of liquefied petroleum gas systems for leaks
and pressure. (1975 Code § 4-4-5)
4-4-6: RECORD OF INSTALLATIONS:
Every person installing liquefied petroleum gas equipment, other than gas burning appliances, and
replacing of portable cylinders, in the City, shall keep a record of each installation, showing the name
and address of the customer at whose place the liquefied petroleum gas equipment has been installed
and the date of installation and shall disclose such record to the City Manager at any time, upon his
request, during regular working hours. (1975 Code § 4-4-6)
Chapter 5
FIRE PREVENTION AND ENVIRONMENTAL
REGULATIONS
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 60/349
4-5-1: BAN ON OPEN BURNING:
Except as otherwise specified herein, it shall be unlawful within the City of West Liberty, Iowa, to burn
any materials including, but not limited to, leaves, twigs, branches, vegetation, construction debris or
other organic wastes generated from any business or residential yards or other properties and any
household or business refuse or waste after March 1, 2004.
Specified exceptions to this restriction are:
A. Open burning used solely for cooking out or barbecuing of food. These fires must be no larger than
two feet (2') in diameter.
B. Training fires as may be conducted by volunteer fire departments in the course of training members
in fire fighting techniques.
C. Open burning authorized for the duration of an officially declared community disaster period. The
Mayor or City Manager shall make such declaration.
D. Camp fires, burning clean wood material, when in association with camping out or similar related
recreational activities provided that these fires comply with all other sections of this chapter and
are no larger than three feet (3') in diameter. (Ord. 2008-01, 3-4-2008)
4-5-2: RESTRICTIONS ON OPEN BURNING:
Open burning under the exceptions set forth in section 4-5-1 of this chapter shall comply with the
following regulations:
A. Open fires shall be constantly attended by an adult person until such fire is extinguished. This
person shall have a hose connected to a water supply or other fire-extinguishing equipment readily
available for use.
B. Open burning may only be performed between the hours of six o'clock (6:00) A.M. and five thirty
o'clock (5:30) P.M. or sunset, whichever is earlier.
C. Open burning shall be at least twenty feet (20') away from any structure, excepting barbeque grills
and other outdoor cooking appliances which may be used within twenty feet (20') of a structure.
Open burning shall be at least five feet (5') away from the closest lot line of any property adjoining
the property on which the item(s) is being burned.
D. Open burning of the following materials is expressly prohibited at all times: construction materials,
garbage, furniture, tires, plastic, or any other recyclable materials or other refuse.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 61/349
E. Prairie maintenance (reestablishment and creation) and agricultural field maintenance shall be
allowed. Fires of this type must be constantly attended by an adult person who shall have fireextinguishing
equipment readily available for use.
F. Only leaves, clean brush, and garden residue may be burned during the open burning. (Ord. 2008-
01, 3-4-2008)
G. Open burning shall be allowed under the conditions set forth herein, and shall only be allowed
during the last two (2) weeks in the month of October and the first two (2) weeks in the month of
April. (Ord. 20140506-11, 6-3-2014)
4-5-3: MORATORIUM:
The restrictions on time of year set out in subsection 4-5-2G of this chapter shall go into effect on
March 1, 2008. (Ord. 2008-01, 3-4-2008)
4-5-4: OPEN BURNING ON STREETS, CURBS, SIDEWALKS, ALLEYS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to burn any materials on any streets, gutters, curbs, sidewalks,
alleys, or other publicly owned property or right-of-way within the City of West Liberty after the date of
adoption of this chapter. (Ord. 2008-01, 3-4-2008)
4-5-5: AUTOMATIC REPEALER:
If the City of West Liberty has made other arrangements for the disposal of burnable waste to the
satisfaction of the Council by March 1, 2008, then subsection 4-5-2G of this chapter is automatically
repealed, and open burning is thereby banned within the corporate limits, except as allowed under
section 4-5-1 of this chapter. If the City has not made alternate arrangements to the satisfaction of the
Council, this repealer may be extended for a one-year period by affirmative roll call vote of the
Council. It may be extended by subsequent one-year periods by the same method. (Ord. 2008-01, 3-
4-2008)
4-5-6: ENFORCEMENT:
Initial violators of this chapter will first be given a written warning about the regulations and asked to
cease any open burning immediately. Any subsequent violation hereof shall be deemed to be a
Municipal infraction and any violator shall be held liable under the enforcement provisions thereof.
A. Fines Established: A Municipal citation shall be issued for violations of this chapter as ordered by
the City Council of three hundred fifty dollars ($350.00) payable to the City Clerk. For all
subsequent violations the fines shall increase by fifty dollars ($50.00) for each event that occurs
within a year. (Ord. 2008-01, 3-4-2008)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 62/349
Title 5
POLICE REGULATIONS
Chapter 1
POLICE DEPARTMENT
5-1-1: DEPARTMENT ESTABLISHED:
The Police Department in the City shall consist of a Chief of Police, a sergeant and such additional
deputy police officers as the City Council may direct, all of whom shall be appointed by the Mayor and
hold office during his pleasure. The Mayor may also, in cases of emergency, appoint such number of
special police officers as he may think proper, reporting such special appointments to the Council at its
next regular meeting; all such appointments shall continue in force until such regular meeting but no
longer, unless sooner terminated by the Mayor. (1975 Code § 5-1-1; amd. 1998 Code)
5-1-2: HEAD OF DEPARTMENT:
The Mayor shall be the head of the Police Department and shall superintend and direct the police
generally and from time to time give such directions as he may deem proper and necessary for the
good order and efficiency of the Department. (1975 Code § 5-1-2)
5-1-3: QUALIFICATIONS OF DEPARTMENT MEMBERS:
The Chief of Police and all police officers must be citizens of the United States and live within the
telephone company prefix of "627" or the West Liberty school district within six (6) months after
employment. All members shall be high school graduates. The prerequisite for persons to qualify as
trainees and/or members of the police force shall be prescribed in formal written documents by the
Chief of Police, which requirements shall include but not be limited to physical and mental fitness,
aptitude and personality inventory and an absence of a criminal record. (Ord. 3-78, 2-21-1978; amd.
Ord. 2-93, 1-19-1993; 1998 Code)
5-1-4: CHIEF OF POLICE:
A. Duties:
1. General Duties: The Chief of Police shall have the supervision and general direction of the
police force and shall be the ministerial officer of the City. He shall attend upon the sittings of the
Magistrate Court, perform the duties of bailiff therein and execute legal process and return all
writs and other processes directed to him by the Magistrate or Mayor. (1975 Code § 5-1-4)
2. Preserving The Peace: The Chief of Police shall suppress all riots, disturbances and breaches
of the peace, arrest all disorderly persons in the City and all persons committing any offense
against the provisions of this Code and the laws of the State, and forthwith bring all such
persons before the Magistrate or other proper Court for examination or trial. He shall diligently
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 63/349
enforce all laws, ordinances and regulations for the preservation of the public welfare and good
order, and shall have the same powers and duties and be subject to the same responsibilities as
law officers in similar cases. He shall pursue and arrest any person fleeing from justice into any
part of the State. (1975 Code § 5-1-5)
3. Authority To Summon Assistance: The Chief of Police may orally summon as many persons as
he finds necessary to aid him in making an arrest or to suppress any riot or unlawful assembly.
(1975 Code § 5-1-6)
B. Hours Of Duty: The Chief of Police shall be on duty at such hours as the Mayor may require. (1975
Code § 5-1-7)
5-1-5: DEPUTY CHIEF OF POLICE, DUTIES:
The Deputy Chief of Police shall have the same powers and perform the same duties as the Chief of
Police. (1975 Code § 5-1-9)
5-1-6: EQUIPMENT:
The City shall furnish the Chief of Police and all police officers with an official badge, sidearms, other
peace officer equipment, and such official uniforms as the City Council may by resolution require and
provide. (1975 Code § 5-1-9)
5-1-7: OFFICIAL BADGE:
While on duty, the Chief of Police and all police officers shall each wear upon his outer garments in
plain view a metal badge of office indicating the name of his office. Said badge shall be furnished by
the City. (1975 Code § 5-1-10)
5-1-8: OTHER POWERS AND DUTIES:
The Chief of Police and police officers shall have such other powers and perform such other duties as
may now or hereafter be provided by the provisions of this Code or the laws of the State. (1975 Code
§ 5-1-11)
5-1-9: POLICE AUXILIARY UNIT:
A. Definitions: For purposes of this Section, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings
herein set forth. (Ord. 2-77, 9-9-1977)
CHIEF OF POLICE: The Chief of the West Liberty Police Department.
MEMBER: A person who has applied for membership in the Police Auxiliary Unit, has been
certified as eligible for advancement from trainee status to member status by the Chief of Police
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 64/349
and has thereafter been sworn in by the Mayor.
OFF-DUTY: The term used when referring to a trainee or member of the Police Auxiliary Unit at all
time periods not specifically designated as on-duty.
ON-DUTY: The term used when referring to a trainee or member of the Police Auxiliary Unit
performing a police function at the direction of the Chief of Police or in his absence, his designated
regular police officer subordinate.
POLICE OFFICER OR REGULAR POLICE OFFICER: An officer of the West Liberty Police
Department.
TRAINEE: A person who has been accepted into training to qualify as a member of the Police
Auxiliary Unit but who has not received full membership status. Each trainee shall be on a one
year probationary period and shall not carry any firearms. (Ord. 2-77, 9-9-1977; amd. Ord. 4-78, 3-
7-1978; Ord. 16-79, 11-20-1979; 1998 Code)
B. Unit Created; Appointment: There is hereby created the Police Auxiliary Unit, in purpose to
supplement the regular police force with trained manpower for normal and emergency operation.
The Police Auxiliary Unit shall be an organization composed of persons who shall have agreed to
volunteer their time and services to the Police Department and have been appointed and sworn in
as members or trainees of the Police Auxiliary Unit by the Mayor. (Ord. 2-77, 9-9-1977)
C. Direction And Supervision Of Chief Of Police: The Police Auxiliary Unit shall be under the direction
and supervision of the Chief of Police. The organizational form and size shall be deemed by the
Chief of Police and the Mayor and as approved by resolution of the City Council. The Auxiliary
shall operate only within the City limits. (Ord. 4-78, 3-7-1978; amd. 1998 Code)
D. Requirements: The prerequisites for persons to qualify as trainees and members of the Police
Auxiliary Unit shall be as prescribed in formal written document by the Chief of Police, which
requirements shall include but not be limited to physical and mental fitness, aptitude and
personality inventory, and criminal record. Said prerequisites or standards shall apply to trainees,
members and applicants, as well as to standards for continuing membership in the Police Auxiliary
Unit. All trainees and members shall be at least eighteen (18) years of age and shall have
completed a high school education. (Ord. 2-77, 9-9-1977; amd. Ord. 16-79, 11-20-1979)
E. Training: It shall be the duty of the Chief of Police to provide such classroom and on-the-job training
as he deems appropriate, necessary and desirable for trainees and members. Said training for the
Police Auxiliary Unit shall consist of a minimum of such hours of classroom and on-the-job training
in various police subjects in fields of police work and activity deemed necessary, and formalized in
writing, by the Chief of Police, in accordance with Iowa Peace Officer Standards. Further, said
training shall be given at the convenience of the Police Department, and no such training shall be
permitted to interfere with the efficient performance of the regular duties of the Police Department.
(Ord. 2-77, 9-9-1977; amd. 1998 Code)
F. Application And Appointment:
1. Trainee: Applicants desiring trainee appointment shall so apply in writing to the Chief of Police
and after complying with the requirements and qualifications therefor may be so appointed by
the Chief of Police.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 65/349
2. Membership: Applicants desiring member status shall so apply in writing to the Chief of Police
and after complying with the requirements and qualifications therefor may be so appointed by
the Chief of Police, whereupon the applicant will take an oath of office given by the Mayor.
G. Trainee Or Member Termination:
1. Termination Or Resignation; Notice: The Chief of Police shall have the authority to terminate a
person's trainee or member status in the Police Auxiliary Unit at any time, and a trainee or
member may resign at any time by written notification to the Chief of Police.
2. Right Of Appeal; Mayor's Decision Final: In situations of termination by the Chief of Police, the
person so terminated shall have the right of appeal to the Recreation, Public Safety and
Grievance Committee of the City Council sitting informally, which, after hearing thereon, shall
make its recommendation to the Mayor who shall, at his sole discretion, uphold or reverse the
actions of the Chief of Police, who shall abide thereby.
3. Surrender Of City Property: Any person or persons whose position as trainee or member is
voluntarily or involuntarily terminated shall surrender all property of the City, which may have
been issued to such person or persons, and this procedure shall also be applied during any
appeal procedure.
H. Line Of Authority: The Chief of Police shall, subject only to the Mayor's directive, have complete
authority and control over the Police Auxiliary Unit, including its members and trainees, and may
delegate the exercise thereof, in whole or in part, to any of his regular police officer subordinates.
The Chief at Police shall promulgate formal written rules and regulations, which he may change
from time to time, governing the Police Auxiliary Unit in all respects providing for the maintaining of
discipline and the assigning of each member or trainee to perform certain peace officer duties; and
he shall be responsible to the Mayor for Police Auxiliary functions or actions taken in the course of
official duty.
I. Peace Officer Status And Authority: Each Police Auxiliary Unit member shall:
1. While serving in said capacity on-duty acting pursuant to the orders of the Chief of Police or his
designated regular police officer subordinate, have the status of a police officer and as such
shall have the same peace officer powers and authority as a regular police officer.
2. Have only those powers and authority granted to a private citizen when they are off-duty and not
acting pursuant to an order of the Chief of Police or his designated regular police officer
subordinate. Each Police Auxiliary Unit member or trainee shall refrain from representing himself
as a police officer or as having police officer authority or implying the same through disclosure of
his association with the Police Auxiliary Unit.
J. Employment Status, Compensation And Insurance: Members and trainees of the Police Auxiliary
Unit shall be considered employees of the City during those periods when they are performing
police duties and functions as authorized and directed by the Chief of Police. The members and
trainees of the Police Auxiliary Unit shall receive a salary from the City of one dollar ($1.00) per
year or fraction thereof to be paid from the Police Department budget. Further, the City shall
provide worker's compensation insurance coverage for said members and trainees of the Police
Auxiliary Unit while on-duty or while participating in supervised training, including the protection of
the City's general liability insurance policy as it applies to other regular City employees. (Ord. 2-77,
9-9-1977)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 66/349
K. Issued Equipment; Uniform Allowance: Each Police Auxiliary Unit member or trainee shall:
1. Furnish equipment and uniforms at his own expense as deemed necessary or desirable by the
Chief of Police. All badges and patches shall carry the "West Liberty Auxiliary Police"
designation. After one year of service, one hundred dollars ($100.00) per year shall be allowed
for uniforms.
2. Keep for expedient use every item of equipment which may from time to time be properly issued
to said trainee or member.
3. While in an on-duty status, carry firearms as authorized by Chief of Police but only after
previously individually qualifying as to firearm safety and use factors.
4. While in an off-duty status, not be authorized to carry any firearms or any other concealed
weapons specifically as a result of their association with the Police Auxiliary Unit.
5. While in an off-duty status, refrain from wearing or displaying the uniform or equipment of the
Police Auxiliary Unit unless specifically authorized by the Chief of Police.
L. Misdemeanor And Penalty: Any person violating any provision of this Section shall be deemed to be
guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be subject to penalty as provided in Section 1-
4-1 of this Code; and each day such violation continues shall constitute a separate and distinct
offense.
The Police Chief shall report in writing to the Council in the first quarter of each year everything in
connection with the Auxiliary Unit which will be of interest to the Council. He shall at the same time
submit a list of the members in good standing and shall recommend to the Council whether the
Auxiliary Unit be continued or terminated. (Ord. 2-77, 9-9-1977; amd. 1998 Code)
Chapter 2
GENERAL OFFENSES
5-2-1: INTERFERING WITH ELECTRIC LIGHT OR POWER METER:
Any person interfering or tampering with, or changing an electric light or power meter used by the City
for the purpose of measuring electric current, or who, with an intent to defraud shall by use of a wire or
other device prevent or attempt to prevent the full current from passing through said meter, shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor. (1975 Code § 5-2-13)
5-2-2: LARCENY OF ELECTRIC CURRENT OR WATER:
It shall be unlawful for any person to wilfully and with intent to defraud in any manner to take from the
wires, pipes or meters or any other apparatus of any electric motor, electric light or waterworks, any
electric current or water. (1975 Code § 5-2-14)
5-2-3: ANTENNAS OR RADIO WIRES:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 67/349
It shall be unlawful for any person to attach any antennas or radio wires to any pole used by the City in
conveying electric current, or to any pole carrying telephone or telegraph wires; or to string, place or
continue any such antennas or radio wires over or under any electric light or power wires carrying two
hundred twenty (220) or more volts of electricity. Nor shall any such wires be strung in, on or across
any street, avenue or alley of the City. (1975 Code § 5-2-15)
5-2-4: LOUD RADIOS PROHIBITED:
A. Noise Disturbance: It is unlawful for any person owning or operating a motor vehicle to create,
cause, permit, produce, or play a radio, stereo, or similar device which produces or amplifies
sound in such a manner as to create or cause a "noise disturbance", which shall be defined as any
sound which can be heard at a distance of one hundred feet (100') or more from the source, when
such motor vehicle is operated on a public right of way or public property.
B. Exceptions: This Section shall not apply to loudspeaker/public address systems and emergency
signaling devices, including car alarms.
C. Penalty: A person in violation of this Section commits a simple misdemeanor and, upon conviction,
shall be assessed a fine as per Section 1-4-1 of this Code. (Ord. 2-95, 3-21-1995)
5-2-5: FIRE DANGERS IN BUSINESSES:
It shall be unlawful for any person to commit any of the following acts:
A. Chimneys And Flues In Businesses: Use or operate any blacksmith shop or other shop, mill or
building for carrying on any business or trade in which fire is used, unless the chimneys or flues
are not less than four feet (4') higher than all buildings within twenty feet (20').
B. Exits In Assemblage Halls: Permit any assembly of people in any hall, opera house, theater,
church, place of amusement or other place, unless all the doors of exit shall swing outward and be
unlocked and easy to open while the assembly is therein. (Ord. 11-76, 11-2-1976)
5-2-6: OTHER OFFENSES:
It shall be unlawful for any person to commit any other "offenses" as defined by Iowa Code section
701.1. (1998 Code)
Chapter 3
DRUG PARAPHERNALIA
5-3-1: DEFINITIONS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 68/349
The following words shall have the following meanings when used in this Chapter:
ACT: The Uniform Controlled Substances Act, Iowa Code chapter 204A, and regulations promulgated
thereunder.
CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE: A "controlled substance" as defined in the Act.
DRUG PARAPHERNALIA: All equipment, products and materials of any kind which are used,
intended for use, or designed for use, in planting, propagating, cultivating, growing, harvesting,
manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing, preparing, testing, analyzing,
packaging, repackaging, storing, containing, concealing, injecting, ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise
introducing into the human body a controlled substance in violation of the Act. It includes, but is not
limited to:
A. Kits used, intended for use, or designed for use in planting, propagating, cultivating, growing or
harvesting of any species of plant which is a controlled substance or from which a controlled
substance can be derived.
B. Kits used, intended for use, or designed for use in manufacturing, compounding, converting,
producing, processing, or preparing controlled substances.
C. Isomerization devices used, intended for use, or designed for use in increasing the potency of
any species of plant which is a controlled substance.
D. Testing equipment used, intended for use, or designed for use in identifying or in analyzing the
strength, effectiveness or purity of controlled substances.
E. Scales and balances used, intended for use, or designed for use in weighing or measuring
controlled substances.
F. Diluents and adulterants, such as quinine hydrochloride, mannitol, mannite, dextrose and
lactose, used, intended for use, or designed for use in cutting controlled substances.
G. Separation gins and sifters used, intended for use, or designed for use in removing twigs and
seeds from, or in otherwise cleaning or refining marijuana.
H. Blenders, bowls, containers, spoons and mixing devices used, intended for use, or designed for
use in compounding controlled substances.
I. Capsules, balloons, envelopes and other containers used, intended for use, or designed for use
in packaging small quantities of controlled substances.
J. Containers and other objects used, intended for use, or designed for use in storing or concealing
controlled substances.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 69/349
K. Hypodermic syringes, needles and other objects used, intended for use, or designed for use in
parentally injected controlled substances into the human body.
L. Objects used, intended for use, or designed for use in ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise
introducing marijuana, cocaine, hashish, or hashish oil into the human body, such as:
1. Metal, wooden, acrylic, glass, stone, plastic, or ceramic pipes with or without screens,
permanent screens, hashish heads, or punctured metal bowls.
2. Water pipes.
3. Carburetion tubes and devices.
4. Smoking and carburetion masks.
5. Roach clips, meaning objects used to hold burning material, such as a marijuana cigarette,
that has become too small or too short to be held in the hand.
6. Miniature cocaine spoons and cocaine vials.
7. Chamber pipes.
8. Carburetor pipes.
9. Electric pipes.
10. Air-driven pipes.
11. Chillums.
12. Bongs.
13. Ice pipes or chillers. (Ord. 1-92, 6-16-1992)
5-3-2: CRITERIA FOR DETERMINING DRUG PARAPHERNALIA:
In determining whether an object is drug paraphernalia, a court and the Police Department should
consider the following factors in addition to all other logically relevant factors:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 70/349
A. Statements by an owner or by anyone in control of the object concerning its use.
B. Prior convictions, if any, of an owner, or of anyone in control of the object, under any State or
Federal law relating to any controlled substance.
C. The proximity of the object, in time and space, to a direct violation of the Act or this Chapter.
D. The proximity of the object to controlled substances.
E. The existence of any residue of controlled substances on the object.
F. Direct or circumstantial evidence of the intent of an owner, or of anyone in control of the object, to
deliver it to persons who he knows, or should reasonably know, intend to use the object to facilitate
a violation of the Act or this Chapter; the innocence of an owner, or of anyone in control of the
object, as to a direct violation of the Act or this Chapter should not prevent a finding that the object
is intended for use, or designed for use as drug paraphernalia.
G. Instructions, oral or written, provided with the object concerning its use.
H. Descriptive materials accompanying the object which explain or depict its use.
I. National and local advertising concerning its use.
J. The manner in which the object is displayed for sale.
K. Whether the owner, or anyone in control of the object, is a legitimate supplier of like or related items
to the community, such as a licensed distributor or dealer of tobacco products.
L. Direct or circumstantial evidence of the ratio of sales of the object(s) to the total sales of the
business enterprise.
M. The existence and scope of legitimate uses for the object in the community.
N. Expert testimony concerning its use. (Ord. 1-92, 6-16-1992)
5-3-3: POSSESSION PROHIBITED:
It is unlawful for any person to use, or to possess with intent to use, drug paraphernalia to plant,
propagate, cultivate, grow, harvest, manufacture, compound, convert, produce, process, prepare, test,
analyze, pack, repack, store, contain, conceal, inject, ingest, inhale or otherwise introduce into the
human body a controlled substance in violation of the Act. (Ord. 1-92, 6-16-1992)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 71/349
5-3-4: MANUFACTURE OR DELIVERY PROHIBITED:
It is unlawful for any person to deliver, possess with intent to deliver, drug paraphernalia, knowing, or
under circumstances where one reasonably should know, that it will be used to plant, propagate,
cultivate, grow, harvest manufacture, compound, convert, produce, process, prepare, test, analyze,
pack, repack, store, contain, conceal, inject, ingest, inhale or otherwise introduce into the human body
a controlled substance in violation of the Act. (Ord. 1-92, 6-16-1992)
5-3-5: ADVERTISEMENT PROHIBITED:
It is unlawful for any person to place in any newspaper, magazine, handbill, or other publication any
advertisement, knowing, or under circumstances where one reasonably should know, that the purpose
of the advertisement, in whole or in part, is to promote the sale of objects designed or intended for use
as drug paraphernalia. (Ord. 1-92, 6-16-1992)
5-3-6: PENALTY FOR VIOLATION:
Any person who violates any of the provisions of this Chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon
conviction, shall be subject to penalty as provided in Section 1-4-1 of this Code. (Ord. 1-92, 6-16-
1992; amd. 1998 Code)
Chapter 4
ANIMAL CONTROL
5-4-1: DEFINITIONS:
For use in this chapter, the following terms are defined:
ANIMAL: Dogs, cats, all domestic animals, and any other animal owned by a person.
AT LARGE: Any animal found off the premises of his owner and not under the control of a competent
person, restrained within a motor vehicle, housed in a veterinary hospital or kennel, on a leash, or "at
heel" beside a competent person and obedient to that person's command.
CAT: Both male and female animals of the feline species whether altered or not.
DOGS: Both male and female animals of the canine species whether altered or not.
OWNER: Any person or persons, firm, association, or corporation owning, keeping, sheltering, or
harboring an animal.
VICIOUS ANIMALS: An animal is deemed to be vicious when it shall have attacked, bitten, molested
or caused injury to a human or other animal or when propensity to attack or bite humans or animals
has been shown to exist through repeated attacks or attempted attacks and where such propensity is
known to the owner or ought reasonably be known to the owner thereof. This definition shall not apply
to guard and/or attack dogs, providing adequate safeguards are established to protect those humans
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 72/349
legally on the premises, and the dog is registered as a guard/attack dog with the City. (Ord. 7-82, 12-
7-1982; amd. Ord. 2010-04, 12-7-2010)
5-4-2: VACCINATION AND IDENTIFICATION REQUIRED:
Any dog or cat of sufficient age to receive the rabies vaccination shall be vaccinated against rabies.
The owner of said animal shall cause to be placed upon the neck of such animal so owned, kept, or
harbored, a collar made of durable material having attached thereto a metal tag showing that the
animal has a current rabies vaccination and indicating the license number. The collar with the attached
tag shall be kept on such dog/cat at all times. (Ord. 7-82, 12-7-1982; amd. 1998 Code)
5-4-3: KENNEL SALES OF ANIMALS:
Kennel sales of animals are not permitted within the City limits. (1998 Code)
5-4-4: KEEPING CERTAIN ANIMALS RESTRICTED:
It shall be unlawful to keep, maintain or allow to remain upon any one lot, tract or piece of ground
within the City, any sheep, goats, hogs, cows, horses, or fowl family; excluding parrots, parakeets,
canaries or any similar small birds kept as pets and capable of being domestically caged, except
where such animals are kept in the conduct of a commercial enterprise or business at locations where
such business is permitted. (1998 Code)
5-4-5: LICENSING REQUIREMENTS:
A. License Required: Any person owning, keeping, harboring, or having custody of any dog or cat of
sufficient age to receive rabies vaccination within the City must obtain a license as herein provided.
B. Application For License: Written application for licenses shall be made to the City staff, which shall
include name and address of applicant, description of the animal, and rabies certificate issued by a
licensed veterinarian or anti-rabies clinic.
C. Term Of License: If not revoked, licenses for the keeping of dogs and cats shall be for a period of
three (3) years.
D. Time For Obtaining License: Application for a license must be made within thirty (30) days after
obtaining a dog or cat over three (3) months of age.
E. License Fee: There shall be a license fee as established by resolution of the City Council.
F. Tag And Collar:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 73/349
1. Issuance Of Tags: Upon acceptance of the license application, the City staff shall issue a
durable tag or identification collar, stamped with an identifying number and the year of issuance.
Tags should be designed so that they may be conveniently fastened or riveted to the animal's
collar or harness.
2. Wearing Of Tags Required: Dogs and cats must wear identification tags or collars at all times
when off the premises of the owners.
3. Maintain Record Of Tags Issued: The City staff shall maintain a record of the identifying
numbers of all tags issued and shall make this record available to the public.
G. Rabies Certificate Required: The licensing period shall begin with the issue of a rabies certificate
and shall run for three (3) years. Application for license shall be made within fifteen (15) days of
issue of rabies certificate.
H. Failure To Obtain License; Fine: Persons who fail to obtain a license as required within the time
period specified in this section will be subjected to a fine of one hundred dollars ($100.00).
I. Duplicate License; Fee: A duplicate license may be obtained upon payment of a five dollar ($5.00)
replacement fee.
J. License For Specific Dog Or Cat: No person may use any license for any dog/cat other than for
which it was issued. (Ord. 7-82, 12-7-1982; amd. Ord. 4-95, 4-4-1995; 1998 Code; Ord. 2010-02,
10-5-2010)
K. License Renewal: A license renewal may be obtained for a cost of five dollars ($5.00) for a period
of three (3) years. Persons who fail to obtain a license renewal as required within the time period
specified in this section will be subjected to a late fine of ten dollars ($10.00). (Ord. 2010-02, 10-5-
2010)
5-4-6: ACTIONS CONSTITUTING A NUISANCE:
A. Animal Excrement: It shall be unlawful for any person who possesses, harbors, or is in charge of
any dog or other domestic animal not to immediately remove excrement deposited by said animal
upon a common thoroughfare, street, sidewalk, play area, park, or upon any other public property,
or upon any private property when permission of the owner or tenant of said property has not been
obtained, and such is hereby deemed to be a public nuisance and prohibited. Animal excrement
shall not be placed in storm sewers but shall be disposed of in a sanitary manner.
B. Damage To Premises Of Others: It shall be unlawful for any owner of any animal to allow or permit
such animal to pass upon the premises of another thereby causing damage to, or interference
with, the premises.
C. Disturbances; Noise; Chasing Persons Or Vehicles: It shall be unlawful for an owner of any animal
to allow or permit such animal to cause serious annoyance or disturbance to any person or
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 74/349
persons by frequent and habitual howling, yelping, barking, meowing, or otherwise; or by running
after or chasing persons, bicycles, automobiles, or other vehicles. (Ord. 7-82, 12-7-1982)
5-4-7: RUNNING AT LARGE PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any owner or person having the care, custody, or control of any domestic
animal or fowl to allow such animal or fowl to run at large within the City. (Ord. 7-82, 12-7-1982; amd.
1998 Code)
5-4-8: IMPOUNDMENT; NOTICE; DISPOSITION:
A. Impoundment: Any animal found running at large shall be taken by the animal warden and
impounded in the local animal shelter and there confined in a humane manner for a period of not
less than three (3) days, and then said animal shall be taken to Muscatine animal shelter.
B. Owner Citation: When animals are found running at large and their ownership is known to the
animal warden, such animal need not be impounded if owner is available, but such officer may cite
the owner of such animal to appear in court to answer charges of the violation of this chapter. (Ord.
7-82, 12-7-1982)
C. Notice Of Impoundment: Immediately upon impounding animals, the animal warden shall make a
reasonable effort to notify the owners of such animal so impounded and inform such owners of the
conditions whereby they may regain custody of such animal. (Ord. 7-82, 12-7-1982; amd. Ord. 4-
95, 4-4-1995)
D. Redemption From Impoundment: Any owner who wishes to redeem an impounded animal may do
so by showing proof of vaccination, obtaining a license from the City Hall, if not licensed, and
paying the following fee in addition to the license, plus a twenty five dollar ($25.00) per day shelter
fee: (Ord. 2010-02, 10-5-2010)
First offense $ 75.00
Second offense in any 12 month period 125.00
Third offense in any 12 month period 175.00
1. Signing Of Waiver For The Release Of Animals: The owner of an animal that is caught and
impounded by the City of West Liberty shall sign a "Redemption Waiver". This waiver holds the
owner responsible for all costs associated with the capture, impoundment, and transportation of
any and all animals by the City Animal Control Department or Police Department. No animal(s)
shall be released to any owner(s) without a signed waiver. (Ord. 2011-02, 8-2-2011)
E. Payment Of Fine: Any owner or person charged with a first or second violation of this chapter may
present such summons at the City Hall in the City and pay such fine without appearance in court,
and upon payment of the fine, shall be deemed to have pleaded guilty to the offense charged.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 75/349
Nothing herein contained shall be construed to prohibit any person charged with a violation of this
section from contesting such charge. The provisions of this subsection shall not be applicable upon
the filing of a complaint and summons for the third or subsequent violations of this section. (Ord. 7-
82, 12-7-1982)
5-4-9: ANIMAL CARE:
A. Provide Care And Treatment: No owner shall fail to provide his animals with sufficient good and
wholesome food and water, proper shelter and protection from the weather, veterinary care when
needed to prevent suffering, and with humane care and treatment.
B. Cruelty: No person shall beat, cruelly ill treat, torment, overload, overwork, or otherwise abuse an
animal.
C. Abandonment: No owner of an animal shall abandon such animal.
D. Duty Of Driver Upon Striking Animal: Any person who, as the operator of a motor vehicle, strikes a
domestic animal shall stop at once and render such assistance as may be possible and shall
immediately report such injury or death to the animal's owner. In the event the owner cannot be
ascertained and located, such operator shall at once report the accident to the appropriate law
enforcement agency or to the local humane society.
E. Poisonous Substances: No person shall expose any known poisonous or harmful substance,
whether mixed with food or not, so that the same shall be liable to be eaten by a domestic animal;
provided, that it shall not be unlawful for a person to expose on his own property common rat
poison mixed only with vegetable substance. (Ord. 7-82, 12-7-1982)
5-4-10: RABIES SUSPECTS:
A. Impoundment: Any dog or cat which is suspected of having rabies, or which has bitten a person or
other animal, shall be impounded, either in the pound or under the supervision of a licensed
veterinarian, for observation. All fees for such impounding and observation shall be charged to the
owner of such animal.
B. Quarantine: Any dog or cat impounded under the provisions of this section shall be placed in a
suitable facility and quarantined for a period of not less than fourteen (14) days at the expense of
the owner.
C. Destruction Of Infected Animal: Any such animal impounded under the provisions of this section
shall be destroyed upon determination that such animal is infected with rabies.
D. Rabies Test Requirement: Owners must not kill or dispose of a suspect dog or cat, except in
extreme life threatening situations, so that rabies tests can be conducted. (Ord. 7-82, 12-7-1982)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 76/349
5-4-11: VICIOUS ANIMALS; GUARD OR ATTACK DOGS:
A. Keeping Restricted: It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or harbor a fierce or vicious animal,
except in an authorized zoo or zoological park.
B. Destruction Of Animal: If satisfied that an animal is accustomed to seizing and biting people or is
vicious and has actually bitten one or more persons, the animal warden, or his or her designated
representative may, if he finds such animal at large, kill the same without previous notice to the
owner if the animal cannot be captured by any reasonable method.
C. Guard Or Attack Dogs:
1. Excepted From Provisions: Dogs maintained as guard dogs or placed in an enclosed area for
the protection of persons or property shall not be included under this section as long as they
remain in the enclosed area and are completely confined in a kennel, yard, or other space when
not being used as a guard dog.
2. Posting Of Signs: The owner, or other person in control if not the owner, of all premises upon
which attack and guard dogs are maintained shall post signs on, over, or next to all exterior
doors stating that such dogs are on the premises. At least one such sign shall be posted at each
driveway or entranceway to said premises. (Ord. 7-82, 12-7-1982)
5-4-12: DOGS OR CATS IN HEAT:
Every female dog or cat in heat shall be confined in a building or secure enclosure in such a manner
that such female dog or cat cannot come into contact with another animal except for planned
breeding. (Ord. 7-82, 12-7-1982)
5-4-13: BREEDING ANIMALS:
No person shall use any stallion, jack or bull for breeding purposes except in a proper enclosure, nor
without written permission from the Mayor authorizing such use at such place. Such permit shall not
be granted for a longer period than one year from date of issuance. (1975 Code § 5-3-4)
5-4-14: DEAD ANIMALS:
No person shall carry, haul or take through the streets or alleys of the City any dead animal without
the same being securely covered so as not to be exposed to public view. (1975 Code § 5-3-5)
5-4-15: REPORTING DISEASE:
Any person having knowledge of the presence of any disease among animals capable of being
communicated to human beings shall immediately report that fact together with the location of the
premises at which the animals are kept to the animal warden. (1975 Code § 5-3-7; amd. 1998 Code)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 77/349
5-4-16: CONFINEMENT1:
If a local board of health receives information that an animal has bitten a person or that a dog or
animal is suspected of having rabies, the board shall order the owner to confine such animal in the
manner it directs for a period of ten (10) days. If the owner fails to confine such animal in the manner
directed, the animal shall be apprehended and impounded by such board, and after ten (10) days the
board may humanely destroy the animal. If such animal is returned to its owner, the owner shall pay
the cost of impoundment. This section shall not apply if a police service dog or a horse used by a law
enforcement agency and acting in the performance of its duties has bitten a person. (Ord. 2010-03,
10-5-2010)
5-4-17: QUARANTINE2:
If a local board of health believes rabies to be epidemic, or believes there is a threat of epidemic, in its
jurisdiction, it may declare a quarantine in all or part of the area under its jurisdiction and such
declaration shall be reported to the Iowa Department of Public Health. During the period of quarantine,
any person owning or having a dog in the person's possession in the quarantined area shall keep
such animal securely enclosed or on a leash for the duration of the quarantine period. (Ord. 2010-03,
10-5-2010)
5-4-18: RABIES VACCINATIONS3:
Every owner of a dog shall obtain a rabies vaccination for such animal. It shall be unlawful for any
person to own or have a dog in the person's possession, six (6) months of age or over, which has not
been vaccinated against rabies. Dogs kept in kennels and not allowed to run at large shall not be
subject to these vaccination requirements. (Ord. 2010-03, 10-5-2010)
5-4-19: VICIOUS ANIMALS:
A. Keeping Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any person to harbor or keep a vicious animal within the
City. An animal is deemed to be vicious when it shall have attacked, bitten, molested or caused
injury to a human or other animal or when propensity to attack or bite humans or animals has been
shown to exist through repeated attacks or attempted attacks and where such propensity is known
to the owner or ought reasonably be known to the owner thereof. This subsection shall not apply to
guard and/or attack dogs, providing adequate safeguards are established to protect those humans
legally on the premises, and the dog is registered as a guard/attack dog with the City.
B. Public Hearing On Disposition:
1. If any animal is accused of being vicious, whether at large or restrained on private property, the
City Manager or designee may set a public hearing on the disposition of such animal. Pending
such public hearing, the animal shall be impounded in the City shelter, or in lieu of impound, the
Director may permit the dog or other animal to be confined, at the owner's or custodian's
expense, in a department approved dog kennel or veterinary facility within the City or at the
owner's or custodian's residence, provided the owner or custodian:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 78/349
a. Shall not remove the dog or other animal from the kennel, veterinary facility or residence
without the prior written approval of the Director or authorized representative; and
b. Shall make the dog or other animal available for observation and inspection by animal control
personnel or members of law enforcement or their authorized representatives.
2. The Director or designee may have a dog or other animal impounded or confined and
permanently identified by means of photo identification prior to release from impound or
confinement.
3. Should the animal be held at a veterinary hospital, release of said animal without written
authorization of the City Manager or designee is prohibited.
4. The hearing shall be public with opportunity for both sides to appear after at least ten (10)
calendar days' written notice of said hearing.
C. Terms, Conditions And Restrictions: If, at the hearing, the City Manager or designee determines
that the allegations are true, the City Manager or designee may require reasonable terms and
conditions or restrictions for the training, handling or maintenance of the animal to abate the
condition which gave rise to the hearing. A license or permit may be revoked if the owner refuses
to accept, in writing, any term, condition or restriction, or fails to attend the hearing. Terms,
conditions or restrictions may include, but are not limited to:
1. Selection of locations within the owner's property or premises where the animal shall not be
kept.
2. Requirements as to size, construction or design of an enclosure where the animal may be kept.
3. Specialized training from a trainer or training program approved by the Director to correct any of
the animal's behavioral problems.
4. Surgical spay or neuter of the animal.
5. Removal of one or more animals to another location or outside of the City.
6. Types and method of restraint, or muzzling, or both.
7. Photo identification or permanent marking or both for purposes of identification.
D. Grounds For Destruction: If the City Manager or designee determines: 1) that the animal is a
vicious animal; 2) that the owner has failed to restrain such animal reasonably; and 3) that it is in
the public interest to destroy such animal, the animal shall be destroyed in a manner deemed
appropriate to the City after five (5) calendar days unless the determination is appealed to a court
of competent jurisdiction. (Ord. 2010-04, 12-7-2010)
5-4-20: HORSE RIDING:
It shall be unlawful for any person to ride or exercise a horse or any other unlicensed animal on public
or private property within the corporate City limits of the City of West Liberty. This section does not
apply to riding or exercising horses or any other non-licensed animal in an authorized parade or event
within the City, with prior permission or authorization by the City. (Ord. 2011-03, 8-16-2011)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 79/349
Chapter 5
RESERVED
(1998 Code)
Chapter 6
CURFEW
5-6-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this Chapter is to regulate, by the establishment of a curfew, the hours minors may be
or remain upon the alleys, streets, other public places and places of business and amusement in this
City. (1975 Code § 5-6-1)
5-6-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this Chapter, the following words and phrases are defined:
HABITUALLY VIOLATES: Any minor who has violated the provisions of this Chapter more than two
(2) times.
MINOR: Any person below the age of eighteen (18) years. (1975 Code § 5-6-2; amd. Ord. 2-84, 3-6-
1984; 1998 Code)
5-6-3: HOURS:
It shall be unlawful for any minor to be or remain upon any of the alleys, streets or public places or
places of business and amusement in the City between the hours of ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. and four
o'clock (4:00) A.M. of the following day, official City time. (1975 Code § 5-6-3)
5-6-4: EXCEPTIONS:
A. Minors Accompanied By Parent Or Guardian: The restriction provided by Section 5-6-3 of this
Chapter shall not apply to any minor who is accompanied by a guardian, parent or other person
charged with the care and custody of such minor, nor shall the restriction apply to any minor who is
traveling between his home or place of residence and the place where any approved church,
Municipal or school function is being held. But these exceptions shall not apply when a minor is
playing or unnecessarily loitering in or upon the enumerated public or private places even though
he is accompanied by a parent, guardian or other person charged with the minor's care and
custody. (1975 Code § 5-6-4)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 80/349
B. Weekends: The restrictions provided by Section 5-6-3 of this Chapter shall not apply to a minor
fourteen (14) years of age and older on Fridays and Saturdays when the curfew time for these
individuals shall be twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight to four o'clock (4:00) A.M. The regular ten
o'clock (10:00) P.M. to four o'clock (4:00) A.M. curfew time shall apply Sundays through
Thursdays. (Ord. 2-84, 3-6-1984; amd. 1998 Code)
5-6-5: PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY:
It is unlawful for any parent, guardian or other person charged with the care and custody of any minor
to allow or permit such minor to be in or upon any of the streets, alleys, places of business or
amusement or other public places within the curfew hours set by Section 5-6-3 of this Chapter, except
as provided in Section 5-6-4 of this Chapter. (1975 Code § 5-6-5)
5-6-6: VIOLATION:
Any peace officer of the City is hereby empowered to arrest any minor who violates any of the
provisions of this Chapter. Upon being arrested, the minor shall be returned to the custody of the
parent, guardian or other person charged with the care and custody of the minor. If a minor habitually
violates the provisions of this Chapter, the Chief of Police shall notify the probation officer, or the
County Attorney if there is no probation officer, of the violations and shall prepare a statement setting
forth the violations to be filed with the clerk of the Juvenile Court upon the approval of the probation
officer or County Attorney. (1975 Code § 5-6-6)
Chapter 7
WEEDS
5-7-1: REMOVAL BY PROPERTY OWNER:
It shall be the duty of all owners or occupants of or agents for real property within the limits of the City
to cut or remove and keep cut or removed all weeds and other noxious growths, exceeding a height of
ten inches (10"), from their respective lots, tracts or parcels and the parking in the adjoining street.
(1975 Code § 5-7-1; amd. 1998 Code)
5-7-2: NOTICE TO REMOVE:
Any and all persons refusing or neglecting to perform the duty imposed upon them by the preceding
Section shall be notified in writing by the City Manager, he keeping a copy of said notice, to cut and
remove such weeds and noxious growths within five (5) days from the date of the service of such
notice. (1975 Code § 5-7-2)
5-7-3: REMOVAL BY CITY:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 81/349
Whenever any person notified as provided above shall fail, neglect or refuse to cut or remove such
weeds and noxious growths, within the time specified in said notice, it shall be the duty of the City
Manager to cause the same to be done. (1975 Code § 5-7-3)
5-7-4: ASSESSMENT OF COSTS; HEARING:
Whenever the City Manager shall do any work under the provision of this Chapter, he shall bill the
owner, occupant or agent for the property. If said individual does not pay the bill within sixty (60) days
of the billing date, the City Manager shall report the fact to the City Council at its next regular meeting
stating the cost of such work giving the items thereof, and the names of the owners, occupants or
agents and the description of the property, lot or parcel of ground concerned. Upon receiving such
report, the Council shall audit the cost of such work and by resolution assess the same as a special
tax against the property concerned and shall give the owner, occupant or agent as the case may be,
reasonable notice of the fact, reason and amount of such assessment and shall fix a date at which
such owner, occupant or agent may appear and be heard with any objections to such assessment.
Upon or after such hearing, the Council may finally determine whether such assessment be made and
the amount thereof and the special tax shall be certified and collected as other special assessments.
(1975 Code § 5-7-4)
Chapter 8
JUNK MOTOR VEHICLES
5-8-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this Chapter is to protect the health, safety, and welfare of the citizens and safety of
property of the City by providing for removal of abandoned motor vehicles and the elimination of the
open storage of abandoned and junk motor vehicles and machinery except in authorized places. (Ord.
8-87, 11-2-1987)
5-8-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this Chapter, the following terms are defined:
ABANDONED VEHICLE: A. Any of the following:
1. A vehicle that has been left unattended on public property for more than forty eight (48) hours
and lacks current registration plates or two (2) or more wheels or other parts which render the
vehicle totally inoperable; or
2. A vehicle that has remained illegally on public property for more than seventy two (72) hours;
or
3. A vehicle that has been unlawfully parked on private property or has been placed on private
property without the consent of the owner or person in control of the property for more than
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 82/349
twenty four (24) hours; or
4. A vehicle that has been legally impounded by order of the Department and has not been
reclaimed for a period of ten (10) days; or
5. Any vehicle parked on the highway determined by the Department to create a hazard to other
vehicle traffic.
B. A vehicle shall not be considered abandoned for a period of fifteen (15) days if its owner or
operator is unable to move the vehicle and notifies the Department and requests assistance in
the removal of the vehicle.
DEPARTMENT: The Police Department of the City of West Liberty, Iowa.
JUNK VEHICLE: Any unlicensed vehicle stored within the corporate limits of the City of West Liberty,
Iowa, and which has any one of the following characteristics:
A. Any vehicle with a broken or cracked windshield or window or headlight or any other cracked or
broken glass.
B. Any vehicle with a broken or loose fender, door or bumper or hood or door handle or window
handle or steering wheel, trunk top or trunk handle or tailpipe.
C. Any vehicle which has become the habitat of rats, mice, or snakes, or any other vermin or
insects.
D. Any vehicle which contains gasoline or any other flammable fuel.
E. Any motor vehicle if it lacks an engine or two (2) or more wheels or other structural parts which
render said motor vehicle inoperable.
F. Any other vehicle which in any other way constitutes a threat to the public health and safety.
G. Any vehicle which is leaking or otherwise discharging oil or flammable liquid(s).
OBSOLETE VEHICLE: Any vehicle not capable of moving under its own power in both forward and
reverse.
PRIVATE PROPERTY: Any real property within the City which is not "public property" as defined in
this Section.
PUBLIC PROPERTY: Any public right of way open for the purposes of vehicular travel.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 83/349
VEHICLE: Every device in, upon, or by which a person or property is or may be transported or drawn
upon a highway or street, excepting devices moved by human power or used exclusively upon
stationary rails or tracks, and shall include without limitation, a motor vehicle, automobile, truck, trailer,
motorcycle, tractor, buggy, wagon, farm machinery, or any combination thereof. (Ord. 8-87, 11-2-1987;
amd. 1998 Code)
5-8-3: REMOVAL OF ABANDONED VEHICLES:
A. Removal By Department: The Department may, without prior notice or hearing, remove and
impound any "abandoned vehicle" as defined in Section 5-8-2 of this Chapter. The Department
may hire other personnel, equipment, and facilities for the purpose of removing, preserving,
storing, or disposing of abandoned vehicles.
B. Place Of Impoundment: The impoundment and storage of all vehicles pursuant to this Chapter shall
be in such areas or places designated by the City Council.
C. Maintain Record Of Impounded Vehicles: When a vehicle is taken into custody and impounded
under the provisions of this Chapter, the Department shall maintain a record of the vehicle, listing
the color, year of manufacture, manufacturer's trade name, body style, vehicle identification
number, and license plate and year displayed on the vehicle. The records shall include the date
and hour of tow, location towed from, location towed to, person or firm doing the towing, reason for
towing, and the name of the officer authorizing the tow.
D. Vehicles Used As Evidence: Nothing in this Chapter shall govern the procedures of any police
officer in taking into custody and impounding any vehicle to be used and proposed to be used as
evidence in a criminal case involving crimes other than violations of this Chapter. (Ord. 8-87, 11-2-
1987)
5-8-4: NOTIFICATION OF OWNERS AND LIENHOLDERS:
A. Written Notice; Contents: When a vehicle is taken into custody under the provisions of this Chapter
or under any provisions of State law, the Department shall notify, within three (3) days, by certified
mail with five (5) days' return receipt, the last known registered owner of the vehicle, all lienholders
of record, and any other known claimant to the vehicle or to personal property found in the vehicle,
addressed to their last known addresses of record, that the abandoned vehicle has been taken into
custody. Notice shall be deemed given when mailed. The notice shall:
1. Describe the year, make, model, and serial number of the vehicle.
2. Describe the personal property found in the vehicle.
3. Describe the location of the facility where the vehicle is being held.
4. Inform the persons receiving notice:
a. Of their right to reclaim the vehicle and personal property within twenty one (21) days after the
effective date of the notice;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 84/349
b. That the right can be exercised upon payment of all towing, preservation, notice, and storage
charges resulting from placing the vehicle in custody;
c. That failure of the owner or lienholders to exercise their right to reclaim the vehicle within the
reclaiming period shall be deemed a waiver by the owner and all lienholders of all right, title,
claim, and interest in the vehicle;
d. That failure to reclaim the vehicle is deemed consent to the sale of the vehicle at a public
auction or disposal of the vehicle to a demolisher.
5. State that any person claiming rightful possession of the vehicle or personal property who
disputes the planned disposition of the vehicle or personal property by the Department or the
assessment of fees and charges provided by this Chapter may request a hearing to contest
these matters in accordance with the provisions of Section 5-8-6 of this Chapter.
6. State that a request for a hearing must be in writing and received by the Department prior to the
expiration of the twenty one (21) day reclaiming period.
7. State that in the event a hearing is requested, immediate release of the vehicle may be obtained
by posting a cash bond as required by subsection 5-8-5C of this Chapter.
B. Extension Of Reclamation Time Period: The owner or any person receiving notice may, by written
request received by the Department prior to the expiration of the twenty one (21) day reclaiming
period, obtain an additional fourteen (14) days within which the vehicle may be reclaimed.
C. Publication Of Notice In Newspaper: Notice by one publication in one newspaper of general
circulation in the area where the vehicle was abandoned shall be sufficient to meet the
requirements of this Chapter. The published notice may contain multiple listings of abandoned
vehicles but shall be published within the same time requirements and shall contain the same
information as prescribed for mailed notice in this Section. Published notice shall be used if:
1. The identity of the last registered owner cannot be determined; or
2. The registration contains no address for the owner; or
3. It is impossible to determine with reasonable certainty the identity and address of all lienholders.
D. Failure To Reclaim Or Request Hearing: If the persons receiving notice do not request a hearing or
exercise their right to reclaim the vehicle or personal property within the reclaiming period, the
owner of the vehicle or owners of the personal property shall no longer have any right, title claim,
or interest in or to the vehicle.
E. Rights Relinquished: No court in any case of law in equity shall recognize any right, title, claim, or
interest of the owner and lienholders after the twenty one (21) day reclaiming period. (Ord. 8-87,
11-2-1987)
5-8-5: IMPOUNDMENT FEES AND BOND:
A. Evidence Of Ownership; Fees: Before the owner or other person lawfully entitled to possession of
any vehicle that has been impounded under the provisions of this Chapter or any other provision of
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 85/349
law may recover such vehicle, such person shall present to the Department evidence of such
person's identity and right to possession of the vehicle, shall sign a receipt for its return, and shall
pay the costs of:
1. An impoundment fee of fifty dollars ($50.00).
2. Towing charges as billed by tower.
3. Preservation charges.
4. Storage charges of five dollars ($5.00)/day.
5. Notice charges.
B. Charges: The amount of the charges specified in subsection A1 through A4 above shall be set by
the City Council. The notice charges shall be limited to the actual cost of such notice.
C. Request For Hearing; Bond: If a hearing is requested under subsection 5-8-4A5 of this Chapter, the
owner or person lawfully entitled to possession of the vehicle shall be permitted to secure the
immediate release of the vehicle upon posting a cash bond in an amount equal to the sum of:
1. The fees required by subsection A above;
2. The amount of the fine or penalty for each violation for which there is an outstanding or
otherwise unsettled traffic violation notice or warrant. (Ord. 8-87, 11-2-1987)
5-8-6: HEARING PROCEDURES:
A. Request For Hearing: The registered owner, any lienholder of record, or duly authorized agents
thereof, may object to the legality of the impoundment or the assessment of fees and request a
hearing thereon. Request for a hearing after an impoundment shall be made in writing and
received by the Department prior to the expiration of the twenty one (21) day reclaiming period. No
person shall be entitled to more than one hearing on each impoundment. The objector shall be
informed of the reason for the impoundment and a hearing shall be held, without unnecessary
delay, before a hearing officer who shall be the Police Chief. Upon request of the objector, the
hearing may be set for a later time and date.
B. Decision Of Hearing Officer: At the hearing, the hearing officer shall consider the objection, make a
decision as to the legality of the impoundment and immediately notify the objector in writing of the
decision. The decision shall state either of the following:
1. That impoundment is authorized by law, an explanation for the basis of that decision, and an
itemization of the charges assessed pursuant to subsection 5-8-5A of this Chapter. Any bond
posted under subsection 5-8-5C of this Chapter shall be applied to the satisfaction of the
charges itemized by the hearing officer.
2. That impoundment is not authorized by law, and if the vehicle has been impounded, that the
vehicle will be released to the objector upon compliance with subsection 5-8-5A and that all
costs of removal, preservation, storage and notification accruing through the fourth day after the
hearing officer's decision are waived and will be paid by the City. All costs accruing thereafter
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 86/349
shall be paid prior to recovery of the vehicle. Any bond posted under subsection 5-8-5C of this
Chapter shall be refunded, less any amounts for outstanding or unsettled traffic violations.
C. Decision Final: The decision of the hearing officer shall be final.
D. Failure Of Objector To Appear: Failure of the objector to appear at the scheduled hearing shall
constitute a waiver of the right to hearing and the bond shall be forfeited.
E. Determination Of Abandonment: The only issue to be considered at the hearing shall be the validity
of the determination that the vehicle is an abandoned vehicle. The hearing will not be
determinative of or adjudicate any outstanding or unsettled traffic violation notice or warrant. (Ord.
8-87, 11-2-1987)
5-8-7: AUCTION OR DISPOSAL OF ABANDONED VEHICLES:
The Department shall follow the procedures in State law for the auction or disposal of abandoned
vehicles. (Ord. 8-87, 11-2-1987)
5-8-8: JUNK VEHICLES DECLARED A NUISANCE:
Except as hereinafter provided, it is hereby declared that the parking, leaving, or storage of a junk
vehicle upon either public or private property within the corporate limits of the City constitutes a threat
to the health and safety of the citizens and is a nuisance within the meaning of Iowa Code section
657.1. If any junk vehicle is stored upon private property or public property in violation thereof, the
owner of the property shall be prima facie liable for said violation. (Ord. 8-87, 11-2-1987)
5-8-9: AUTHORITY TO ENFORCE:
The Department, upon obtaining a search warrant, may enter upon private property for the purposes
specified in this Chapter to examine vehicles or parts thereof, obtain information as to the identity of
vehicles, and to remove or cause the removal of a vehicle or parts thereof declared to be a nuisance
pursuant to this Chapter. (Ord. 8-87, 11-2-1987)
5-8-10: NOTICE TO ABATE:
A. Persons Notified: Whenever the Department shall find a junk vehicle placed or stored on public or
private property within the City in violation of Section 5-8-8 of this Chapter, the Department shall
notify, by certified mail with five (5) days' return receipt, the following persons:
1. The last known registered owner of the vehicle.
2. All lienholders of record.
3. The owner of the property.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 87/349
4. The occupant of the property.
B. Contents Of Notice: The notice to abate shall:
1. Describe, to the extent possible, the year, make, model, and color of the vehicle.
2. Describe the location of the vehicle.
3. State that the vehicle constitutes a nuisance under the provisions of this Chapter.
4. State that the owner of the property shall remove or repair the said junk vehicle within twenty
one (21) days.
5. State that any person ordered to abate a nuisance or condition may request, in writing, within
the twenty one (21) day limit, a hearing to determine whether a nuisance or prohibited condition
exists.
6. State that if the nuisance or condition is not abated as directed or if no request for a hearing is
made within twenty one (21) days, the City will abate the nuisance and assess the costs against
the property owner.
C. Mailing Of Notice: Notice shall be deemed given when mailed. If the notice is returned undelivered
by the U.S. Post Office, action to abate the nuisance shall be continued to date not less than
twenty one (21) days from the date of such return. (Ord. 8-87, 11-2-1987)
5-8-11: DUTY OF OWNER TO REMOVE OR REPAIR:
A. Time Limit To Remove Or Repair: The owner of the property upon which a junk vehicle is stored in
violation of the provisions of Section 5-8-8 of this Chapter shall, within twenty one (21) days after
receipt of the notice to abate from the Department, remove the motor vehicle or machinery to a
lawful place of storage without the City limits, or repair the defects that cause such motor vehicle or
machinery to violate the provisions of this Chapter, including licensing in the case of a motor
vehicle not currently licensed.
B. Removal Or Repair Following Hearing Decision: If a hearing is requested under Section 5-8-12 of
this Chapter, the duty of the owner to remove or repair the junk vehicle shall be suspended
pending the decision. (Ord. 8-87, 11-2-1987)
5-8-12: HEARING PROCEDURES; JUNK VEHICLE:
A. Request Hearing: Any person ordered to abate a nuisance or condition may request a hearing
before the City Council or an official of the City designated by the City Council, to determine
whether a nuisance or prohibited condition exists.
B. Filing Of Request; Time Limit: A request for a hearing shall be made in writing and filed with the
City Clerk within the twenty one (21) day limit; or
1. The right to a hearing shall be considered waived, and
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 88/349
2. It will be conclusively presumed that the nuisance or prohibited condition exists and it must be
abated as ordered.
C. Time And Place Of Hearing Set By Council: The City Council shall, within fifteen (15) days after the
filing of the request for a hearing, fix the time and place of the hearing, which shall be within thirty
(30) days of the filing of the request.
D. Written Decision: At the conclusion of the hearing, the City Council, or its designee, shall render a
written decision as to whether a nuisance exists. If a nuisance is found to exist, it shall be ordered
abated within a reasonable time.
E. Decision Final: The decision shall be final. (Ord. 8-87, 11-2-1987)
5-8-13: ABATEMENT BY CITY:
If the person notified to abate a nuisance or condition neglects or fails to abate as directed, the City
may perform the required action to abate, keeping an accurate account of the expense incurred. The
itemized expense account shall be filed with the City Clerk who shall pay such expenses on behalf of
the City. (Ord. 8-87, 11-2-1987)
5-8-14: COLLECTION OF COST OF ABATEMENT:
The Clerk shall mail a statement of the total expense incurred to the property owner who has failed to
abide by the notice to abate, and if the amount shown by the statement has not been paid within one
month, the Clerk shall certify the costs to the County Auditor and the costs shall then be collected
with, and in the same manner, as general property taxes. (Ord. 8-87, 11-2-1987)
5-8-15: EXCEPTIONS:
This Chapter shall not apply to the following:
A. A vehicle in an enclosed building.
B. A vehicle on the premises of a business enterprise operated in a district properly zoned therefor, as
authorized under the Zoning Ordinance of the City, when necessary to the operation of said
business enterprise.
C. A vehicle in an appropriate storage space or depository maintained in a lawful place and lawful
manner by the City. (Ord. 8-87, 11-2-1987)
5-8-16: INTERFERENCE WITH ENFORCEMENT:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 89/349
Any person who shall interfere in any way with the enforcement provision of this Chapter shall be
deemed guilty of a simple misdemeanor and punished accordingly. (Ord. 8-87, 11-2-1987)
5-8-17: PENALTY:
Any person failing to remove or repair any junk vehicle or machinery stored on private property in
violation of Section 5-8-8 of this Chapter shall be deemed guilty of a simple misdemeanor and, upon
conviction, be subject to penalty as provided in Section 1-4-1 of this Code. (Ord. 8-87, 11-2-1987;
amd. 1998 Code)
Chapter 9
FIREWORKS; FIREARMS
5-9-1: FIREWORKS:
The possession, discharge or firing of firecrackers, rockets, torpedoes, Roman candles or other
fireworks designed and intended for pyrotechnic display and of pistols, canes, cannons or other
appliances using blank cartridges or caps containing chlorate of potash mixtures, is hereby prohibited;
provided, that the Mayor or City Council may, upon suitable application, issue a permit to a properly
qualified person or organization for giving a pyrotechnic display of fireworks in the public park,
fairgrounds or other open place. Such display shall be of such character and so located, discharged or
fired as in the opinion of the Chief of the Fire Department shall not be hazardous to surrounding
property or endanger any person. (1975 Code § 5-9-1; amd. 1998 Code)
5-9-2: FIREARMS:
A. Discharge Prohibited: No person shall discharge within the City limits at any time any firearm, air
gun, sling, catapult or other dangerous instrument; provided, that this prohibition shall not apply to
peace officers using firearms in the discharge of their duties. (1975 Code § 5-9-3)
B. Firing Exemptions: Firearms firing exemptions shall also apply to permitted exemptions as provided
by the City Council to permit gun club operations within the corporate limits of the City. (Ord. 5-88,
4-19-1988; amd. 1998 Code)
Chapter 10
CIVIL DISORDERS
5-10-1: DECLARATION OF CIVIL DISORDER:
Whenever the Mayor determines that there has been either an act of violence or resistance to a lawful
exercise of public authority, and that as a result thereof, he has reason to believe that there exists a
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 90/349
clear and present danger of a riot or other general public disorder involving widespread disobedience
of the law and substantial injury to persons or property, which riot or other general public disorder
constitutes an immediate threat to the public peace and to the general welfare of the City, or any area
of it, he may declare a state of civil disorder within the City or any of its areas. (1975 Code § 5-11-1)
5-10-2: PROMULGATION OF TEMPORARY RESTRICTIONS:
Whenever the Mayor declares that a state of civil disorder exists, he may promulgate any, all or part of
the temporary restrictions provided for in Section 5-10-3 of this Chapter, with such limitations and
conditions as he may deem appropriate under the circumstances. In so doing, he shall specify the
area of the City affected by each restriction. Any measure promulgated will take effect only after
reasonable notice of its contents has been given. (1975 Code § 5-11-2)
5-10-3: TEMPORARY RESTRICTIONS:
The Mayor is authorized to promulgate any, all or part of the following restrictions:
A. Alcohol: Order the immediate closing of all taverns and order the cessation of the sale or any other
distribution of intoxicating liquor and beer.
B. Weapons: Order the cessation of public display, possession, sale or any other distribution of
firearms and ammunition.
C. Explosives And Flammables: Order the cessation of the sale or any other distribution of explosives
and flammables.
D. Curfew: Order the closing of all or some public parks, public streets or other public places during
specified hours.
E. Assembly: Order the cessation of gatherings by three (3) or more persons in public buildings,
streets, parks and other open areas either public or private.
F. Other Activities: Order the cessation of any other activities reasonably believed hazardous to the
maintenance of public safety. (1975 Code § 5-11-3)
5-10-4: TERMINATION OF TEMPORARY RESTRICTIONS:
Any restriction promulgated in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter will terminate
automatically forty eight (48) hours after the Mayor's declaration of civil disorder was issued or upon
his issuing a declaration that a state of civil disorder no longer exists, whichever occurs first; provided,
however, that any or all of the restrictions promulgated by the Mayor may be extended by successive
resolutions of the City Council for additional periods of time. The period of any one extension shall not
exceed five (5) days. (1975 Code § 5-11-4)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 91/349
5-10-5: PENALTY:
Anyone violating any of the provisions of this Chapter shall, upon conviction, be subject to penalty as
provided in Section 1-4-1 of this Code. (1975 Code § 5-11-5; amd. 1998 Code)
Chapter 11
NOISE CONTROL
5-11-1: PURPOSE:
It is the purpose of this chapter to prevent excessive sound which is a serious hazard to the public
health and welfare and to the quality of life in the city. (1998 Code)
5-11-2: DEFINITIONS:
All terminology used in this chapter and not defined below, shall be in conformance with applicable
publications of the American National Standards Institute or its successor body.
DECIBEL: A logarithmic and dimensionless unit of measure often used in describing the amplitude of
sound. Decibel may be denoted as dB.
EMERGENCY VEHICLE: A motor vehicle used in response to a public calamity or to protect persons
or property from imminent danger.
EMERGENCY WORK: Work made necessary to restore property to a safe condition following a public
calamity, work to restore public utilities, or work required to protect persons or property from imminent
danger.
GROSS VEHICLE WEIGHT: The value specified by the manufacturer as the loaded weight of a
vehicle.
PERSON: Any individual, association, partnership, corporation or officer thereof.
SOUND: A temporal and spatial oscillation in pressure, or other physical quality, in a medium with
internal forces that causes compression and rarefaction of that medium, and which propagates at
finite speed to distant points.
SOUND LEVEL METER: An instrument, including a microphone, amplifier, output meter and weighting
networks, that is sensitive to pressure fluctuations. The output meter reads sound pressure level in
decibels when properly calibrated and the instrument is of type 2 or better as specified in American
National Standards Institute publication S1.4-1983, or its successor publication.
WEIGHTED SOUND LEVEL: The sound pressure level in decibels as measured on a sound level
using the A weighting network. The level so read shall be designated dB(A) or dBA. (1998 Code)
5-11-3: MEASUREMENT OF NOISE AND SOUND:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 92/349
The measurement of noise and sound shall be made with a sound level meter meeting the standards
prescribed by the American National Standards Institute. The instruments shall be maintained in
calibration and good working order. A calibration check shall be made of the system on an annual
basis. Measurements recorded shall be taken so as to provide a proper representation of the noise
source. The microphone during measurement shall be positioned so as not to create an unnatural
enhancement or diminution of the measured noise. A windscreen for the microphone shall be used
when required. The measurement shall be an A weighted, slow response sound level. (1998 Code)
5-11-4: TEST MEASUREMENT AND REQUIREMENTS FOR DETERMINATION AND
CLASSIFICATION OF SOUND:
A. No person shall engage or participate in the making and creating of an excessively loud sound
within the city heard and measured in the manner prescribed below, except when done under and
in compliance with a permit issued pursuant to this chapter.
B. It shall be the duty of persons in a position of ownership, possession or control of premises to
prevent such premises from being the site of such activities producing sound levels in excess of
what is permitted under this chapter. Failure or refusal to perform such duty shall constitute a
violation of this section.
C. It shall be the duty of persons in positions of leadership or responsibility with respect to
unincorporated associations, groups, gatherings and assemblages of people to prevent such from
causing or making noise levels in excess of what is permitted under this chapter. Failure or refusal
to perform such duty shall constitute a violation of this section.
D. For the purpose of determining and classifying any sound as excessive or unusually loud, the
following test requirements and measurements shall be applied:
1. The sound shall be measured at the edge of the city street or alley right of way reasonably
appearing to be nearest to the source of the sound, or if in a park or agriculturally zoned areas,
approximately twenty five feet (25') from the source of the sound. When a complaint is received,
a measurement may also be taken at a location on the property where the complaining party
was disturbed. (1998 Code)
2. The sound shall be measured on a sound level meter of standard design and quality operated in
either of the following methods:
a. The "A" slow response rating scale.
b. The "A" fast response rating scale. (Ord. 04-03, 7-20-2004)
3. a. A sound measured to register in excess of the maximum permitted levels according to the
following table, is declared to be excessive and unusually loud and is unlawful:
Neighborhood
Characteristic
Maximum Permitted Noise Level
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 93/349
Residential 60 decibels between 7:00 A.M. to 12:00 midnight
55 decibels between 12:00 midnight to 7:00 A.M.
Commercial 65 decibels
Industrial 80 decibels
Park or agricultural 65 decibels
(1998 Code; amd. Ord. 04-03, 7-20-2004)
b. Sound levels measured using the "A" fast response rating scale shall not exceed the following
measurements:
Neighborhood
Characteristic
Maximum Permitted Noise Level
(As Measured During A
Continuous 30 Second Period)
Residential 6 occurrences of 70 decibels or more
Commercial 6 occurrences of 75 decibels or more
Industrial 6 occurrences of 90 decibels or more
Park or agricultural 6 occurrences of 75 decibels or more
(Ord. 04-03, 7-20-2004)
5-11-5: VEHICLE NOISE LIMITS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or for the owner to cause or permit to be operated within
the public right of way in this city, any motor vehicle which emits a noise in excess of the dBA level
established in this section.
A. The maximum allowable noise levels for motor vehicles shall be seventy five (75) dBA measured at
a distance of twenty five feet (25').
B. This section applies to the total noise from a motor vehicle and shall not be construed as limiting or
precluding the enforcement of any other provisions of this chapter.
C. No person shall modify the exhaust system of any motor vehicle or operate any such vehicle or
device in the City in a manner that the noise emitted by the motor vehicle is above that emitted by
the vehicle as originally manufactured. Muffler cutouts, bypasses, or other nonemissions compliant
devices which increase sound emitted shall be unlawful.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 94/349
D. The sound shall be measured on a sound level meter of standard design and quality operated on
the "A" slow response weighting scale. (1998 Code)
5-11-6: PERMITS:
Applications for a permit for relief from the provisions of this chapter may be made at City Hall,
pursuant to the following procedure:
A. All permits must be applied for in writing during normal business hours stating what devices are to
be employed, where they are to be employed, on what date(s) and at what times of day they are to
be used, the nature of the sounds to be produced or amplified and the number of people in
attendance, and the persons responsible for the activity.
B. Permits granted shall state with reasonable specificity the date(s), location(s), time(s), nature of the
sound, devices permitted, number of people in attendance, and the persons responsible for the
activity.
C. Permits shall not be unreasonably or arbitrarily withheld nor shall the free expression of ideas or
lawful speech be restrained, but sound and noise producing conduct having no communicative
value and serving only to unreasonably disrupt and disturb the enjoyment of residences and
normal pursuits shall be restrained.
D. The City Manager may prescribe any conditions or requirements deemed necessary to minimize
adverse effects upon the community or the surrounding neighborhood.
E. Annual permits may be issued for events of significant duration or having regularly scheduled
occurrences throughout the year. Examples of this may include, but are not limited to, the
Muscatine County Fair and NASCAR sanctioned auto racing.
F. Fees for permits shall be set by resolution of the Council. (1998 Code)
5-11-7: MAXIMUM SOUND TO BE PERMITTED:
When a permit has been issued pursuant to this chapter the sound levels listed in the following table
shall be the maximum levels permitted:
Sound Level
Limit In dBA Duration In Hours
80 24
83 12
86 6
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 95/349
89 3
90 1.5
The above stated duration for each sound level shall not be exceeded. The sound level shall be
measured in the same manner as set out in subsection 5-11-4D of this chapter. (1998 Code)
5-11-8: EXCEPTIONS:
The requirements, prohibitions, and terms of this chapter shall not apply to emergency work or to any
authorized emergency vehicle, when responding to an emergency call or acting in time of emergency.
The terms of this section shall not apply to those activities of a temporary duration, permitted by law
and for which a license or permit therefor has been granted by the City, including, but not limited to,
parades, fireworks displays, and the outdoor warning system. Also excepted are nonprofessional
athletic contests. (Ord. 2009-02, 4-7-2009)
5-11-9: PENALTY:
Any person who violates the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a simple misdemeanor. (1998
Code)
5-11-10: SEMITRACTOR ENGINE BRAKES:
It shall be unlawful for any person within the City limits to make, or cause to be made, loud or
disturbing noises with any mechanical devices operated by compressed air and used for purposes of
assisting braking on any semitractor. (Ord. 04-04, 10-19-2004)
Title 6
HEALTH AND SANITATION
Chapter 1
GARBAGE AND REFUSE
6-1-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and phrases when used in this Chapter shall, for the purpose hereof, have the
meanings respectively ascribed to them:
BRUSH: Tree trimmings, weeds, large hedge trimmings, and tree limbs not exceeding two inches (2")
in diameter and cut into lengths not exceeding four feet (4').
BUILDING RUBBISH: Waste material from construction, remodeling and repair operations on houses,
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 96/349
commercial buildings and other structures and comprises excavated earth, stone, rock, brick, plaster,
wallboard, lumber, shingles, concrete and other trash resulting from a cleanup of vacant or improved
property prior to occupancy.
COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL REFUSE: Solid waste materials from commercial establishments,
factories, processing plants or manufacturing plants, and consists of putrescible garbage, condemned
foods, building rubbish, cinders or similar miscellaneous manufacturing or commercial waste or boxes,
paper, rags and cartons.
GARBAGE: Every accumulation of animal, fruit or vegetable food waste generated by or resulting
from decay, deterioration, storage, preparation or handling of animal and vegetable matter in any
household; and miscellaneous waste materials such as tin cans, metals, mineral matter, glass,
crockery, dust, paper, rags, cartons, boxes, yard and lawn trimmings, garden tops and leaves.
YARD WASTE: Organic debris (e.g., grass clippings, leaves, tree limbs, bark, branches, flowers, etc.)
which is produced as part of yard and garden development and maintenance. (1975 Code § 6-3-1;
amd. Ord. 3-90, 8-7-1990)
6-1-2: DEPARTMENT OF SANITATION:
The Department of Sanitation in the City shall be under the direction of the City Manager. It shall be
the duty of said Department of Sanitation to collect all garbage and refuse in accordance with the
regulations of this Chapter. (1975 Code § 6-3-8)
6-1-3: CONTAINER REQUIREMENTS:
Garbage containers must meet the following requirements:
A. Container Specifications: The container must be a watertight receptacle of solid and durable grade
of metal or plastic not to exceed thirty (30) gallons in capacity. The combined weight of the
garbage and container shall not exceed fifty (50) pounds.
B. Handles: The container shall be provided with suitable lifting handle or handles on the outside and
a close-fitting cover equipped with a handle. (1975 Code § 6-3-2; amd. Ord. 1-94, 1-4-1994; 1998
Code)
C. Inside Structures Or Bands: The container must not have inside structures, such as inside bands
and reinforcing angles or anything within the container to prevent the free discharge of the
contents.
D. Replacement Of Damaged Or Deteriorated Containers: Containers that have deteriorated or that
have been damaged to the extent of having jagged or sharp edges capable of causing injury to
collectors or other persons whose duty it is to handle the containers, or to such an extent that the
covers will not fit securely, will be condemned by the City, acting through its Department of
Sanitation; and if such containers are not replaced after notice to the owner or user of their
defective condition, they will be confiscated. (1975 Code § 6-3-2; amd. Ord. 1-94, 1-4-1994)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 97/349
6-1-4: CONTAINERS PROVIDED:
It shall be the duty of every owner, agent, lessee, tenant or occupant of any private residence of any
house, building, flat or apartment in the City where persons reside, board or lodge, where animal or
vegetable food is prepared or served, to provide such house, building, flat, apartment or tenement with
a garbage container or containers, in good repair, for the deposit of garbage. (1975 Code § 6-3-3)
6-1-5: COLLECTION OF GARBAGE AND REFUSE:
A. Placement Of Containers On Street: Every family occupying or possessing a house, building, flat,
apartment or dwelling place in the City which is a private residence and for which a container for
garbage has been provided, to place or cause to be placed such container by seven o'clock (7:00)
A.M. of the day of collection at the street curb line, in such a manner as the City may direct. (Ord.
1-94, 1-4-1994; amd. 1998 Code)
B. Mobile Home Parks: Mobile home parks will be permitted to choose between the City or a private
commercial hauler to provide solid, recyclable and yard/brush waste disposal, selection to be for a
minimum period of twelve (12) months. Mobile home park owners will provide a central location for
dumpsters within the trailer park for the residents to dispose of their garbage.
C. Drainage And Care Of Garbage: The garbage, prior to being placed in the container, shall be
thoroughly drained of all liquid and securely placed in paper or plastic.
D. Brush And Yard Waste: All brush to be collected shall be placed at the curb line. Brush shall be cut
in lengths not to exceed four feet (4') in length and two inches (2") in diameter and placed at the
curb line. All yard waste to be collected shall be placed at the curb line loose, not in bags. (Ord. 1-
94, 1-4-1994)
6-1-6: BUILDING WASTES:
Rock, waste, scrap, building materials or other trash resulting from construction or remodeling,
resulting from a cleanup of vacant or improved property just prior to its occupancy or resulting from
sizeable amounts of trees, brush and debris cleared from property in preparation for construction, will
not be removed by the City. (1975 Code § 6-3-5)
6-1-7: INDUSTRIAL AND COMMERCIAL WASTES:
Industrial wastes resulting from manufacturing operations will not be disposed of by the City. They
must be disposed of by the owner or occupant of the building or premises where such wastes
originate. Garbage, paper and paper cartons from commercial establishments will be disposed of by
the City or private commercial hauler. Such paper must be tied in bundles or put in paper cartons.
Empty paper cartons must be flattened and tied in bundles not to exceed four feet (4') square.
Commercial and business establishments located in a C-2 Zone (General Retail District) will be
permitted to choose between the City or a private commercial hauler to provide solid, recyclable and
yard/brush waste disposal; selection to be for a minimum period of twelve (12) months. Wood crating
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 98/349
will not be collected but must be disposed of by the owner or occupant where such crating originates.
(Ord. 1-94, 1-4-1994)
6-1-8: DISPOSAL OF DEAD ANIMALS:
Dogs, cats or any other dead animals shall not be placed in garbage containers. Dogs, cats and other
animals accidentally killed will be removed by the City upon notice. (1975 Code § 6-3-7)
6-1-9: PROHIBITED REFUSE:
No dead or decaying animals or food, or any substance defined as "garbage" and required to be
handled by garbage collectors, shall be disposed of in the City. (1975 Code § 6-3-9; amd. 1998 Code)
6-1-10: REMOVAL PROHIBITED:
All persons engaged in removing, handling, transferring or in any manner dealing with refuse matter or
waste materials of any kind shall remove the same to a place provided for and designated by the
provisions of this Code, and all such refuse matter or waste material of any kind taken by such
persons to any dumping ground or other place provided by the City shall be placed and deposited
upon said dumping ground under the direction of the City Manager, and it shall be unlawful for any
such person engaged in the handling and delivery of such waste material, or any other person, to
remove any of the same. (1975 Code § 6-3-10; amd. 1998 Code)
6-1-11: RATES:
City garbage collection rates shall be established by separate ordinance. (Ord. 20180619-03, 7-17-
2018)
6-1-12: ACCUMULATION OF WASTE MATTER PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit or throw, or permit or cause to be placed,
deposited or thrown, any garbage, brush, loose waste or refuse of any kind on public or private
property outside of any house, building, flat or tenement in the City, unless the same has been
deposited in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. It shall be unlawful for any person to
cause or permit to be or remain in or upon any premises, private or public, any animal, vegetable or
mineral matter, or any composition or residue thereof, which is in an unsanitary condition or injurious
to public health. It shall be unlawful for any person who is not a resident of the City to place, deposit,
throw, or permit to be placed, deposited, or thrown any garbage, brush, loose waste or refuse of any
kind on any public or private property in the City. (1975 Code § 6-3-12; amd. 1998 Code)
6-1-13: SEPARATION OF YARD WASTE REQUIRED:
All yard waste shall be separated by the owner or occupant from all other garbage or refuse
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 99/349
accumulated on the premises and shall be composted on the premises or set out for collection (by the
City) at the curb in a bulk noncontainerized manner for collection per schedule promulgated by the
City Manager. (Ord. 3-90, 8-7-1990; amd. 1998 Code)
Chapter 2
NUISANCES
6-2-1: NUISANCES IN GENERAL:
The following acts are hereby prohibited:
A. Offensive Businesses: The erecting, continuing or using of any building or other place for the
exercise of any trade, employment or manufacture, which by occasioning noxious exhalations,
offensive smells, or other annoyances, becomes injurious or dangerous to the health, comfort or
property of individuals or the public.
B. Filth; Noisome Substances: The causing or suffering of any offal, filth, or noisome substances to be
collected or remain in any place to the prejudice of others.
C. Obstructing Buildings Or Streets: The obstructing or encumbering by fences, buildings or otherwise
of the public roads, private ways, streets, alleys, commons or burying grounds.
D. Houses Of Ill Fame: Houses of ill fame, kept for the purpose of prostitution and lewdness.
E. Gambling; Disorderly Houses: Gambling houses or houses resorted to for the use of opium or
hasheesh, or houses where drunkenness, quarreling, fighting or breaches of the peace are carried
on or permitted, to the disturbance of others, whatever is injurious to health, indecent or offensive
to the senses or an obstruction to the free use of property, so as essentially to interfere with the
comfortable enjoyment of life or property.
F. Other Nuisances: All other nuisances, either public or private. (1975 Code § 6-2-1)
6-2-2: NUISANCES AFFECTING HEALTH:
Any thing, condition or act which is or may become a detriment to or menace to the public health is
declared to constitute a nuisance. The following are specifically named as nuisances:
A. Manure Or Animal Matter Accumulations:
1. The accumulation of manure, vegetable or animal matter in which mosquito larva breed.
2. The accumulation of manure or vegetable matter in which fly larvae breed.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 100/349
B. Polluted Drinking Water: The maintenance of a polluted water supply for either drinking or
household purposes.
C. Unclean Restrooms: The maintenance of any imperfect, leaking, unclean or filthy sink, water closet,
urinal or other fixture in any building used or occupied by human beings.
D. Cleanliness; Crowding: The maintenance of any building or room in such a state of uncleanliness,
or the crowding of persons in any building or room in such a manner as to endanger the health of
those that dwell therein.
E. Lighting And Ventilation: The maintenance of any building or portion of a building occupied as a
dwelling without adequate means for lighting or ventilating the same.
F. Privy Vaults; Cesspools: The maintenance of any privy vault or open cesspool. (1975 Code § 6-2-2)
6-2-3: URINATING OR DEFECATING IN PUBLIC:
It shall be unlawful for any person to urinate or defecate in or upon any street, alley, public place or in
any place open to public view; provided, that this Section shall not apply to restrooms or public
facilities designated for such purpose. (Ord. 10-95, 9-5-1995; amd. 1998 Code)
6-2-4: PENALTY:
Any person maintaining or aiding in the creation or maintenance of any nuisance shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be subject to penalty as provided in Section 1-4-1 of this
Code. Each day during which a nuisance is allowed to exist, after due notice to abate the same has
been given, may, if the court so decides, constitute a separate and distinct offense. (1975 Code § 6-2-
4; amd. 1998 Code)
Title 7
PUBLIC WAYS AND PROPERTY
Chapter 1
WATERWORKS
7-1-1: CONSUMER'S CONTRACT WITH CITY:
The rules, regulations and water rates hereinafter referred to shall be considered a part of the contract
with every person who is supplied with water through the City's water system, and every such person
by taking water shall be considered as expressing his consent to be bound thereby. Whenever any of
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 101/349
said rules, regulations or rates, as amended from time to time by the City Council, is violated, the
water shall be shut off from the premises or place of such violation and shall not be turned on again
except upon order of the Council, the City Manager or his duly authorized representative, and then
only after the payment of the expense of shutting off the water and turning it on again, and under such
other terms as the Council or City Manager shall prescribe. In cases of such violation, the Council or
City Manager shall have the right to declare forfeit of any payment made for water by the person
committing such violation. (1975 Code § 7-1-1)
7-1-2: APPLICATION FOR WATER:
Every person desiring a supply of water or desiring to add to the service already in use shall make
application therefor to the City Manager in such form as may be prescribed by the City Council for that
purpose. The application must state fully and thoroughly all the uses to which the water is to be
applied. No different or additional use will be allowed except upon further application and agreement.
This rule shall also apply in any case where more than one family desires to use the same tap, and
each shall be required to make such an application therefor. (1975 Code § 7-1-2)
7-1-3: PAYMENT OF BILLS; DELINQUENCIES:
All bills for water and water service shall be payable to the City at City Hall on the first day of every
month and shall become delinquent on the sixteenth day of each month. A penalty of five percent
(5%) shall be added to all delinquent bills. (1975 Code § 7-1-3; amd. 1998 Code)
7-1-4: SERVICE DEPOSIT:
The water shall not be turned into any house or private service pipe, except upon order of the Council
or City Manager and when the applicant is a nonowner of the premises, a deposit of fifteen dollars
($15.00) shall be paid in advance to the City before service is commenced. (1975 Code § 7-1-4)
7-1-5: METER REQUIRED:
It shall be the duty of every consumer using water supplied by the City to prepare a suitable place for
and install a meter and the same shall be located so as to be easy for access, absolutely protected
from frost and flooding and in all respects to the satisfaction of the City Manager. The City will furnish
the meter, but all other expense of preparation and installation shall be borne by the consumer. (1975
Code § 7-1-5)
7-1-6: WILFUL WASTE OF WATER:
All persons using water shall keep the taps and all other fixtures closed when not in actual use. No
person shall wilfully permit water to be wasted by neglect or otherwise. (1975 Code § 7-1-6)
7-1-7: JOINT BILL FOR CUSTOMERS USING SAME PIPE:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 102/349
Where two (2) or more consumers upon the same premises are supplied through one service pipe,
the person controlling such pipe, if that fact can be ascertained, and if not, then the owner of such
premises, shall pay the water rates for all of such consumers. In such cases separate bills will not be
made and a failure to pay any part of the rates due from occupants of such premises shall be
sufficient cause for shutting off the water from all of the consumers thereon. (1975 Code § 7-1-7)
7-1-8: RIGHT OF INSPECTION:
Each person or firm supplied with water through the City water system shall permit the Council or City
Manager or duly authorized representative to enter his premises at all reasonable daylight hours to
examine the pipes and fixtures and the manner in which used or to read meters, and must at all times
answer fully and truthfully any questions asked concerning the consumption of water. (1975 Code § 7-
1-8)
7-1-9: TAPPING OF MAINS:
A. No tapping of the water mains of the City shall be made or permitted, except when made in
accordance with rules and regulations adopted by the City which may be changed from time to
time by the Council. (1975 Code § 7-1-9)
B. A fee for tapping the water main of the City shall be charged for all said taps. The fee shall be
established by resolution of the Council. (1998 Code)
7-1-10: WATER RATES:
A. Measurement; Sale By Truckload: All water sold by the City shall be measured by meters furnished
by the City, except water that is sold by the truckload with permission of the City Manager or
Council. (1975 Code § 7-1-10)
B. User Charge:
1. Areas within the West Liberty City limits:
$8.67 per 1,000 gallons, from the effective date of July 1, 2018;
$9.10 per 1,000 gallons, from the effective date of July 1, 2019;
$9.56 per 1,000 gallons, from the effective date of July 1, 2020 and beyond.
2. Areas served outside of the West Liberty City limits:
$13.44 per 1,000 gallons, from the effective date of July 1, 2018;
$14.11 per 1,000 gallons, from the effective date of July 1, 2019;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 103/349
$14.82 per 1,000 gallons, from the effective date of July 1, 2020 and beyond. (Ord. 20170815-
39, 10-3-2017)
C. Funds For Repair And Improvement Of System: One dollar sixty five cents ($1.65) per one
thousand (1,000) gallons billed shall be set aside for use in repairing and/or improving the City
water system. (Ord. 7-85, 11-4-1985, eff. 1-15-1986)
7-1-11: RATE WHEN METER OUT OF ORDER:
Should a water meter need repair or fail to register properly, the consumer will be charged with the
average monthly consumption as shown by the meter when in order for the six (6) months
immediately preceding, or fraction thereof if the same has not been used six (6) months. (1975 Code
§ 7-1-11)
7-1-12: RESPONSIBILITY OF CONSUMER; RIGHT TO SHUT OFF WATER:
All persons taking water shall keep their own service pipes, stopcocks, and apparatus in good repair
and protected from frost and freezing at their own risk and expense, and shall prevent all unnecessary
waste of water. It is expressly stipulated that no claim shall be made against the City by reason of the
breaking of any service pipe or service cock, or if for any cause the supply of water shall fail or from
damage arising from shutting off the water to repair mains, making connections or extensions, or for
any other purpose that may be deemed necessary. The right is hereby reserved to the City to shut off
the supply of water at any time, any permit granted or regulation to the contrary notwithstanding.
(1975 Code § 7-1-12)
7-1-13: TAKING WATER FROM HYDRANTS:
Public property or hydrants erected for the purpose of extinguishing fires are hereby declared to be
public hydrants, and no person except members of the Fire Department or waterworks or persons
specifically authorized by the Chief of Police, and then only in the exercise of authority delegated by
said Chief of Police, shall open any of said hydrants or attempt to draw water from the same, or at any
time attempt to uncover or remove any protection from or in any manner interfere with the same. It
shall be unlawful for any person authorized to open hydrants to delegate his authority to another or let
or suffer another person to take wrenches or tools furnished him, or suffer the same to be taken from
any hose house except for any purpose strictly connected with the Fire Department. (1975 Code § 7-
1-13)
7-1-14: POLICE TO REPORT WASTE OF WATER AND VIOLATIONS:
It shall be the duty of the Chief of Police and all police officers to report to the City Manager all cases
of waste, leakage or unnecessary profusion in the use of water, and all violations of the provisions of
this chapter shall be reported to the Mayor. (1975 Code § 7-1-14)
7-1-15: INTERFERENCE WITH METER:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 104/349
In no case shall any licensed plumber or any other person remove a meter from its setting or interfere
with its reading for any cause unless he shall first obtain permit to do so from the City Manager. (1975
Code § 7-1-15)
7-1-16: RIGHT OF CITY TO SHUT OFF WATER:
The failure of any user of water to comply with any respective provision of this chapter or of title 9,
chapter 4 of this Code shall be sufficient cause for the City to refuse to furnish water to such user
while such failure or delinquency continues, and the City acting through its duly authorized
representatives shall have the right to enter the premises of such user, shut off the water, and remove
meter and meter setting. (1975 Code § 7-1-16)
7-1-17: WATER CONSERVATION PLAN:
A. Declaration And Publication Of Emergency:
1. The City Council may declare a water conservation emergency whenever water supply or water
system facilities are found to be inadequate or whenever there appears to be a substantial and
imminent danger of such inadequacy.
2. A resolution declaring such emergency shall be published for one publication in a newspaper of
general circulation in the City and upon publication shall require compliance with this section by
all persons using water from the water system until by resolution of the Council, the emergency
shall be declared to be terminated.
B. Prohibited And Restricted Uses: The following uses of potable processed water from the Municipal
water system during the water conservation emergency are prohibited:
1. The use of water consuming air conditioning equipment which consumes in excess of five
percent (5%) of the water circulating in such equipment.
2. Watering or irrigation of lawns and all other outside vegetation, except that direct applications of
water not exceeding one inch (1") per week are permitted between the hours of ten o'clock
(10:00) A.M. and six o'clock (6:00) P.M. on flower and vegetable gardens, trees and shrubs less
than four (4) years old, and areas which were newly seeded or sodded prior to issuance of the
emergency resolution.
3. The washing of cars, trucks, trailers, and other mobile vehicles or equipment except at
commercial establishments which provide that service.
4. The cleaning of outdoor surfaces including buildings, sidewalks, driveways, and porches.
5. The nonessential cleaning of commercial and industrial equipment, machinery and interior
spaces.
6. The filling of private swimming pools, wading pools, reflecting pools, ornamental fountains, or
any other structure making similar use of water.
7. Permitting the loss of water through defective plumbing or fixtures, except where the customer
can provide proof of prompt repair of the defect.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 105/349
8. Use by a business or industry of an amount of water exceeding the amount used during the
corresponding month of the preceding year except where the business or industry is declared by
resolution of the Council to be necessary for the public health, safety, and welfare. Where there
is no corresponding period of use or where review is directed by the Council, the City Manager
shall hold a public hearing to determine the allowable use.
Nothing in this section shall prohibit the use of water which has been reclaimed or recycled after
an essential primary use.
C. Rate For Water Used In Violation Of Conservation Emergency: Any person found to be using City
water in violation of this section shall be charged twice the rate which would otherwise apply. This
rate shall apply to all metered service through the service connection used in the violation during
any month that a water conservation emergency is declared by the City Council to exist and during
which the violation has occurred or continued.
D. Effective Upon Publication: This section shall become law upon the publication of same in the local
newspaper. (Ord. 10-88, 9-6-1988)
Chapter 2
PUBLIC AND PRIVATE SEWERAGE SYSTEMS
7-2-1: DEFINITIONS:
Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meanings of terms used in this Chapter shall
be as follows:
ACT: The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, as amended, 33 USC et seq.
ADMINISTRATOR: The Administrator of the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency.
APPROVING AUTHORITY: The Mayor and City Council of the City of West Liberty, acting by and
through the City Manager being their duly authorized agent or representative.
BOD (BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND): The quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical
oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure in five (5) days at twenty degrees
Celsius (20°C) expressed in milligrams per liter.
BUILDING DRAIN: That part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system which receives the
discharge from soil, waste, and other drainage pipes inside the building and conveys it to the building
sewer or other approved point of discharge, beginning five feet (5') (1.5 m) outside the inner face of
the building wall.
BUILDING INSPECTOR: The Building Inspector of the City of West Liberty, or his authorized deputy,
agent or representative as designated by the City Council.
BUILDING SEWER: The extension from the building drain to the public sewer or other place of
disposal.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 106/349
CITY: The City of West Liberty, and any reference to "within the City" shall mean all territory within the
perimeter of the City of West Liberty boundaries.
COMBINED SEWER: A sewer receiving both surface runoff and sewage.
COMPATIBLE POLLUTANTS: Biochemical oxygen demand, suspended solids, pH and fecal coliform
bacteria.
CONTROL MANHOLE: A structure located on a site from which industrial wastes are discharged.
Where feasible, the manhole shall have an interior drop. The purpose of a "control manhole" is to
provide access for a City representative to sample and/or measure discharge.
DIRECTOR: The chief administrative officer of a State water pollution control agency or interstate
agency. In the event responsibility for water pollution control and enforcement is divided among two
(2) or more State or interstate agencies, the term "director" means the administrative officer
authorized to perform the particular procedure to which reference is made.
EASEMENT: An acquired legal right for the specific use of land owned by others.
FEDERAL GRANT: The U.S. government participation in the financing of the construction of treatment
works as provided for by Title II - Grants for Construction of Treatment Works of the Act and
implementing regulations.
FLOATABLE OIL: Oil, fat, or grease in a physical state such that it will separate by gravity from
wastewater by treatment in an approved pretreatment facility. A wastewater shall be considered free
of floatable fat if it is properly pretreated and the wastewater does not interfere with the collection
system.
GARBAGE: Solid wastes from the domestic and commercial preparation, cooking, and dispensing of
food, and from the handling, storage, and sale of produce.
INCOMPATIBLE POLLUTANT: Any pollutant which is not a compatible pollutant as defined in
"compatible pollutants".
INDUSTRIAL WASTE: Any solid, liquid or gaseous substance discharged, permitted to flow, or
escaping from any industrial, manufacturing, commercial or business establishment or process or from
the development, recovery or processing of any natural resource as distinct from sanitary sewage.
MAJOR CONTRIBUTING INDUSTRY: The industrial user of the publicly owned treatment works that:
a) has a flow of fifty thousand (50,000) gallons or more per average work day; b) has a flow greater
than five percent (5%) of the flow carried by the Municipal system receiving the waste; c) has in its
waste, a toxic pollutant in toxic amounts as defined in standards issued under section 307(a) of the
Act; or d) is found by the permit issuance authority, in connection with the issuance of an NPDES
permit to the publicly owned treatment works receiving the waste, to have significant impact, either
singly or in combination with other contributing industries, on that treatment works or upon the quality
of effluent from that treatment works.
MILLIGRAMS PER LITER: A unit of the concentration of water or wastewater constituent. It is onethousandth
(0.001) g of the constituent in one thousand (1,000) ml of water. It has replaced the unit
formerly used commonly, parts per million, to which it is approximately equivalent, in reporting the
results of water and wastewater analysis.
NPDES PERMIT: Any permit or equivalent document or requirements issued by the Administrator, or,
where appropriate by the Director, after enactment of the Federal Water Pollution Control
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 107/349
Amendments of 1972, to regulate the discharge of pollutants pursuant to section 402 of the Act.
NATURAL OUTLET: Any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake, or other body of surface or
ground water.
pH: The logarithm (base 10) of the reciprocal of the hydrogen-ion concentration expressed in grams
per liter of solution. It shall be determined by one of the procedures outlined in Standard Methods.
PPM: Parts per million by weight.
PERSON: Any individual, firm, company, Municipal or private corporation, association, society,
institution, enterprise, governmental agency or other entity.
POPULATION EQUIVALENT: A term used to evaluate the impact of industrial or other waste on a
treatment works or stream. One population equivalent is one hundred (100) gallons of sewage per
day, containing seventeen one-hundredths (0.17) pounds of BOD and twenty one-hundredths (0.20)
pounds of suspended solids. The impact on a treatment works is evaluated as the equivalent of the
highest of the three (3) parameters. Impact on a stream is the higher of the BOD and suspended
solids parameters.
PRETREATMENT: The treatment of wastewaters from sources before introduction into the wastewater
treatment works.
PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE: The wastes from the preparation, cooking, and dispensing of
food that have been shredded to such a degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow
conditions normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than one-half inch (1/2") (1.27
cm) in any dimension.
PUBLIC SEWER: A sewer provided by or subject to the jurisdiction of the City of West Liberty. It shall
also include sewers within or outside the City boundaries that serve one or more persons and
ultimately discharge into the City sanitary or combined sewer system, even though sewers may not
have been constructed with City funds.
REPLACEMENT: Expenditures for obtaining and installing equipment, accessories, or appurtenances
which are necessary during the service life of the treatment works to maintain the capacity and
performance for which such works were designed and constructed. The term "operation and
maintenance" includes replacement.
SANITARY SEWER: A sewer that conveys sewage or industrial wastes or a combination of both, and
into which storm, surface, and ground waters or unpolluted industrial wastes are not intentionally
admitted.
SEWAGE: A combination of the water-carried wastes from residences, business buildings, institutions,
and industrial establishments, together with such ground, surface, and storm waters as may be
present.
SEWAGE TREATMENT PLANT: Any arrangement of devices, structures and equipment for treating
sewage.
SEWAGE WORKS: All facilities for collecting, pumping, treating, and disposing of sewage.
SEWER: A pipe or conduit for conveying sewage or any other waste liquids, including storm, surface
and ground water drainage.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 108/349
SEWERAGE: The system of sewers and appurtenances for the collection, transportation and pumping
of sewage.
SHALL/MAY: "Shall" is mandatory; "may" is permissible.
SLUG: Any discharge of water, sewage, or industrial waste which, in concentration of any given
constituent or in quantity of flow, exceeds for any period of duration longer than fifteen (15) minutes
more than five (5) times the average twenty four (24) hour concentration of flows during normal
operation.
STANDARD METHODS: The examination or analytical procedures set forth in the most recent edition
of "Standard Methods for the Examination of Water, Sewage, and Industrial Wastes", published jointly
by the American Public Health Association, the American Water Works Association and the
Federation of Sewage and Industrial Wastes Associations.
STORM SEWER (Also Called Storm Drain): A sewer that carries storm, surface and ground water
drainage but excludes sewage and industrial wastes other than unpolluted cooling water.
STORM WATER RUNOFF: That portion of the rainfall that is drained into the sewers.
SUPERINTENDENT: The Superintendent of the Municipal sewage works of the City of West Liberty,
or his authorized deputy, agent or representative.
SUSPENDED SOLIDS: Solids that either float on the surface of, or are in suspension in water,
sewage, or industrial waste, and which are removable by a laboratory filtration device. Quantitative
determination of suspended solids shall be in accordance with procedures set forth in "Standard
Methods".
UNPOLLUTED WATER: Water of quality equal to or better than the effluent criteria in effect or water
that would not cause violation of receiving water quality standards and would not be benefited by
discharge to the sanitary sewers and wastewater treatment facilities provided.
WASTEWATER: The spent water of a community. From this standpoint of course, it may be a
combination of the liquids and water-carried wastes from residences, commercial buildings, industrial
plants, and institutions, together with any ground water, surface water, and storm water that may be
present. (Also see Sewage.)
WASTEWATER FACILITIES: The structures, equipment, and processes required to collect, carry
away, and treat domestic and industrial wastes and dispose of the effluent.
WASTEWATER TREATMENT WORKS: An arrangement of devices and structures for treating
wastewater, industrial wastes, and sludge. Sometimes used as synonymous with "waste treatment
plant" or "wastewater treatment plant" or "pollution control plant".
WATERCOURSE: A channel in which a flow of water occurs, either continuously or intermittently.
(Ord. 18-79, 1-2-1980)
7-2-2: USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS REQUIRED:
A. Unlawful Discharge Of Wastes: It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet, watercourse
or storm sewer within the City or in any area under the jurisdiction of the City, any sewage or other
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 109/349
polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with the
following sections.
B. Unlawful Construction Of Sewage Facilities: Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful to
construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool, or other facility intended for the
disposal of sewage.
C. Mandatory Sewer Hookup: The owner of all houses, buildings, or properties used for human
occupancy, employment, recreation, or other purposes, situated within the City and abutting on any
street, alley, or right of way in which there is now located or may in the future be located a public
sanitary or combined sewer of the City, is hereby required at his expense to install suitable toilet
facilities therein, and to connect such facilities directly with the proper public sewer within ninety
(90) days after the official notice to do so; provided, that said public sewer is within two hundred
feet (200') (61 m) of the property line. (Ord. 18-79, 1-2-1980)
7-2-3: PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL:
A. Public Sewer Not Available: Where a public sanitary or combined sewer is not available under the
provisions of subsection 7-2-2C of this Chapter, the building sewer shall be connected to a private
sewage disposal system complying with the provisions of this Section.
B. Permit Required; Application; Fee: Before commencement of construction of a private sewage
disposal system, the owner shall first obtain a written permit signed by the City Manager. The
application for such permit shall be made on a form furnished by the City, which the applicant shall
supplement by any plans, specifications and other information as are deemed necessary by the
City. A permit and inspection fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) shall be paid to the City at the
time the application is filed.
C. Inspection Required: A permit for a private sewage disposal system shall not become effective until
the installation is completed to the satisfaction of the Building Inspector. He shall be allowed to
inspect the work at any stage of construction and, in any event, the applicant for the permit shall
notify the Building Inspector when the work is ready for final inspection, and before any
underground portions are covered. The inspection shall be made within seventy two (72) hours of
the receipt of notice by the Building Inspector.
D. Compliance With State And Local Regulations: The type, capacities, location, and layout of a
private sewage disposal system shall comply with all recommendations of the Iowa State
Department of Health. No permit shall be issued for any private sewage disposal system
employing subsurface soil absorption facilities where the area of the lot is less than fifteen
thousand (15,000) square feet. No septic tank or cesspool shall be permitted to discharge to any
natural outlet.
E. Connect To Public Sewer When Available: At such time as a public sewer becomes available to a
property served by a private sewage disposal system, as provided in subsection 7-2-2C of this
Chapter, a direct connection shall be made to the public sewer within sixty (60) days in compliance
with this Chapter, and any septic tanks, cesspools, and similar private sewage disposal facilities
shall be abandoned, cleaned, and filled with suitable material.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 110/349
F. Operation In Sanitary Manner: The owner shall operate and maintain the private sewage disposal
facilities in a sanitary manner at all times, at no expense to the City.
G. Additional Requirements: No statement contained in this Section shall be construed to interfere
with any additional requirements that may be imposed by the approving authority. (Ord. 18-79, 1-2-
1980)
7-2-4: BUILDING SEWERS AND CONNECTIONS:
A. Permit Required: No unauthorized person shall make any connection with any public sewer, nor
make any excavation in any street or alley for the purpose of making any connection with a public
sewer, or for the purpose of laying any sewer pipe or altering or repairing the same, without first
obtaining a written permit from the City.
B. Permit Classifications; Fees:
1. There shall be two (2) classes of building sewer permits:
a. For residential and commercial services; and
b. For service to establishments producing industrial wastes.
In either case, the owner or his agent shall make application on a special form furnished by
the City. The permit application shall be supplemented by any plans, specifications, or other
information considered pertinent in the judgment of the City. An inspection fee of twenty five
dollars ($25.00) for all nonindustrial users and one hundred dollars ($100.00) for all industrial
users shall be paid to the City at the time the application is filed. This inspection fee is in
addition to the hookup and user charge fees the provisions of which are detailed in
subsequent sections of this Chapter. (Ord. 18-79, 1-2-1980)
2. An additional fee of twenty five dollars ($25.00) will be charged for all inspections required other
than during the regular forty (40) hour work week. (Ord. 18-79, 1-2-1980; amd. 1998 Code)
3. Each excavation for any of the above purposes shall require a separate permit.
4. Any person who makes an excavation, or does any other work without first securing the permit
required by this Chapter shall, in addition to any other penalty imposed by this Chapter, pay to
the Treasurer within twenty four (24) hours of receipt of demand therefor, the sum of one
hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) for the purpose of paying the fees of the Building Inspector. Such
Inspector shall thereupon make an inspection as in other cases. Failure to pay the said sum on
demand as provided shall constitute a separate violation.
C. Cost Borne By Owner: All costs and expenses incidental to the installation and connection of the
building sewer shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify the City for any loss or
damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the building sewer.
D. Prohibited Connections: Every house, store, or other building connected with the public sewer must
have a direct connection therewith. In no case shall two (2) or more buildings be allowed to make
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 111/349
such connections through one pipe. In no case shall a building be connected to the public sewer
through a pipe laid beneath or through property owned by another person. In no case shall any
person be permitted to maintain, without the consent of the approving authority, any sewer
connection connecting a building owned by him to the public sewer across or under the property of
another.
E. Building Sewer Materials; Construction; Fees: The size, slope, alignment, materials of construction
of a building sewer, and the methods to be used in excavating, placing of the pipe, jointing, testing
and backfilling the trench, shall all conform to the requirements of the Building and Plumbing
Codes or other applicable rules and regulations of the City. In the absence of Code provisions or in
amplification thereof, the materials and procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the
ASTM and WPCF Manual of Practice No. 9 shall apply.
1. Existing wyes shall be used to connect building sewers to public sanitary or combined sewers.
Except for lined concrete sanitary sewers, the Building Inspector may approve a sewer tap at a
location where no wye was originally installed. The person making the connection shall make an
opening in the main sewer similar to the interior diameter of the Y branch and then properly
cement and attach a saddle in place. The saddle shall have a suitable curvature to conform to
the outside diameter of the public sewer.
2. A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every building; except where
one building stands at the rear of another on an interior lot and no private sewer is available or
can be constructed to the rear building through an adjoining alley, court yard, or driveway, the
building sewer from the front building may be extended to the rear building and the whole
considered as one building sewer.
3. Every person using the public sewers of the City shall provide such fixtures as will allow a
sufficient quantity of water to flow into the lateral drain or private sewer and shall keep such
private sewer at all times unobstructed.
4. All connections with sewers or drains used for the purpose of carrying off refuse from water
closets, or slops from kitchens, shall be provided with fixtures allowing for sufficient water flow to
properly carry off such matter.
5. Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only when they are found, on
examination and test by the City, to meet all requirements of this Chapter.
6. Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building at an elevation below the
basement floor. In all buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the
public sewer, sanitary sewage carried by such building drain shall be lifted by an approved
means and discharged to the building sewer.
7. No person shall make connection of roof downspouts, interior or exterior foundation drains,
areaway drains, or other sources of surface runoff or ground water to a building sewer or
building drain which in turn is connected directly or indirectly to a public sanitary sewer.
8. The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall conform to the requirements of
the Building and Plumbing Codes or other applicable rules and regulations of the City. Any
deviation from the prescribed procedures and materials must be approved by the Building
Inspector before installation.
9. The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the Building Inspector when the building
sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the public sewer. The connection shall be made
under the supervision of the Building Inspector or his representative.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 112/349
10. Any person filling in an excavation without having first received approval of the Building
Inspector as provided in this Chapter shall, in addition to suffering the fine herein imposed,
expose the sewer for inspection by the Building Inspector at no cost to the City. In any case
where the Inspector finds the work on any sewer not done in a satisfactory manner as herein
provided, he shall serve notice on the person to whom the permit is issued, stating wherein such
work is deficient, and ordering said person to remedy such defect within seventy two (72) hours.
In the event such person fails to comply therewith, the Inspector shall cause such defect to be
corrected at the expense of the person to whom the permit was issued.
The sum of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) as herein provided shall be paid to the City as a
fee for the performance of the Inspector, and it shall be the duty of the Inspector to inspect any
sewer connection or sewer pipe within the City. It shall also be the duty of said Inspector to
inform the approving authority of any violation of this Chapter, and to assist in the prosecution of
offenders.
11. All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately protected with barricades and
lights according to City and State regulations. Streets, sidewalks, parkways and other public
property disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored to its original condition. (Ord. 18-
79, 1-2-1980)
7-2-5: USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS:
A. Storm And Unpolluted Waters Not Allowed: No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged
any storm water, surface water, ground water, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, uncontaminated
cooling water, or unpolluted industrial process waters to any sanitary sewer.
B. Discharge Of Storm And Unpolluted Waters: Storm water and all other unpolluted drainage shall be
discharged to such sewers as are specifically designated as storm sewers, or combined sewers, or
to a natural outlet approved by the City Manager. Industrial cooling water or unpolluted process
waters may be discharged, on approval of the City Manager, to a storm sewer, combined sewer, or
natural outlet.
C. Prohibited Waste:
1. No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged the following described substances,
materials, waters, or wastes if it appears likely in the opinion of the Superintendent that such
wastes can harm either the sewers, sewage treatment process, or equipment, have an adverse
effect on the receiving stream, or otherwise endanger life, limb, public property, or constitute a
nuisance. In forming his opinion as to the acceptability of these waters, the Superintendent will
give consideration to such factors as the quantities of subject wastes in relation to flows and
velocities in the sewers, materials of construction of the sewers, nature of the sewage treatment
process, capacity of the sewage treatment plant, degree of treatability of wastes in the sewage
treatment plant, and other pertinent factors. The substances prohibited are:
a. Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil, or other flammable or explosive liquid, solid, or gas.
b. Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids, or gases in sufficient
quantity, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, to injure or interfere with any sewage
treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, create a public nuisance, or
create any hazard in the receiving waters of the sewage plant, including but not limited to
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 113/349
cyanides in excess of five one-hundredths (0.05) mg/l as CN in the wastes as discharged to
the public sewer.
c. Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than five and five-tenths (5.5) or having any other
corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment, and
personnel of the sewage works.
d. Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of such size capable of causing obstruction to the
flow in sewers, or other interference with the proper operation of the sewage works such as,
but not limited to, ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar,
plastics, woods, unground garbage, whole blood, paunch manure, hair and fleshings, entrails
and paper dishes, cups, milk containers, etc., either whole or ground by garbage grinders.
e. Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than one hundred fifty degrees Fahrenheit
(150°F) (65°C).
f. Any water or waste containing fats, wax, grease, or oils, whether emulsified or not, in excess
of seventy five (75) mg/l or containing substances which may solidify or become viscous at
temperatures between thirty two degrees Fahrenheit and one hundred fifty degrees
Fahrenheit (32°F and 150°F) (0°C and 65°C).
Fats, oil and grease, etc., can be analytically separated into polar and nonpolar components.
Those materials of a mineral or petroleum origin (nonpolar components) in excess of seventy
five (75) mg/l shall not be allowed. Those materials of an animal and vegetable origin (polar
components) may be allowed in the sewerage system, if they do not in the opinion of the
Superintendent hinder or harm the operation of the treatment plant, sewers, equipment, or
have an adverse affect on the receiving stream. Any concentration of polar components above
one hundred (100) mg/l shall be billed as described in Section 7-2-7 of this Chapter,
"Wastewater Service Charges".
g. Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. The installation and operation of any
garbage grinder equipped with a motor of three-fourths (3/4) horsepower and seventy six onehundredths
(0.76) horsepower metric or greater shall be subject to the review and approval of
the City Manager.
h. Any waters or wastes containing strong acid iron pickling wastes, or concentrated plating
solutions whether neutralized or not.
i. The maximum acceptable concentration of certain substances in the waste discharged to the
City sewers shall be as follows:
Waste Or Chemical Concentration (mg/l)
Arsenic (total) 0.25
Barium (total) 2.0
Boron 1.0
Cadmium (total) 0.15
Chromium (total hexavalent) 0.3
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 114/349
Chromium (total trivalent) 1.0
Copper (total) 1.0
Fluoride (total) 2.5
Iron (total) 2.0
Iron (dissolved) 0.5
Lead (total) 0.1
Manganese (total) 1.0
Mercury (total) 0.0005
Nickel (total) 1.0
Selenium (total) 1.0
Silver 0.1
Zinc (total) 1.0
Any other wastes or substances not enumerated above being similar objectionable or toxic
substances or wastes exerting an excessive chlorine requirement of such degree that any
such material received in the composite sewage of the sewage treatment works exceeding
the requirements of the State, Federal or other public agencies or jurisdiction for such
discharge to the receiving waters.
The City may also, upon notice to any person, require the lowering of any chemical contents
of any substances discharged into the City sewer which injures the treatment process of the
City.
j. The maximum acceptable concentrate of phenols in waste discharged to the City sewer shall
be three-tenths (0.3) mg/l.
k. Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half life or concentration as may exceed limits
established by the City Manager in compliance with applicable State or Federal regulations.
l. Any waters or wastes having a pH in excess of nine and five-tenths (9.5).
m. Materials which exert or cause:
(1) Unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids (such as, but not limited to, fuller's earth,
lime slurries, and lime residues) or of dissolved solids (such as, but not limited to, sodium
chloride and sodium sulfate).
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 115/349
(2) Excessive discoloration (such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning
solutions).
(3) Unusual BOD, chemical oxygen demand, or chlorine requirements in such quantities as to
constitute a significant load on the sewage treatment works.
(4) Unusual volume of flow or concentration of wastes constituting "slugs" as defined herein.
n. Waters or wastes containing substances which are not amenable to treatment or reduction by
the sewage treatment processes employed, or amenable to treatment only to such degree that
the sewage treatment plant effluent cannot meet the requirements of other agencies having
jurisdiction over discharge to the receiving waters.
o. All exhaust from steam engines and all blow offs from steam boilers shall be first connected
with a proper catch basin, and shall not be allowed to connect directly with the public sewers
without special permission from the approving authority.
p. Any waters or wastes having:
(1) A five (5) day BOD greater than three hundred (300) parts per million by weight, or
(2) Containing more than three hundred fifty (350) parts per million by weight of suspended
solids, or
(3) Having an average daily flow greater than two percent (2%) of the average sewage flow of
the City, shall be subject to the review of the City.
2. Where necessary in the opinion of the City, the owner shall provide, at his expense, such
preliminary treatment as may be necessary to:
a. Reduce the biochemical oxygen demand to three hundred (300) parts per million by weight, or
b. Reduce the suspended solids to three hundred fifty (350) parts per million by weight, or
c. Control the quantities and rates of discharge of such waters or wastes. Plans, specifications,
and any other pertinent information relating to proposed preliminary treatment facilities shall
be submitted for the review of the City and no construction of such facilities shall be
commenced until said review is obtained in writing. (Ord. 12-80, 12-16-1980)
D. Illicit Discharge:
1. Source Of Sewage To Be Treated: Any raw influent that originates outside of Wapsinonoc
Township located in Muscatine County, Iowa is prohibited without the express written consent of
the West Liberty City Council.
2. Trucking And Hauling: The trucking and hauling of raw influent for the purpose of adding waste
into the West Liberty sanitary sewer system from an industrial source is also prohibited without
the express written consent of the West Liberty City Council.
3. Fines: Violation of this subsection D will be subject to fines that are specified in section 7-2-17,
"Penalties", of this chapter. (Ord. 2008-04, 8-19-2008)
7-2-6: POWERS AND AUTHORITY OF INSPECTORS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 116/349
A. Inspection: The City Manager and other duly authorized employees of the City, the Iowa
Department of Environmental Quality and the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency bearing
proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all properties for the purposes of
inspection, observation, measurements, sampling, and testing in accordance with the provisions of
this chapter. The City Manager or his representatives shall have no authority to inquire into any
processes including metallurgical, chemical, oil, refining, ceramic, paper, or other industries
beyond that point having a direct bearing on the kind and source of discharge to the sewers or
waterways or facilities for waste treatment.
B. Inspection On Easements: The City Manager and other duly authorized employees of the City, the
Iowa Department of Environmental Quality and the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, bearing
proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all private properties through which
the City holds a duly negotiated easement for the purposes of, but not limited to, inspection,
observation, measurement, sampling, repair, and maintenance of any portion of the sewage works
lying within said easement. All entry, and subsequent work, if any, on said easement, shall be done
in full accordance with the terms of the duly negotiated easement pertaining to the private property
involved.
C. Hold Harmless Agreement: While performing the necessary work on private properties referred to
in subsection A of this section, the City Manager or duly authorized employees of the City shall
observe all safety rules applicable to the premises established by the company and the company
shall be held harmless for injury or death to the City employees and the City shall indemnify the
company against loss or damage to its property by City employees and against liability claims and
demands for personal injury or property damage asserted against the company and growing out of
the gauging and sampling operation, except as such may be caused by negligence or failure of the
company to maintain safe conditions as required in section 7-2-12 of this chapter. (Ord. 18-79, 1-2-
1980)
7-2-7: WASTEWATER SERVICE CHARGES:
A. Purpose Of Wastewater Service Charge: The purpose of the wastewater service charge is to
collect equitable operating, maintenance, plant depreciation, replacement costs, and debt service,
as necessitated by the collection, conveyance, treatment and disposal of wastewater from
residential, commercial, public or industrial users into the sewers or wastewater facilities of the
sewerage system.
B. Basis For Wastewater Service Charge:
1. The basic method for determining the equitable charge to the users for the cost to the sewerage
system for handling, treating and disposing of wastewater shall consist of a basic user charge for
operation and maintenance plus depreciation and replacement, a debt service charge plus
capital improvement, and a surcharge, if applicable.
2. The wastewater service charge shall be based on water usage as recorded by water meters
and/or wastewater meters for wastes having the following normal concentrations:
a. A five (5) day, twenty degree Celsius (20°C) biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) of two
hundred milligrams per liter (200 mg/L).
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 117/349
b. A suspended solids concentration of two hundred forty milligrams per liter (240 mg/L).
c. An oil and grease concentration (polar components) of less than one hundred milligrams per
liter (100 mg/L).
3. The wastewater service charge shall be computed by estimating the projected revenue required
to operate and maintain the sewerage system, including replacement and depreciation and a
debt service charge including capital improvement, for the next fiscal year. Proportion the
estimated costs to the wastewater facility categories of volume, BOD, suspended solids, and
customer. Estimate wastewater volume, BOD, suspended solids, and customer.
4. Surcharge costs will be based on wastewater strength in excess of normal wastewater strength
for BOD and suspended solids. A surcharge will be levied to all users whose wastewater
exceeds the two hundred milligrams per liter (200 mg/L) and two hundred forty milligrams per
liter (240 mg/L) concentration for BOD and suspended solids respectively; an oil and grease
concentration (polar components) over one hundred milligrams per liter (100 mg/L), an oil and
grease concentration (polar components) over four hundred milligrams per liter (400 mg/L), and
an oil and grease concentration over seven hundred milligrams per liter (700 mg/L).
C. Measurement Of Flow:
1. The volume of flow used for computing wastewater service charges shall be the metered water
consumption read to the nearest one thousand (1,000) gallons.
2. If the person discharging wastes into the public sewers procures any part, or all, of his water
from sources other than the public waterworks system, all or part of which is discharged into the
public sewers, the person shall install and maintain, at his expense, water meters of a type
approved by the approving authority for the purpose of determining the volume of water obtained
from these other sources.
3. Devices for measuring the volume of waste discharged may be required by the approving
authority if these volumes cannot otherwise be determined from the metered water consumption
records.
4. Metering devices for determining the volume of waste shall be installed, owned, and maintained
by the person. Following approval and installation, such meters may not be removed without the
consent of the approving authority.
D. Wastewater Service Charges:
1. Each nonindustrial or industrial user of the sewerage system shall be subject to wastewater
service charges based on the volume of wastewater, BOD, and suspended solids content of the
wastewater. (Ord. 12-80, 12-16-1980)
2. a. Within The West Liberty City Limits: For each user, the wastewater service charge for a
monthly period will be as follows for normal strength wastewater.
$20.26 per monthly bill from the effective date hereof through July 1, 2018 plus
$22.18 per monthly bill effective July 1, 2018, plus
$5.22 per 1,000 gallons, from the effective date hereof through July 1, 2018;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 118/349
$5.72 per 1,000 gallons, from July 1, 2018 and beyond.
b. Outside Of The West Liberty City Limits: For each user, the rate structure for the sewer will be
as follows outside of the City limits for residential customers:
$29.38 per monthly bill, from the effective date hereof through July 1, 2018, plus
$32.17 per monthly bill, effective July 1, 2018, plus
$5.90 per 1,000 gallons, from the effective date hereof through July 1, 2018;
$6.49 per 1,000 gallons, from July 1, 2018 and beyond. (Ord. 20170815-40, 10-3-2017)
3. The approving authority or its representative shall have the right to waive the requirement of
required wastewater test data from each user. However, if it is suspected that the user is
contributing a waste with a toxic pollutant in toxic amounts, or prohibited wastes as described in
section 7-2-5 of this chapter, or a high organic load to the treatment facilities, the approving
authority shall have the right to require the user to provide laboratory test data as directed by the
approving authority. (Ord. 12-80, 12-16-1980)
4. The wastewater service charge for normal strength wastewater shall be calculated as follows:
WSC = MC + V(UC)
Where:
WSC = Amount of wastewater service charge ($) per billing period
MC = Minimum charge per customer per billing period
V = Wastewater volume in thousand gallons per billing period
UC = Unit charge for wastewater volume
(Ord. 10-93, 12-7-1993)
5. For wastewater with waste constituents higher than those specified above, the user charges
shall be computed according to the following formula:
WSC = UF + V(G) + B(A) + D(C) + F(E)
Where WSC, and V, are defined above
UF = A fixed user fee, per billing period
A = Unit charge for BOD, in dollars per pound BOD
B = The pounds of BOD discharged/billing period
C = Unit charge for suspended solids, dollars per pound SS
D = The pounds of TSS discharged/billing period
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 119/349
E = Unit charge for total Kiehldal nitrogen (TKN), dollars per pound. TKN
F = The pounds of TKN discharged/billing period
G = Unit charge for wastewater volume, dollars per 1,000 gallons
Where the following charges shall apply:
FY 17-18 FY 18-19
UF $20.26 $22.18
A 0.68 0.74
C 0.73 0.80
E 1.53 1.68
G 2.32 2.54
(Ord. 10-93, 12-7-1993; amd. Ord. 2008-02, 3-4-2008; Ord. 20170815-40, 10-3-2017)
6. Any user which discharges any toxic pollutants which cause an increase in the cost of managing
the effluent or the sludge from the City's treatment works, or any user which discharges any
substances causing identifiable increases in the cost of operation, maintenance, depreciation, or
replacement of the treatment works, shall pay for such increased costs. The charge to each user
shall be as determined by the Superintendent and approved by the City Council.
E. Billing Period: The billing period for each user shall be monthly.
F. Payment: Said rates or charges for services shall be payable monthly. The owner of the premises,
the occupant thereof and the user of the service shall be jointly and severally liable to pay for the
service on such premises, and the service is furnished to the premises by the City, only upon the
condition that the owner of the premises, occupant and user of the service are jointly and severally
liable therefor to the City. All bills for service shall be rendered as of the first day of the month
succeeding the period for which the service is billed, and shall be payable within fifteen (15) days
after rendition thereof. If payment of the full amount of the bill is not made within said period, then a
penalty of five percent (5%) of the amount of the bill shall be added thereto.
G. Delinquency: In the event the charges for service are not paid within sixty (60) days after rendition
of the bill for such monthly service, such charges shall be deemed and are hereby declared to be
delinquent, and thereafter such delinquencies shall constitute liens upon the real estate for which
such service is supplied, and the City Clerk is hereby authorized to file sworn statements showing
such delinquencies in the Office of the Recorder of Deeds of Muscatine County, and the filing of
such statements in such office shall be deemed notice for the payment of such charges for such
service.
H. Discontinuance Of Service:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 120/349
1. In the event of failure to pay sewer user charges after they become delinquent, the City shall
have the right to remove or close sewer connections and enter upon the property for
accomplishing such purposes.
2. The expense of such removal or closing, as well as the expenses of restoring service, shall
likewise be a debt due to the City, and a lien upon property, and may be removed by civil action
in the name of the City against the property owner, the person, or both.
I. Restoration Of Service: Sewer service shall not be reinstated until all past due bills, including
penalties, removal or closing, and restoration are paid in full, together with a payment made of
fifteen dollars ($15.00) for reinstating such service.
J. Special Contract Available For Industrial Waste: No statements contained in this section shall be
construed as preventing any special contract or arrangement between the City and any person
whereby any nonpermanent industrial waste of unusual strength or character may be accepted by
the City for treatment subject to payment therefor by the industrial concern in accordance with the
provisions of the user charge ordinance.
K. Duties Of City:
1. It is hereby made the duty of the City Clerk to render bills for service and for all rates and
charges in connection therewith and to collect all monies due thereon.
2. All revenues and monies derived from the operation of the sewerage system shall be held by the
City separate and apart from his private funds and separate and apart from all other funds of the
City, and all of said sum, without any deductions whatever, shall be delivered to the City
Treasurer not more than ten (10) days after receipt of the same, or at such more frequent
intervals as may from time to time be directed by the Mayor and City Council.
3. The City Treasurer shall receive all such revenues from the sewerage system and all other
funds and monies incident to the operation of such system as the same may be delivered to him
and deposit the same in a separate fund designated as the "City of West Liberty Sewer Utility
Fund", and said Treasurer shall administer such Fund in every respect in the manner provided
by the provisions of the Iowa Municipal Code and all laws amendatory thereof and
supplementary thereto.
4. The City Manager shall establish a proper system of accounts and shall keep proper books, and
records and accounts, in which complete and correct entries shall be made of all transactions
relative to the sewerage system, and at regular annual intervals he shall cause to be made an
audit by an independent auditing concern of the books to show the receipts and disbursements
of the sewerage system.
Revenues generated by the user charge system shall be set aside in separate accounts and
applied toward the payment of operation and maintenance and replacement expenses of the
treatment works, and to pay principal, interest and other requirements of revenue bonds issued
by the City. At least two (2) separate accounts must be established as follows:
Operation and maintenance accounts for the specific purpose of defraying operation and
maintenance costs (excluding replacement) of the treatment works. (Ord. 12-80, 12-16-1980)
5. Fiscal year end balances in the primary accounts set forth above shall be carried over to the
same accounts in the subsequent fiscal year, and shall be used for no other purposes than those
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 121/349
designated for these accounts. Monies which have been transferred from other sources to meet
temporary shortages in West Liberty Sewer Utility Fund shall be returned to their respective
accounts upon appropriate adjustments of user charge rates. The user charge rate(s) shall be
adjusted such that the transferred monies will be returned to their respective accounts within the
fiscal year following the fiscal year in which the monies were borrowed.
6. The City will review the user charge system at least annually and revise user charge rates as
necessary to ensure that the system generates adequate revenues to pay the cost of operation
and maintenance, including replacement, and that the system continues to provide for the
proportional distribution of operation and maintenance, including replacement costs, among
users and user classes.
7. The City will notify each user at least annually, in conjunction with a regular bill, of the rate being
charged for operation and maintenance including replacement of the treatment works.
8. A copy of this Chapter, properly certified by the City Clerk, shall be filed in the office of the
Recorder of Deeds of Muscatine County and shall be deemed notice to all owners of real estate
of their liability for service supplied to any user of the service of the sewerage system of the City
on their properties. (Ord. 12-80, 12-16-1980; amd. Ord. 10-93, 12-7-1993)
7-2-8: SPECIAL RATES AND EXCEPTIONS:
Where, in the judgment of the City Council, special conditions surrounding the use of City water to the
extent that the application of the service charges, rates or rentals as specified herein would be
inequitable and unfair to the City, the Council may establish a special rate applying to such
contributors. Such special rates, when adopted by ordinance of the Council, shall apply to all
contributors to the sanitary utilities of the City under like circumstances. Special rates may include,
among others, the following cases:
A. Where the nature of the use of City water is such that the resulting sewage or industrial waste
discharged into the sanitary sewer system of the City has characteristics making it more difficult to
treat than ordinary domestic waste.
B. Where privately produced water supplies are discharged directly or indirectly into the sanitary
sewer system of the City, the service charges, rates or rentals shall be on an equal basis as
possible with the rates which are applied to an equal quantity and character of waste originating
through the use of City water. (1975 Code § 7-2-10)
7-2-9: DELETERIOUS WASTE:
If any waters or wastes are discharged, or are proposed to be discharged to the public sewers, which
waters contain the substances or possess the characteristics enumerated in section 13.1, State of
Iowa Plumbing Code, and which in the judgment of the Superintendent, may have a deleterious effect
upon the sewage works, processes, equipment or receiving waters, or which otherwise create a
hazard to life or constitute a public nuisance, the Superintendent may:
A. Reject the wastes.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 122/349
B. Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to the public sewers.
C. Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge.
D. Require the violator to cease and desist any discharging of said materials into the sewer system
immediately. (1975 Code § 7-2-11)
7-2-10: GREASE, OIL AND SAND INTERCEPTORS:
Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion of the Superintendent, they
are necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing grease in excessive amounts, or any
flammable wastes, sand or other harmful ingredients; except that such interceptors shall not be
required for private living quarters or dwelling units. All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity
approved by the Superintendent, and shall be located as to be readily and easily accessible for
cleaning and inspection. (1975 Code § 7-2-12)
7-2-11: PRE-DISCHARGE FACILITIES MAINTENANCE:
Where preliminary treatment or flow equalizing facilities are provided for any waters or wastes, they
shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective operation by the owner at his expense.
(1975 Code § 7-2-13)
7-2-12: CONTROL MANHOLE:
Each industry shall be required to install a control manhole, and when required by the Superintendent,
the owner of any property serviced by an existing building sewer carrying industrial or commercial
wastes shall install a suitable control manhole, together with such necessary meters and other
appurtenances in the building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling, and measurement of the
wastes. Such manhole, when required, shall be accessibly and safely located, and shall be
constructed in accordance with plans approved by the Superintendent. The manhole shall be installed
by the owner at his expense, and shall be maintained by him so as to be safe and accessible at all
times. (1975 Code § 7-2-14)
7-2-13: MEASUREMENTS, TESTS, ANALYSES:
A. Standard Methods Of Measurement: All measurements, tests, and analyses of the characteristics
of waters and wastes to which reference is made in this Chapter shall be determined in
accordance with the latest edition of "Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Waste
Water", published by the American Public Health Association, or methods approved by the Illinois
Environmental Protection Agency or "Manual of Laboratory Methods for Sewage Plants" published
by the Illinois Department of Public Health. Substances shall be determined at the control manhole
provided, or upon suitable samples taken at said control manhole. Sampling shall be carried out by
customarily accepted methods to reflect the effect of constituents upon the sewage works and to
determine the existence of hazards to life, limb, and property. (The particular analyses involved will
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 123/349
determine whether a 24-hour composite of all outfalls of a premises is appropriate or whether a
grab sample or samples should be taken.) Normally, but not always, BOD and suspended solids
analyses are obtained from twenty four (24) hour composites of all outfalls whereas pHs are
determined from periodic grab samples.
B. Violations To Be Metered: Any person discharging wastes having concentrations greater than the
"normal" concentrations as set forth herein shall upon notification by the approving authority install
a composite sampler with a compatible pacing (metering) device for monitoring said substances.
The pacing and sampling devices shall be of a type approved by the Superintendent. (1975 Code
§ 7-2-15)
7-2-14: PROTECTION FROM DAMAGE:
No unauthorized person shall maliciously, wilfully, or negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover,
deface, or tamper with any structure, appurtenance, or equipment which is a part of the sewage
works. Any person violating this provision shall be subject to immediate arrest under charge of
disorderly conduct. (1975 Code § 7-2-16)
7-2-15: CHARGES APPLIED TO RETIREMENT OF BONDS:
All revenues collected from service charges, rates or rentals shall be used in payment of the cost of
operation, maintenance, repair or expansion of the sanitary utilities and the retirement of bonds issued
therefor and the interest accruing on such bonds. (1975 Code § 7-2-17)
7-2-16: DRAINAGE INTO PUBLIC SEWER OR DISPOSAL TANKS:
No water closet, cesspool, sink, laundry or stable drain shall open into any street or alley, ditch or
stream, nor into any drain except into the public sewer of the City or into disposal tanks equipped with
filters that are of ample area. (1975 Code § 6-1-6)
7-2-17: PENALTIES:
A. Notice Of Violation: Any person found to be violating any provision of this Chapter except Section
7-2-14 hereof shall be served notice by the City with written notice stating the nature of the
violation and providing a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory correction thereof. The offender
shall, within the period of time stated in such notice, permanently cease all violations. The City may
revoke any permit for sewage disposal as a result of any violation of any provision of this Chapter.
(Ord. 18-79, 1-2-1980)
B. Continuance Of Violation; Penalty Imposed: Any person who shall continue any violation beyond
the time limit provided for in this Section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction
thereof, shall be subject to penalty as provided in Section 1-4-1 of this Code. Each day in which
such violation shall continue shall be deemed a separate offense. (Ord. 18-79, 1-2-1980; amd.
1998 Code)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 124/349
C. Liability For Expense, Loss Or Damage: Any person violating any provision of this Chapter shall
become liable to the City for any expense, loss, or damage occasioned by the City by reason of
the violation. (Ord. 18-79, 1-2-1980)
Chapter 3
ELECTRICAL DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM
7-3-1: CONTROL OF PLANT AND SYSTEM:
The electric generating plant and distribution system of the City shall at all times be under the control
of the City Council, with general supervision of said plant and distribution system vested in the City
Manager. The City Manager shall at all times keep the Council apprised of the general condition of the
generating plant and distribution system and the general policies, rules and regulations of the
management of said plant and system. (1975 Code § 7-3-1)
7-3-2: MANAGEMENT BY SUPERINTENDENT:
The responsibility for the maintenance of the electric system shall be vested in the Superintendent of
the Municipal Light Plant, who shall be in active charge of and have the entire management of the
electric generating and distribution facilities of the City, including the inspection and installation of
electrical facilities and the extensions, replacement or repair of the distribution system, together with
all tools, buildings and other property and equipment connected with the electric system; subject,
however, to the supervision of the City Manager and the control of the City Council as provided in
Section 7-3-1 of this Chapter. (1975 Code § 7-3-2; amd. 1998 Code)
7-3-3: DUTIES OF CLERK:
The clerical department of the electric system shall be under the charge of the City Clerk. He shall be
responsible for the collection of bills and accounts and shall receive all money therefor and remit the
same to the City Treasurer. He shall keep an accurate account of all receipts and disbursements of
electric funds and shall perform such other duties in the management of the electric system as may be
required or directed by the City Council. (1975 Code § 7-3-3)
7-3-4: DUTIES OF TREASURER:
The City Treasurer shall keep a separate account, to be known as the Utilities Fund, to which he shall
credit all receipts of monies received on account of the electric system. All disbursements in
connection with the management and operation of the electric system shall be paid out of the Utilities
Fund as requested by the City Clerk. (1975 Code § 7-3-4)
7-3-5: SALE OF ELECTRIC CURRENT:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 125/349
All electric current sold by the City shall be measured by meters furnished by the City. Before any
current shall be furnished by the City, a meter shall be installed as herein provided. All electric current
shall be sold by meter, and each house, business or separate dwelling unit shall be equipped with a
separate meter. Multiple housing structures will be required to install separate meters for each
separate dwelling unit, unless the owner pays the total electric bill. (1975 Code § 7-3-5)
7-3-6: METER READING:
The reading of all electric meters shall be coordinated by the Superintendent of the Municipal Light
Plant. (1998 Code)
7-3-7: NO GUARANTY OF SERVICE:
The City does not guarantee a constant supply of electrical energy to any consumer and shall not be
liable for any damages for failure to supply same. (1975 Code § 7-3-7)
7-3-8: RENEWAL OF SERVICE; CHARGE:
The City may, upon reasonable notice by a customer, make temporary disconnections for the
customer's convenience. The customer shall be required to pay a fee for disconnection or for
reconnection, or both, as established by resolution of the City Council. If services are disconnected
due to nonpayment of a bill, a cost per hour fee shall be charged based on the rate of pay of the
employee, established rental rates for any equipment required, and costs of fringe benefits paid for
said employee. (1998 Code)
7-3-9: LOCATION OF METERS IN DWELLINGS:
All meters in dwelling houses shall be placed on the first floor in a location easily accessible for the
reading thereof. In all cases where such meters are not so located, the Superintendent of the
Municipal light plant shall disconnect the service and such service shall not be connected again until
the meter is placed in a position satisfactory to the Superintendent of the Municipal light plant. (1975
Code § 7-3-9; amd. 1998 Code)
7-3-10: ELECTRIC LIGHT AND POWER RATES:
The City Council herewith adopts new electric rates and herewith sets forth the following electric rate
schedule to be effective January 15, 2016. Said rates to be billed with the billing due in February
based on the January 15, 2016 readings.
City of West Liberty electric rates for each month for the use of electricity from the Municipal electric
system shall be as follows:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 126/349
A. Residential Customers: This schedule is available to any residential customer with a permanent
residence at a point on the Municipal utility's existing secondary distribution lines within the area
served by the Municipal utility.
New Rate
Customer facility charge $15.00
Plus energy charge (kWh):
For all kWh 10.31¢/kWh
B. Commercial Consumers: This schedule is available to any commercial customer using standard
electric service for lighting, power and/or other incidental service on one meter and one service at
a point on the Municipal utility's existing secondary distribution lines within the area served by the
Municipal utility.
120 volt single phase, 120/240 volt 3-phase 3-wire delta, 120/208 volt 3-phase 4-wire wye, shall be
available at this rate schedule.
New Rate
Customer facility charge $50.00
Plus energy charge (kWh):
For all kWh 9.35¢/kWh
C. Commercial Consumers-Minimal Use: This schedule is available to any commercial customer using
standard electric service for lighting, power and/or other incidental service on one meter and one
service at a point on the Municipal utility's existing secondary distribution lines within the area
served by the Municipal utility and shall have a total monthly consumption of one hundred kilowatts
per hour (100 kWh) or less and based on historical use of the account and user. At any time should
the usage exceed on more than one occasion within a six (6) month billing cycle the rate will be
automatically adjusted to the standard commercial customer rate structure to be reviewed the
following six (6) month cycle. This does not apply to vacant retail store space or storefronts.
New Rate
Customer facility charge $15.00
Plus energy charge (kWh):
For all kWh 9.35¢/kWh
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 127/349
D. Large Industrial Consumers: This schedule is available to any commercial customer using standard
electric service for lighting, power and/or other incidental service on one meter and one service at
a point on the Municipal utility's existing secondary distribution lines within the area served by the
Municipal utility. Customers using this schedule shall have any total measured demand.
New Rate
Customer facility charge $100.00
Monthly demand charge (kW) 10.52/kW
Plus energy (kWh):
For all kWh 6.64¢/kWh
E. Security Lights: For each customer who signs an agreement of at least one year, the monthly
charge shall be six dollars ($6.00), plus one dollar ($1.00), if the City furnishes the pole. The light
shall be a 100-watt high pressure sodium fixture.
F. PEI: All energy charges, above stated, are subject to a cost of purchased energy index (PEI), as
hereinafter stated:
1. These rates are based upon a cost of purchased energy index of $0.067 per kWh, and shall be
increased or decreased by a purchased power adjustment equal to the amount by which the
average cost of power sold in the preceding three (3) purchase billing periods by the West
Liberty Municipal utility is greater or less than $0.067 per kWh. The cost of power sold used in
determining the purchased energy index (PEI) shall include repair and maintenance costs
incurred to generating equipment at the Municipal power plant.
2. These rates are based upon a power factor of not less than ninety percent (90%) lagging.
Demand charges shall be increased one and one-half percent (11/2%) for each one percent
(1%) by which the customer's power factor is less than ninety percent (90%) lagging. The City
shall have the right to install, at the expense of the customer, any facilities necessary to bring the
customer's power factor to not less than ninety percent (90%) lagging, or to require the customer
to install such facilities within sixty (60) days after receiving notice to do so.
3. The billing demand shall be the sum of the highest 15-minute demand.
4. The non-energy operating expenses shall be reviewed annually by the City. Any percent change
(increase or decrease) in the total non-energy operating expenses charges, based on the latest
fiscal year audit, shall be passed directly to all bills rendered upon acceptance of the latest fiscal
year audit report. This adjustment shall be no more than three percent (3%).
5. The utility may supply large power service pursuant to provisions of a written contract.
6. For all non-demand metered rates, the charges are subject to an annual operations adjustment.
Commencing with the first billing date for each customer after June 30th of each year, there shall
be a three percent (3%) increase to the customer service charge and a three percent (3%)
increase to the difference between the energy charge and the base energy charge of $0.067 per
kWh as defined in the PEI.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 128/349
7. For all demand metered rates, the charges are subject to an annual operations adjustment.
Commencing with the first billing date for each customer after June 30th of each year, there shall
be a three percent (3%) increase to the customer service charge and a three percent (3%)
increase to the difference, if positive, between the energy charge per kWh and a demand
metered base energy charge between the energy charge and the base energy charge of $0.067
per kWh as defined in the PEI.
G. Adjustments: The cost of purchased energy index as stipulated in subsection F1 of this section
may be adjusted upward or downward, by adding or deducting the like amount to the electric
energy rates in this section, to provide the net effect that the amended rates will have no additional
costs added or deducted due to the cost of purchased energy index, for the next succeeding billing
period, when such action is deemed advisable by the City.
H. Effective Date: This section shall be in full force and effective beginning January 15, 2016. All
electric bills due on that date and thereafter to be payable monthly and based so far as possible
upon monthly readings by a duly authorized representative of the City of West Liberty, Iowa. (Ord.
20151117-10, 12-15-2015)
7-3-11: PAYMENT OF BILLS; DELINQUENCIES:
A. Payable Monthly; Late Penalty: All sums due the City for electric light and power service shall be
payable monthly at the City Hall. Said bills will be due the first of each month and become
delinquent if unpaid on the sixteenth of each month. A penalty of five percent (5%) will be added to
all delinquent bills. (1975 Code § 7-3-11)
B. Delinquency Cause For Removal Of Meter; Fee For Reinstallation: Nonpayment of a delinquent bill
after the twenty third of the month will be sufficient cause for the City to remove the meter or
meters and a charge as set by resolution of the City Council will be made to reinstall such meters.
(1975 Code § 7-3-12; amd. 1998 Code)
7-3-12: SEPARATE INDIVIDUAL CONTRACTS:
A. Council Action: The City Council is hereby authorized to enter into separate contracts for the
furnishing of electrical power and services to individual consumers. Said contracts must be in
writing, and must be approved by a majority of the members of the whole Council.
B. Excepted From Chapter Provisions: Consumers with whom such agreement has been made shall
not be subject to the terms of the foregoing provisions of this chapter. (1975 Code § 7-3-14)
7-3-13: APPLICATION FOR SERVICE; DEPOSIT:
Before any electric service shall be furnished by the City, the prospective customer shall file an
application in writing to the City. A separate application for each service class and/or service location
shall be filed and approved prior to providing the service requested.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 129/349
A. Customer Deposits: A deposit as herein provided shall be required for each service connection
requested by a customer. The City shall, at its discretion, require a customer with an unsatisfactory
credit rating to provide a deposit sufficient to guarantee payment of bills for service. However, no
residential customer shall be disconnected during the period of November 1 to April 1 of any year
due to nonpayment of a deposit. (1975 Code § 7-3-15)
1. When existing electric customers move or relocate to a new premises within the City and have
had no delinquent utility bill for twelve (12) months prior to the move or relocation, the deposit
requirement may be waived by the Utility Billing Supervisor.
2. When new customers or when existing electric customers move or relocate to a new premises
within the City and have had delinquent bills within the last twelve (12) months, a deposit shall
be required. Deposit shall be calculated by the Utility Billing Supervisor and shall be not less
than forty dollars ($40.00) for residential customers and eighty dollars ($80.00) for commercial
customers. Deposits for electric heating service shall be at least two (2) times the nonelectric
heating deposit.
a. Construction Electric Service: Requests for construction electric service shall be by written
application and a deposit of forty dollars ($40.00) for each project shall be required from new
contractors who have not established credit with the City. Contractors with prior credit will be
exempt from the deposit requirement at the discretion of the Utility Billing Supervisor. (1975
Code § 7-3-15; amd. 1998 Code)
b. Permanent Service Connection: When construction electric service is removed and a
permanent service is connected, the owner/tenant shall be responsible for the regular deposit
as set forth in subsections A1 and A2 of this section.
B. Amount Of Deposit: Deposits shall not be less than forty dollars ($40.00) or more in amount than
the maximum estimated charge for service for two (2) consecutive billing periods or ninety (90)
days, whichever is less, or as may be reasonably required for service for short periods or special
occasions. A delinquent deposit shall be subject to late payment penalties normally accruing to an
unpaid bill.
C. Deposit Receipt: A receipt shall be given for all such deposits. If such receipt shall be lost, a
duplicate may be issued if the customer will provide adequate identification for the city.
D. Refund Of Deposit: All such deposits shall be refunded at the request of the customer after twelve
(12) consecutive months of prompt payment, or without request by the customer after thirty six (36)
consecutive months of prompt payment. these times may be extended when the city has evidence
that continued retention of such deposit is required to ensure payment of bills for service. Refund
will be made upon discontinuance of service due to customer's moving from the city's service area.
(1975 Code § 7-3-15)
E. Interest On Deposit: Simple interest at a rate equal to the lowest interest rate currently being
earned on the City's financial accounts will be paid for such deposits at the time of refund of such
deposit. No interest will be paid for less than six (6) months, and such deposits will cease to bear
interest on any date upon which the customer becomes delinquent. (1975 Code § 7-3-15; amd.
1998 Code)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 130/349
F. Additional Deposits: New or additional deposit shall be required upon ten (10) days' written notice of
the need for such a requirement in any case where a deposit has been refunded or is found to be
inadequate to cover the amount provided for or where a customer's credit standing is not
satisfactory to the City. The service of any customer who fails to comply with these requirements
shall be disconnected in accord with billing, notice, and disconnection procedures as herein
prescribed. A delinquent additional deposit shall be subject to late payment penalties normally
accruing to an unpaid bill. However, no residential customer shall be disconnected during the
period of November 1 to April 1 of any year due to nonpayment of an additional deposit.
G. Noncompliance: The service of any customer who fails to comply with these requirements may be
discontinued upon five (5) days' written notice. (1975 Code § 7-3-15)
7-3-14: UTILITY DEPOSITS:
A. Additional Connections: Where buildings or premises are occupied by more than one customer, the
City shall require a separate meter deposit for each customer and for each different classification
for service by each customer. (Ord. 8-79, 5-15-1979)
B. Receipt For Deposit: All deposits collected by the Utility Billing Supervisor shall be evidenced by a
receipt given to the customer and receipt kept on file in the office of the Utility Billing Supervisor.
(1975 Code § 7-3-17; amd. 1977; 1998 Code)
C. Return Of Deposit:
1. One Year Service:
a. The Utility Billing Supervisor shall return the deposit paid by the customer within thirty (30)
days of the first anniversary of public utilities being furnished to the customer; provided, that
no arrearages are due on the account. If the account is in arrears, a part or all of the deposit
shall be used to satisfy the arrearage. (1975 Code § 7-3-18; amd. 1977; 1998 Code)
b. If the account is not in arrears on the date of the first anniversary of public utility service but
the customer account has been in arrears for more than one billing period during the twelve
(12) months of service, the deposit shall not be returned until the account has been without
arrearage for twelve (12) consecutive months. This subsection C1b shall supersede
subsection C1a of this Section when applicable. (1975 Code § 7-3-18; amd. 1977)
c. Return of deposit may, at the option of the Utility Billing Supervisor, be made by crediting the
deposit to the customer's account. (1975 Code § 7-3-18; amd. 1977; 1998 Code)
2. Discontinuance Of Service:
a. If the deposit has not been returned as provided in subsection C1 of this Section and the
customer voluntarily requests the discontinuance of public utilities from the City, the Utility
Billing Supervisor shall return the deposit paid by the customer within thirty (30) days of the
last day upon which the City furnished public utilities to the customer, provided a forwarding
address has been given to the Utility Billing Supervisor. If no forwarding address is given to
the Utility Billing Supervisor when the discontinuance is requested, the deposit shall be
returned within thirty (30) days of receiving such forwarding address. If no forwarding address
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 131/349
is received within one year after the request for discontinuance, the deposit shall be deemed
forfeited to the City.
b. The Utility Billing Supervisor shall withhold from the deposit returned, any arrearage due on
the account. (1975 Code § 7-3-19; amd. 1977; 1998 Code)
D. Notice To Customers: Each customer requesting the City to furnish public utilities who is required to
pay a deposit shall receive from the Utility Billing Supervisor a brief written statement describing
when and how deposits are returned. (1975 Code § 7-3-20; amd. 1977; 1998 Code)
E. Landlord-Tenant Agreements: The Utility Billing Supervisor is authorized to recognize agreements
made between a landlord and tenant regarding responsibility for paying the public utilities deposit,
provided such agreement is presented to the Utility Billing Supervisor in writing and signed by both
parties. (1975 Code § 7-3-21; amd. 1977; 1998 Code)
7-3-15: ELECTRIC HEAT QUALIFICATIONS AND REGULATIONS:
Each electric heat installation must be provided with a meter recording only current used for electric
heat and each installation to qualify for electric heat must have a minimum connected capacity of
5,000 watts unless the installation furnishes electric heat to the entire building or unit, in which case
the minimum connected capacity may be less than 5,000 watts. (1975 Code § 7-3-13)
7-3-16: ANTENNAS:
No antennas of any type shall be permitted on or attached to any electrical distribution pole, streetlight
pole or any other pole belonging to the electric utility. (Ord. 2-97, 1-7-1997)
Chapter 4
SIDEWALKS
7-4-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this Chapter is to improve and maintain sidewalks in a safe condition, to require
owners of abutting property to maintain, repair, replace, construct or reconstruct sidewalks. (1998
Code)
7-4-2: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this Chapter, the following terms have these meanings:
DEFECTIVE SIDEWALK: Any public sidewalk exhibiting one or more of the following characteristics:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 132/349
A. Vertical separations equal to three-fourths inch (3/4") or more.
B. Horizontal separations equal to three-fourths inch (3/4") or more.
C. Holes or depressions equal to three-fourths inch (3/4") or more and at least four inches (4") in
diameter.
D. Spalling over fifty percent (50%) of the surface of a single square of the sidewalk with one or
more depressions equal to one-half inch (1/2") or more.
E. Spalling over less than fifty percent (50%) of a single square of the sidewalk with one or more
depressions equal to three-fourths inch (3/4") or more.
F. A single square of sidewalk cracked in such a manner that no part thereof has a piece greater
than one square foot.
G. A sidewalk with any part thereof missing to the full depth.
H. A change from design or construction grade equal to or greater than three-fourths inch (3/4") per
foot.
OWNER: The person owning the fee title or the contract purchaser for purposes of notification
required herein. For all other purposes, "owner" shall include the lessee, or person in possession.
SIDEWALK IMPROVEMENTS: The construction, reconstruction, repair, replacement, or removal of a
public sidewalk or the excavating, filling, or depositing of material in the public right of way in
connection therewith. (1998 Code)
7-4-3: CLEANING SNOW, ICE, AND ACCUMULATIONS:
It shall be the duty of the owner to keep sidewalks abutting the owner's property clear of the natural
accumulations of snow or ice. If the owner fails to do so within twenty four (24) hours after deposit of
accumulation, the Mayor may have the natural accumulations of snow or ice removed without notice
to the property owner. The Mayor shall give the Council an itemized and verified statement of the
removal costs and a legal description of the property at the next regular Council meeting. The costs
shall be reviewed by the Council, and if found correct, shall be assessed against the property as
taxes. The City Clerk shall be directed to certify the costs to the County Auditor for collection as
provided in section 364.12 of the Iowa Code. (1998 Code)
7-4-4: MAINTENANCE RESPONSIBILITY1:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 133/349
The abutting property owner or owners shall be responsible for the repair, replacement or
reconstruction of all broken or defective sidewalks to a safe condition and to maintain in a safe
condition all sidewalks in the abutting street right of way. (1998 Code)
7-4-5: LIABILITY OF ABUTTING OWNER2:
As provided in section 364.14, Iowa Code, in the event the owner of property abutting any public
sidewalk fails or refuses to perform any act required of them by this Chapter and in the event an action
is brought against the City for personal injuries alleged to have been caused by a defect in or the
condition of said sidewalk, the City may notify in writing the said abutting owner that it claims the injury
was caused by their negligence and/or their failure to repair the defect or eliminate the condition
complained of. The notice shall state the pendency of the action, the name of the plaintiff, the name
and location of the court where the action is pending, a brief statement of the alleged facts from which
the cause arose, that the City believes that the person notified is liable to it for any judgment rendered
against the City, and asking the person to appear and defend.
A judgment obtained in the suit is conclusive in any action by the City against any person so notified,
as to the existence of the defect or condition or other cause of the injury or damage, as to the liability
of the City to the plaintiff in the first named action, and as to the amount of the damage or injury. The
City may maintain an action against the person notified to recover the amount of the judgment
together with all the expenses incurred by the City in the suit. (1998 Code)
7-4-6: ORDERING SIDEWALK IMPROVEMENTS:
The City Council may order the construction, reconstruction, repair, or replacement of permanent
sidewalks upon any street or court. Notice of this order shall be sent to the owner by certified mail.
The notice shall include the fact that the owner may request a hearing by the Council within fifteen
(15) days or receipt of the notice. (1998 Code)
7-4-7: REPAIRING DEFECTIVE SIDEWALKS:
It shall be the duty of the abutting property owner at any time, or upon receipt of thirty (30) days' notice
from the City, to repair, replace, or reconstruct all broken or defective sidewalks in the abutting street
right of way. If, after the expiration of the thirty (30) days as provided in the notice, the required work
had not been done or is not in the process of completion, the Mayor shall order the work to proceed to
repair, replace, or reconstruct the sidewalk. Upon completion of the work, the Mayor shall submit to
the Council an itemized and verified statement of expenditures for material and labor, and the legal
description of the property abutting the sidewalk on which work has been performed. These costs
shall be assessed to the property as taxes. The City Clerk shall be directed to certify the costs to the
County Treasurer for collection as provided in section 364.12 of the Iowa Code. (1998 Code)
7-4-8: NOTICE OF INABILITY TO REPAIR OR BARRICADE:
It shall be the duty of the owner of the property abutting the sidewalk, or of the contractor or agent of
the owner, to notify the City immediately in the event the owner is unable to make necessary sidewalk
improvements or to install or erect warnings and barricades as required by this Chapter. (1998 Code)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 134/349
7-4-9: STANDARD SIDEWALK SPECIFICATIONS:
Sidewalks constructed, repaired, or replaced under the provisions of this Chapter shall be of the
following construction and meet the following standards:
A. Materials Used: Portland cement concrete shall be the only material used in the construction and
repair of sidewalks unless otherwise authorized by the City Council.
B. Construction: Sidewalks shall be on one-course construction.
C. Soil Drainage; Concrete: Concrete may be placed directly on compact and well-drained soil. Where
soil is not well drained, a four inch (4") subbase of compact, clean, coarse gravel, sand, or cinders
shall be laid. The adequacy of the soil drainage is to be determined by the Superintendent of
Public Works.
D. Grade: The sidewalk bed shall be graded to the established grade.
E. Dimensions: Residential sidewalks shall be at least four feet (4') wide, or match existing sidewalks,
and four inches (4") thick, and each section shall be no more than four feet (4') in length. In the
central business district, sidewalks shall extend from the property line to the curb unless the
Council shall establish a different distance due to the circumstances. Each section shall be four
inches (4") thick and no more than six feet (6') in length and width. All driveway areas shall not be
less than six inches (6") in thickness.
F. Location: Residential sidewalks shall be located with the inner edge (edge nearest the abutting
private property) on the property line, unless the Council shall establish a different distance due to
the circumstances.
G. Elevation: All elevations of sidewalks are to be established by the City Council with assistance from
the Superintendent of Public Works on a case-by-case basis.
H. Slope: All sidewalks shall slope at least one-quarter inch (1/4") per foot toward the curb, but in no
event more than one-half inch (1/2") per foot toward the curb.
I. Steel Trowel Finish: All sidewalks shall have a steel trowel finish followed by a "broom" or a "wood
float" finish.
J. Ramps For The Handicapped3: There shall not be less than two (2) curb cuts or ramps per lineal
block which shall be located on or near the crosswalks at intersections. Each curb cut or ramp
shall be at least thirty inches (30") wide, shall be sloped at not greater than one inch (1") of rise per
twelve inches (12") lineal distance, except that a slope no greater than one inch (1") of rise per
eight inches (8") lineal distance may be used where necessary, shall have a nonskid surface, and
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 135/349
shall otherwise by so constructed as to allow reasonable access to the crosswalk for physically
handicapped persons using the sidewalk.
K. Improvements: All sidewalk improvements on public property, whether performed by the owner of
the abutting property or by the City, shall be performed under the supervision and inspection of the
City Superintendent of Public Works, and in accordance with the standard sidewalk specifications
set forth in this Chapter. (1998 Code)
7-4-10: PERMITS FOR CONSTRUCTION OR REMOVAL:
No person shall make any sidewalk improvements unless such person shall obtain a permit from the
City Clerk. The permit shall state that the person will comply with the ordinances of the City and with
the specifications for sidewalks adopted by the City. The permit also shall state that the work will be
done under the direction and approval of the City Superintendent of Public Works. All such permits
shall be issued without charge and a copy thereof, with the application, shall be filed and preserved in
the office of the City Clerk. The permit shall state when the work is to be commenced and when the
work is to be completed. The time of completion for the sidewalk improvements may be extended by
the City Council. All permits for sidewalk improvements not ordered by resolution of the City Council
shall be issued in compliance with this Chapter. The City Council may withhold the issuance of any
permit for any sidewalk improvements for a sufficient period to determine the necessity for the
proposed improvements or when weather conditions will adversely affect the sidewalk improvements.
(1998 Code)
7-4-11: FAILURE TO OBTAIN PERMIT; REMEDIES:
Whenever any sidewalk improvements are made that do not conform to the provisions of this Chapter
and with the specifications, or when any sidewalk improvements are made without a permit, the Mayor
shall serve notice to obtain a permit upon the property owner and upon the contractor doing the work.
If the sidewalk is in the course of construction, the notice shall order the work to stop until a permit is
obtained and the work is corrected to comply with the specifications. If the sidewalk work has been
completed, the owner shall obtain a permit immediately and perform any needed corrections within
five (5) days from receipt of the permit. If the owner fails to comply with this notice, the Mayor shall
have the work completed and the costs assessed to the property owner as provided in this Chapter.
(1998 Code)
7-4-12: INSPECTION AND APPROVAL:
Upon final completion, the Superintendent of Public Works shall inspect the work and may order
corrections if the work does not meet specifications. When the work does meet all requirements of this
Chapter, the specifications, and the permit, the Superintendent of Public Works shall indicate this on
both copies of the permit. (1998 Code)
7-4-13: BARRICADES AND WARNING LIGHTS:
Proper warning lights and barricades shall be placed to protect persons from materials, equipment,
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 136/349
and dangerous conditions. Placement and maintenance of adequate warnings is the responsibility of
the constructor, the owner, and the lessee of the property. (1998 Code)
7-4-14: INTERFERENCE WITH SIDEWALK IMPROVEMENTS:
No person shall knowingly or wilfully drive any vehicle upon any portion of any sidewalk or approach
thereto while it is in the process of being improved, or upon any portion of any completed sidewalk or
approach thereto, or shall remove or destroy any part or all of any sidewalk or approach thereto, or
shall remove, destroy, mar, or deface any sidewalk at any time or destroy, mar, remove, or deface any
notice or warning device provided by this Chapter. (1998 Code)
7-4-15: SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS FOR CONSTRUCTION AND REPAIR:
The City Council may assess the cost of initial construction, improvements, and/or repair of sidewalks
in the City according to the special assessment procedures established in chapter 384, division IV,
Iowa Code. (1998 Code)
7-4-16: NOTICE OF ASSESSMENT FOR REPAIR OR CLEANING COSTS4:
When the Mayor submits a bill for sidewalk improvements or for removal of accumulations as provided
in this Chapter, the City Clerk shall send a notice of such facts to the owner of the abutting property.
The notice may be given either by personal service or by certified mail to the last known address of
the owner. The notice shall contain a statement of the work performed, the cost of the work that is
being assessed, a description of the property affected, and the fact that the person may pay the
amount assessed within thirty (30) days without interest or penalty. The notice also shall indicate that
the person may object to such assessment and given the place and time at which Council will hear
such objections. The time set for hearing shall be at least fifteen (15) days after the service or mailing
of the notice. (1998 Code)
7-4-17: HEARING AND ASSESSMENT5:
At the time and place designed in the notice, the Council shall consider all objections to the
assessment, correct all errors or omissions, and adopt a corrected list as the amounts to be assessed
against the property. (1998 Code)
7-4-18: BILLING AND CERTIFYING TO COUNTY6:
Thirty (30) days after the Council's decision, the City Clerk shall certify any unpaid amounts to the
County Treasurer. The unpaid assessments shall constitute a lien against the property and shall be
collected by the County Treasurer in the same manner as other taxes. Any assessment that exceeds
one hundred dollars ($100.00) may be paid in installments as set by Council, not exceeding ten (10),
in the same manner and at the same interest rates as for special assessments under chapter 384,
division IV, Iowa Code. No interest shall be charged for assessments, or parts thereof, paid within
thirty (30) days of the time the Council determined the final amounts. (1998 Code)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 137/349
Chapter 5
STREET GRADES
7-5-1: PURPOSE:
For the purpose of regulating future construction in, upon and along certain streets or designated
portions thereof within the corporate limits of the City, there shall be and the same is hereby
established, a schedule of permanent grades or elevations as hereinafter set forth. (Ord. 57.1, 9-24-
1956)
7-5-2: DATUM PLANE:
The datum plane upon which said grades or elevations are based shall be known as City datum, the
same being permanently located and preserved on numerous bench marks through the City,
descriptions of which are recorded in plans and records on public file in the office of the City Clerk.
(Ord. 57.1, 9-24-1956)
7-5-3: STREET GRADES ESTABLISHED:
The following elevations apply to the center line grade of the streets designated and all future
improvements of a permanent nature including pavement, curb and gutter, sidewalks and driveways
shall conform with said elevations in as harmonious a manner as possible:
Station Elevation
ELM STREET
0+00 Center line of existing pavement opposite
S end of football field 108.96
1+03 End, 1.000% being +0.642% grade, 50' V.C. 107.93 (108.03)
6+75 End, 0.642%, begin +3.055% grade, 150' V.C. 111.60 (112.05)
7+87.7 Center line Maxson St. Continue +3.055% 115.04
9+50 End, 3.0550%, begin +0.886% grade, 150' V.C. 120.00 (119.59)
11+43.8 Center line Gibson St. Continue +0.886% 121.72
13+00 End +0.886%, begin +1.733% grade, 100' V.C. 123.10 (123.21)
16+00 End +1.733%, begin +2.518% grade, 100' V.C. 128.30 (128.40)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 138/349
20+25 End +2.518%, begin -3.400% grade, 200' V.C. 139.00 (137.52)
21+40 South edge existing pavement, U.S. Hwy. No. 6 135.09
GIBSON STREET
0+00 East property line of Elm St. 123.00
2+50 End + 2.900%, begin +1.667% grade, 100' V.C. 130.25 (130.10)
4+41.2 Center line Division St. Continue +1.667% 133.44
5+50 End +1.667% being -1.249% grade, 160' V.C. 135.25 (134.67)
8+73.8 West property line of Calhoun St. 131.20
DIVISION STREET
0+00 North property line of Maxson St. +2.986%
grade between Maxson and Gibson 123.73
2+94.4 South property line of Gibson St. 132.52
CALHOUN STREET
0+43 North property line of Maxson St. 133.61
2+00 End +2.477%, begin -3.618% grade, 200' V.C. 137.50 (135.98)
3+68.6 Center line Gibson St. Continue -3.618% 131.40
FIFTH STREET
0+00 East property line of Columbus St. 110.88
2+00 End -3.440%, begin -1.917% grade, 100' V.C. 104.00 (104.19)
3+99.7 Center line Miller St. Continue -1.917% 100.17
8+00 West property line of Clark St. 92.50
MILLER STREET
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 139/349
0+00 North property line of Fourth St. 104.13
1+50 End -0.753% begin -1.659% grade, 100' V.C. 103.00 (102.89)
3+44.7 End -1.659% grade, S. gutter line 5th St. 99.77
3+58.2 Center line of Fifth St., 0.40' crown 100.17
3+71.7 N. gutter line, begin +4.076% grade 99.77
5+00 End +4.076%, begin +0.692% grade, 100' V.C. 105.00 (104.58)
7+15.4 South property line of Sixth St. 106.49
CLARK STREET
0+00 North property line of Fourth St. -1.283%
grade between 4th and 5th 95.92
3+43 South gutter line of Fifth St. 91.52
3+56.5 Center line of Fifth St. 0.40' crown 91.92
3+70 North gutter line of Fifth St. 91.52
5+55 End +0.573%, begin -0.501% grade, 50' V.C. 92.58 (92.51)
7+46.5 South gutter line of Sixth St. 91.62
FIRST STREET
0+00 North property line of Calhoun St. +0.956%
grade from Calhoun to Spencer 96.45
3+66.8 Center line Spencer St. Continue +0.956% 99.96
4+59.3 End +0.956%, begin -0.504% grade, 100' V.C. 100.84 (100.66)
6+49.8 South property line of Columbus St. 99.88
COLUMBUS STREET (Paved)
0+00 North property line of Columbus St. 99.43
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 140/349
1+78.5 End -0.751%, begin +1.758% grade, 50' V.C. 98.09 (98.25)
3+93.4 Center line of Miller St. Continue +1.758% 101.87
6+00 End 1.758%, begin -0.500% 100' V.C. 105.50 (105.22)
7+58.4 Center line of Clark St. Continue -0.500% 104.71
9+00 End -0.500%, begin -2.450% grade, 100' V.C. 104.00 (103.76)
11+20.4 West property line of Park St. 98.60
"A" STREET
0+38.5 E. property line Calhoun. Begin +0.525% 95.21
4+04.6 Center line Spencer St. Continue +0.525% 97.13
6+87.6 W. property line Columbus. End +0.525% 98.62
(Ord. 57.1, 9-24-1956)
Station N. And S. Curb
Elevations
EIGHTH STREET
0+00 Center line of Columbus St.
0+15 E. curb line of Columbus St. 111.20
1+00 Point of vertical intersection, end -6.118%,
begin -1.769% center of 100' vertical curve 106.54
4+39.2 Point of vertical intersection end -1.769%, begin -1.533%
center line of Miller St.
100.00
8+63.2 Center line of Clark St. 93.50
SEVENTH STREET
0+00 E. property line of Columbus St. 116.47
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 141/349
4+00 Point of vertical intersection end -3.955,
begin -1.536%, center of 200' vertical curve 101.26
4+01.2 Center line of Miller St.
6+00 Point of vertical intersection, end -1.536%,
begin -1.607% 97.58
8+35.2 Point of vertical intersection, end -1.607%,
begin -1.028%, center line of Clark St. 93.80
9+50 Point of vertical intersection, end -1.028%,
begin +0.50% 92.62
11+25 Point of vertical intersection, end +0.50%,
begin +2.08%, center of 50' vertical curve 93.60
12+75 Point of vertical intersection end +2.08%, 96.62
begin -0.50%, center of 50' vertical curve 96.46
15+00 Center line of Walton St. 95.50
WALTON STREET
0+00 Center line of Sixth St. 100.30
0+09.5 No. curb line of Sixth St. 103.50
1+00 Point of vertical intersection, end +3.536%,
begin -2.857%, center of 100' vertical curve 102.70
3+80 Center line of Seventh St. 95.50
MILLER STREET
0+00 N. property line W. side Sixth St. 105.83
3+20 S. property line of Seventh St. 100.85
0+00 Center line of Eighth St. 100.00
1+40 N. line of Elder's 1st addition 103.15
ALLEY BETWEEN 4TH And 5TH STREETS
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 142/349
CALHOUN TO SPENCER, 16' wide
(Inverted Crown, No Curb)
Edge Elevations
Station N. Side S. Side
0+00 E. property line of Calhoun St. 111.06 111.06
3+25 W. property line of Spencer St. (PVI) (119.51) (119.51)
3+25 Same, corrected for 50' vertical curve 119.22 119.22
(Ord. 55-67, 6-20-1967)
Station N. Side S. Side
5+00 122' S. of Ninth St. center line (PVI) (106.98) (106.68)
5+00 Same, corrected for 200' vertical curve 107.82 107.52
6+75 53' N. of Ninth St. center line (PVI) (110.48) (110.18)
6+75 Same, corrected for 50' vertical curve 110.62 110.32
Station W. Side E. Side
8+75 152' S. of Tenth St. center line (PVI) (118.98) (118.68)
8+75 Same, corrected for 150' vertical curve 117.56 117.26
10+57 N. property line of Tenth St. extended 112.97 112.67
NINTH STREET, 30' Wide
Station N. Side S. Side
0+15 15' E. of Columbus St. center line 121.94 121.45
0+35 35' E. of Columbus St. center line (PVI) (121.64) (121.34)
0+35 Same, corrected for 40' vertical curve 121.55 121.21
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 143/349
3+84 35' W. of Miller St. center line (PVI) (S) No V.C. 110.40 110.10
4+04 15' W of Miller St. center line 109.69 109.15
TENTH STREET, 30' Wide
0+10 10' E. of Columbus St. center line 122.93
0+15 15' E. of Columbus St. center line 123.45
1+00 100' E. of Columbus St. center line (PVI) (124.19) (124.49)
1+00 Same, corrected for 100' vertical curve 123.60 123.92
3+87.5 31.5' W. of Miller St. center line (PVI) (N) No V.C. 114.70 115.00
4+04 15' W. of Miller St. center line 113.52 114.41
PARK STREET, 21' Wide (Inverted Crown, No Curb)
Edge Elevations
Station W. Side E. Side
0+00 30' N. of Eighth St. center line 126.25 126.59
0+50 80' N. of Eighth St. center line (PVI) (127.00) (127.00)
0+50 Same, corrected for 50' vertical curve 126.72 126.72
3+25 355' N. of Eighth St. center line (PVI) (116.50) (116.50)
3+25 Same, corrected for 100' vertical curve 116.91 116.91
4+70 500' N. of Eighth St. center line 115.77 115.77
CLARK STREET
N. & S. Curb
Station Elevations
0+00 Center line of Sixth St.
0+09.5 N. curb line of Sixth St. 91.95
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 144/349
3+80 Center line of Seventh St. 93.80
4+95 Point of vertical intersection, end +.50%, begin -0.512% 94.37
6+65 Point of vertical intersection, end -0.512%, begin
0.50%, center line of Eighth St. 93.50
8+05 N. line of Elder's 1st addition 94.20
FIFTH STREET
8+00 W. property line of Clark St.
8+60 E. property line of Clark St. 91.30
12+50 Center line of Morgan St. 88.50
MORGAN STREET
0+00 Center line of Fourth St.
0+40 N. property line of Fourth St. 99.80
1+50 Point of vertical intersection end, -1.636%, begin -4.00%,
center of 100' vertical curve
98.00
97.70
3+50 Point of vertical intersection end, -4.00%, begin
-3.00% 90.00
4+00 Center line of Fifth St. 88.50
(Ord. 40, 6-4-1963)
EIGHTH STREET, 27' Wide
Station N. Side S. Side
0+13.5 13.5' E. of Clark St. center line 94.83 94.53
4+00 291' W. of Walton St. center line (PVI) (89.02) (89.02)
4+00 Same, corrected for 100' vertical curve 89.42 89.42
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 145/349
MILLER STREET, 30' Wide
0+30 30' N. of Eighth St. center line 99.95 99.65
0+50 50' N. of Eighth St. center line (PVI) (100.15) (99.85)
0+50 Same, corrected for 40 + vertical curve 100.32 100.00
2+80 280' N. of Eighth St. center line (PVI) (109.95) (109.65)
2+80 Same, corrected for 100' vertical curve 109.22 108.92
Station VPI
Elevation
TC
Elevation
WALNUT STREET - SHORT STREET
0+00 Center line of W. Prairie St.
0+12 Edge of existing slab, begin +0.93% grade 657.29
2+50 End +0.93%, begin +1.50% grade, 100' V.C. 659.50 659.58
3+65.4 Horizontal P.I., end Walnut St., begin Short St., continue
+1.50% grade
6+50 End +1.50%, begin +3.00% grade 665.50 665.69
8+00 End +3.00% grade 670.00
SECOND STREET - (MORGAN TO WALTON)
0+00 Center line of Morgan St.
0+25.8 End of existing return, begin -0.50% grade 660.95
4+20 Center line Walton St., and -0.50% grade 658.98
SPENCER STREET
0+00 Center line First St.
0+39.5 End of existing return, begin -2.50% grade, on center line 669.22 W
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 146/349
669.42 E
669.63 E
1+00 End of -2.50%, begin -0.50% grade, 100' 668.12 W
V.C. 667.91 668.16 E
668.20 E
3+57.8 End of existing return, end -0.50% grade 666.63
3+88.2 Center line of East "A" St.
4+17.7 End of existing return, begin +1.09% grade 666.60
5+00 End of +1.09%, begin -1.30% grade, 100' V.C. 667.50 667.20
7+69 Center line of East 8 St., and -1.30% grade 664.00
NORTH CALHOUN STREET
0+00 Center line of Hwy. No. 6 - Rainbow Drive, begin +0.64%
grade
687.58
0+50 End +0.64%, begin -0.50% grade, 100' V.C. 667.90 687.76
3+50 End -0.50%, begin +1.60% grade, 100' V.C. 686.40 686.66
5+50 End +1.60%, begin +3.00% grade, 100' V.C. 689.60 689.78
7+00 End +3.00%, begin +5.54% grade, 100' V.C. 694.10 694.32
8+19 Center line of Gibson St., and +5.54% grade 700.70
MAXSON AVENUE (MILLER ST. TO EAST)
0+00 Center line of Miller St.
0+32.2 End of existing return, begin -0.73% grade 679.18
2+00 End of -0.73%, begin -1.60% grade, 100' V.C. 677.95 766.05
5+00 End of -1.60%, begin -0.55% grade, 100' V.C. 673.15 673.26
7+75 End of -0.55%, begin +1.89% grade, 100' V.C. 671.65 671.96
10+25 End of +1.89%, begin -0.50% grade, 100' V.C. 676.38 676.08
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 147/349
12+00 End of -0.50%, begin -1.69% grade, 100' V.C. 675.51 675.24
18+00 End of -1.69% grade 665.37
WALTON STREET
0+00 Center line of Fourth St.
0+25 End of existing return, begin -1.40% grade, on center line 661.25 W
660.82 E
660.39 E
1+00 Continue -1.40% grade on center line 100' V.C. on top curb
659.84 W
659.76 659.76 E
659.69 E
4+00 Center line of Fifth St. 655.56
End -1.40% grade
CORN STREET (HWY. NO. 6 TO SOUTH)
0+00 Center line of Hwy. No. 6
0+39.8 End of existing return, begin -0.50% grade 658.50
1+90 N. line of alley, and -0.50% grade 657.75
CORN STREET (HWY. NO. 6 TO NORTH)
0+00 Center line of Hwy. No. 6
0+28 End of existing return, begin +1.39% 658.57 W
grade on center line 658.33 E
658.09 E
1+00 End +1.39%, begin -0.50% grade, 100' 659.13 W
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 148/349
V.C. 659.33 659.09 E
659.05 E
4+00 Center line Fourth St., continue -0.50% grade 657.83
8+08.7 Center line Fifth St., end -0.50% grade 655.79
EAST "B" STREET
0+00 Center line of Spencer St., begin -0.74% grade 664.00
2+71 Center line of Columbus St., and -0.74% grade 662.00
FIRST STREET
0+00 Center line of Calhoun St.
0+40 End of existing return, begin -1.72% grade 665.26
2+00 End of -1.72%, begin -0.50% grade, 100' V.C. 662.50 662.65
4+00 Center line of Clay St. 661.50
MILLER STREET
0+00 Center line of First St.
0+34.8 End of existing return, begin -4.26% grade 671.17 W
on center line 671.48 E
671.78 E
1+00 End -4.26%, begin -1.75% grade, 100' 668.95 W
V.C. 668.70 669.01 E
669.07 E
2+50 End -1.75%, begin -0.62% grade on center line, 100' V.C. 666.19 W
666.07 666.21 E
666.23 E
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 149/349
3+78.8 Edge of existing pavement, and -0.62% grade on center
line
665.11 W
665.29 E
665.42 E
3+89.8 Center line of East "A" St. (Hwy. #70)
CLARK STREET
0+00 Center line of First St.
0+35.1 End of existing return, begin +0.50% grade 674.25
3+00 End of +0.50%, begin -0.42% grade on center line, 100'
V.C.
675.33 W
675.57 675.45 E
675.58 E
3+79 Edge of existing pavement, and -0.42% grade on center
line
674.45 W
675.24 E
676.03 E
3+90 Center line of East "A" St. (Hwy. #70)
MORGAN STREET (FIRST TO EAST A)
0+00 Center line of First St., begin +1.25% grade 667.23
2+00 End +1.25%, begin +2.60% grade, 100' V.C. 669.73 669.90
3+89 Center line of East "A" St., and +2,60% grade 674.67
MORGAN STREET (FIFTH TO FOURTH)
0+00 Center line of Fifth St.
0+15.5 End of return, begin +3.70% grade 657.66
3+22 End +3.70%, begin -2.00% grade, 100' V.C. 669.00 668.29
3+90 End of return, and -2.00% grade 667.96
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 150/349
4+05.5 Center line of Fourth St.
FOURTH STREET
0+00 Center line of Corn St.
0+15.5 End of return, begin +0.50% grade 657.75 N
657.91 S
2+00 End +0.50%, begin +1.03% grade, 100' V.C. 658.75 658.82
3+93.73
End of return, and of +1.03% grade 660.75
4+21.86
Center line of Walton St. 660.14 N
661.33 S
FIRST STREET
0+00 Center line of Calhoun St.
0+40 End of existing return, begin -1.72% grade 665.26
2+00 End of -1.72%, begin -0.50% grade, 100' V.C. 662.50 662.65
4+00 Center line of Clay St. (and of First St.) 661.50
CLAY STREET
0+00 Center line of First St., begin -0.50% grade 661.50
0+50 End of -0.50%, begin +1.02% grade on center line, 100'
V.C.
661.47 E
661.25 661.42 W
3+85.6 End of return, end of +1.02% grade 665.30 E
664.07 W
3+99.06
Center line of Second St.
FIFTH STREET
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 151/349
0+00 Center line of Clark St.
0+29.5 End of existing return, begin -2.78% grade 660.49 N
660.62 S
0+79.5 End of -2.78%, begin -0.50% grade, 100' V.C. 659.10 659.39
4+18.22
Center line of Morgan St. 657.66
8+39.07
Center line of Walton St.
End of -0.50%, begin +0.50% grade, 100' V.C. 655.56 655.68
10+75 End of +0.50%, begin -0.50% grade, 100' V.C. 656.74 656.62
12+60 Center line of Corn St., end of -0.50% grade 655.82
SECOND STREET
0+00 End of existing paving on Second St., begin 660.26 N
-0.63% grade 660.14 S
4+50 End of -0.63%, begin +4.70% grade, 100' V.C. 657.41 658.08
5+74.01
End of +4.70%, begin 4.50% grade, 100'
V.C.
663.24 662.09 N
602.09 S
7+00 End of -4.50%, begin +0.50% grade, 100' V.C. 657.57 658.20
9+50 End of +0.50%, begin -0.61% grade, 100' V.C. 658.82 658.68
11+18 End of -0.61% grade, edge of W. Prairie St. pavement 657.80
11+39.46
Center line of West Prairie St.
(Ord. 10-79, 6-5-1979)
Chapter 6
CEMETERY
7-6-1: CITY CLERK, DUTIES:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 152/349
It shall be the duty of the City Clerk, under the direction and supervision of the City Council:
A. To manage and control any cemetery or burial grounds owned or controlled by the City.
B. To keep a record of all burial and disinterment permits issued by him and a record of all burials and
disinterments reported to him by the Sexton or Cemetery Superintendent.
C. To make a report thereof to the Council at the first regular meeting in each fiscal year.
D. To keep a plat of all burial grounds and cemeteries owned or controlled by the City and a record of
all lots therein sold and unsold together with the purchase prices of the unsold lots, which said
prices shall be fixed by the Council from time to time. When any lot is selected and paid for, the
Clerk shall deliver a certificate thereof to the purchaser, stating the identification or description of
the lot sold and the price paid therefor. (1954 Code Ch. 12)
7-6-2: CITY MANAGER, DUTIES:
It shall be the duty of the City Manager to supervise the care of all burial grounds and cemeteries
owned or controlled by the City and to keep an accurate account of all expenditures made by him.
(1975 Code § 7-6-9)
7-6-3: CERTIFICATE OF DEATH:
Upon the death of any person in the City, the undertaker or person in charge of the funeral of such
person shall cause a certificate of death to be made as required by the laws of the State. (1954 Code
Ch. 12)
7-6-4: PERMIT OF BURIAL:
Before the body of any deceased person shall be buried in any cemetery owned or controlled by the
City, there shall be presented to the City Clerk a certificate of death made as provided in the preceding
Section and issued by the State Registrar of Vital Statistics, and thereupon the Clerk shall record the
above permit with the County Recorder and shall also make a record of such death in the City record.
(1975 Code § 7-6-2)
7-6-5: DISINTERMENT PERMIT:
Before the body of any deceased person heretofore buried in any cemetery owned or controlled by the
City shall be disinterred, there shall be presented to the City Clerk a proper disinterment permit issued
by the State Department of Health and thereupon the Clerk shall issue a City permit for the
disinterment of the body of the deceased person named in said disinterment permit. (1975 Code § 7-
6-3)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 153/349
7-6-6: FEES:
For each burial or disinterment permit issued as hereinbefore provided, the City Clerk shall collect
such fees as may from time to time be fixed by resolution of the City Council and said fees shall be by
him paid over to the City Treasurer who shall credit said fees to the Cemetery Fund. (1954 Code Ch.
12)
7-6-7: BURIAL WITHOUT PERMIT:
It shall be unlawful for the Sexton or Superintendent of any cemetery owned or controlled by the City,
or for any undertaker or other person to inter or disinter the body of any deceased person in or from
such cemetery until a permit therefor has been issued as herein provided. (1954 Code Ch. 12)
7-6-8: RETURN OF PERMITS:
Upon interment or disinterment, the permit therefor shall be delivered to the Sexton or Cemetery
Superintendent, who shall, on or before the first Monday in each calendar month, return to the City
Clerk all such permits with an endorsement thereon showing the name of the person buried and upon
what lot or the name of the person disinterred and from what lot the body was removed, as the case
may be, together with the date of each burial or disinterment. Said permits when thus received by the
Clerk shall be filed and preserved by him among the records of his office. (1954 Code Ch. 12)
7-6-9: DEED OF CONVEYANCE:
Upon presentation of such certificate of purchase to the Mayor, it shall be his duty to have prepared,
signed and acknowledged by himself and the City Clerk a proper deed conveying the lot thus sold to
the purchaser thereof. All such deeds shall contain the condition that title to the lot conveyed thereby
shall be subject to all reasonable rules and regulations concerning the use and adornment thereof
which may then exist or may thereafter be adopted by the Council. (1975 Code § 7-6-8)
7-6-10: DONATIONS FOR CEMETERY PURPOSES:
The City may receive from any person bequests or donations of money for the purpose of keeping a
certain lot or lots in order and repair. Such funds shall be kept separate from all other funds belonging
to or in the control of the City and shall be expended by the City Clerk as directed by the donor
thereof. (1954 Code Ch. 12)
Chapter 7
RAILROADS
7-7-1: SPEED LIMITED:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 154/349
No railroad locomotive, engine, passenger or freight car or cars shall be run, driven or propelled over,
upon or along any railroad track located, established and operated within the limits of the City at a
speed in excess of twenty five (25) miles per hour. (1975 Code § 7-7-1)
7-7-2: BELLS; HORN:
At all times when any railroad locomotive or engine shall be moving or being operated upon or within
three hundred feet (300') of any highway or street crossing, the engineer, fireman or other person in
charge thereof shall cause the bell or horn of such locomotive or engine to be rung or blown during
such running or operation. (1975 Code § 7-7-2)
7-7-3: OBSTRUCTING CROSSINGS:
No railroad company, engineer, fireman, train conductor or other person shall cause, permit or allow
any locomotive or engine, passenger or freight car or cars to stop and remain in such a place and
manner as to obstruct any street crossing, sidewalk or any part of any street, for a period of time in
excess of five (5) minutes. (1975 Code § 7-7-3)
7-7-4: REPAIR OF RAILROAD CROSSINGS:
A. Notification To Repair: As needed, written notice shall be sent by the Mayor of the City to the
respective railroads whose tracks cross streets in the City, notifying said railroad to repair said
crossings.
B. Serving Notice: Said notice shall be served in the manner of an original notice as provided by the
Iowa Rules of Civil Procedure.
C. Failure Of Railroad To Repair: If any railroad, after having been so notified pursuant hereto, shall
neglect or refuse to alter or repair said crossings or approaches, within thirty (30) days from the
service of notice, the public authorities shall forthwith cause construction or alterations or repairs to
be made in the manner directed by the notice herein provided for.
D. Recovery Of Costs: In the event the corporate authorities are forced to expend public monies to
make the necessary repairs, the City Attorney shall bring those legal actions advisable or
necessary to recover the monies so expended. (1975 Code § 7-7-4)
Chapter 8
NUMBERING BUILDINGS
7-8-1: GENERAL REQUIREMENTS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 155/349
All buildings now or hereafter erected and fronting any street or avenue shall be numbered. The
owners or lessees shall cause the numbers to be placed and maintained on their property. (1975
Code § 7-8-1)
7-8-2: BASE LINES FOR NUMBERING:
Calhoun Street and First Street shall constitute the base lines from which the numbering of buildings
on either side thereof shall commence. (1975 Code § 7-8-2)
7-8-3: ODD AND EVEN NUMBERS:
The odd numbers shall be on the north side of all streets running east and west, and on the west side
of all streets running north and south. The even numbers shall be on the south side of all streets
running east and west and on the east side of all streets running north and south. The numbers of
buildings shall alternate from side to side of each street. (1975 Code § 7-8-3)
7-8-4: STREET DESIGNATIONS:
Commencing at the base line, streets south of First Street and running north and south shall be known
and designated by the prefix "South", and streets north of First Street and running north and south
shall be known and designated by the prefix "North". Streets east of Calhoun Street and running east
and west shall be known and designated by the prefix "East", and streets west of Calhoun Street and
running east and west shall be known and designated by the prefix "West". (1975 Code § 7-8-4)
7-8-5: COUNCIL DECISION REGARDING NUMBERING:
Should there be any doubt as to the proper number for any building or lot, the City Council shall
decide the same. (1975 Code § 7-8-5)
7-8-6: METHOD OF NUMBERING:
The numbers shall be of durable material at least four inches (4") in height and highly visible, located
on the first story front of all buildings, or the numbers may be painted on the front of the building, door,
post, transom or other place on the premises where the same will be easily seen. (1975 Code § 7-8-6;
amd. 1998 Code)
7-8-7: PROCEDURE UPON REFUSAL OR NEGLECT TO NUMBER:
A. Notice; Publication: If the owner, or owners or lessee of any building shall fail, refuse or neglect to
number the same, or renumber the same when necessary, the City Council may cause a notice to
be given to comply with this Chapter within ten (10) days, such notice to be given by one
publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the City.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 156/349
B. Numbering By City; Assessment Of Cost: If any buildings shall not have been numbered or
renumbered within ten (10) days after the completion of publication of such notice, the Council
shall cause the same to be done. The cost and expense of such numbering or renumbering shall
be assessed against the property or premises numbered or renumbered and enforced and
collected as other special assessments. (1975 Code § 7-8-7)
C. Duty Of City Manager: The City Manager shall number or renumber buildings where the owner or
lessee fails to do so upon proper notice by publication as herein specified. (1975 Code § 7-8-8)
Chapter 9
TREES
7-9-1: SHORT TITLE:
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the MUNICIPAL TREE ORDINANCE OF THE CITY
OF WEST LIBERTY. (Ord. 2-91, 2-5-1991)
7-9-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words, and their derivations shall have
the meanings given herein. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense
include the future, words in the plural include the singular, and words in the singular include the plural.
The word "shall" is mandatory and not merely directory.
LARGE TREES: Those trees attaining a height of forty five feet (45') or more.
MEDIUM TREES: Those trees attaining a height of thirty feet (30') to forty five feet (45').
MUNICIPAL ARBORIST: A qualified, designated official of the city of West Liberty, assigned to carry
out the enforcement of this chapter.
MUNICIPALITY: The city of West Liberty, county of Muscatine, state of Iowa.
PARKS: All public parks having individual names.
PERSON: Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company, or organization of any
kind.
PRINCIPAL THOROUGHFARE: Any street upon which trucks are not prohibited.
PROPERTY LINE: The outer edge of a street or highway.
PUBLIC PLACES: All other grounds owned by title or controlled by easement by the city of West
Liberty, Iowa.
PUBLIC TREES: All shade and ornamental trees now or hereafter growing on any public right of way
or any public places/areas where otherwise indicated.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 157/349
SMALL TREES OR SHRUBS: Those woody plants attaining a height of thirty feet (30') or less.
STREET OR HIGHWAY: The entire width of every public way or right of way when any part thereof is
open to the use of the public, as a matter of right, for purposes of vehicular and pedestrian traffic.
TREELAWN: That part of a street or highway, not covered by sidewalk or other paving, lying between
the property line and that portion of the street or highway usually used for vehicular traffic. (Ord. 2-91,
2-5-1991)
7-9-3: TREE COMMITTEE:
A. Committee Established: The parks and recreation commission (title 2, chapter 1 of this code) shall
serve as the tree committee for the city. The municipal arborist shall serve as an ex officio member
of the tree committee. (Ord. 2-91, 2-5-1991; amd. Ord. 04-01, 6-15-2004)
B. Duties: The duties of said Tree Committee shall be as follows:
1. To study the problems and determine the needs of the City, in connection with its tree planting
program.
2. To recommend to the proper authority, the type and kind of trees to be planted upon such City
streets or parts of City streets or in parks as is designated.
3. To assist the properly constituted officials of the City, as well as the City Council and citizens of
the City, in the dissemination of news and information regarding the selection, planting, and
maintenance of trees within the corporate limits, whether the same be on private or public
property, and to make such recommendations, from time to time, to the City Council as to
desirable legislation concerning the tree program and activities for the City.
4. To provide regular and special meetings at which the subject of trees insofar as it relates to the
City may be discussed by the members of the Committee, officers and personnel of the City and
its several divisions, and all others interested in the tree program. (Ord. 2-91, 2-5-1991)
7-9-4: MUNICIPAL ARBORIST:
A. Duties: The Municipal Arborist shall have the authority to set forth the rules and regulations of the
Arboricultural Specifications and Standards of Practice governing the planting, maintenance,
removal, fertilization, pruning, and bracing of trees on the streets or other public places, and shall
direct, regulate, and control the planting, maintenance, and removal of all trees growing now or
hereafter in any public place of the City. He shall cause the provisions of this Chapter to be
enforced. In his absence, these duties shall be the responsibility of a qualified alternate designated
by the City.
B. Authority:
1. Generally: The City Arborist shall have the authority and jurisdiction of regulating the planting,
maintenance, and removal of trees on streets and public places to ensure safety or preserve the
aesthetics of such public sites.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 158/349
2. Supervision: The Municipal Arborist shall have the authority and it shall be his duty to supervise
or inspect all work done under a permit in accordance with the terms of this Chapter.
3. Conditions Of Permit: The Municipal Arborist shall have the authority to affix reasonable
conditions to the granting of a permit in accordance with the terms of this Chapter.
4. Master Street Tree Plan: The Municipal Arborist shall have the authority to formulate a Master
Street Tree Plan with the advice, a hearing, and approval of the Tree Committee. The Master
Street Tree Plan shall specify the species of trees to be planted on each of the streets or other
public places of the City. From and after the effective date of the Master Street Tree Plan, or any
amendment thereof, all planting shall conform thereto.
a. Utility And Environmental Factors: The Municipal Arborist shall consider all existing and future
utility and environmental factors when recommending a specific species for each of the streets
and other public places of the City.
b. Amendment Of Plan: The Municipal Arborist, with the approval of the Tree Committee, shall
have the authority to amend or add to the Master Street Tree Plan at any time that
circumstances make it advisable. (Ord. 2-91, 2-5-1991)
7-9-5: PERMITS REQUIRED:
A. Planting, Maintenance, Or Removal On Public Right Of Way:
1. No person shall plant, spray, fertilize, preserve, prune, remove, cut above ground, or otherwise
disturb any tree on any street or public place without first filing an application and procuring a
permit from the Municipal Arborist or otherwise specified City authority. The person receiving the
permit shall abide by the Arboricultural Specifications and Standards of Practice adopted by the
Municipal Arborist.
2. Applications for permits must be made at the office of the Municipal Arborist not less than forty
eight (48) hours in advance of the time the work is to be done.
3. Standards Of Issuance: The Municipal Arborist shall issue the permits provided for herein if, in
his judgment, the proposed work is desirable and the proposed method and workmanship
thereof are of a satisfactory nature. Any permit granted shall contain a definite date of expiration
and the work shall be completed in the time allowed on the permit and in the manner as therein
described. Any permit shall be void if its terms are violated.
4. A certificate of insurance for bodily injury and property damage coverage in the minimum
amount of five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) shall be required as a condition of
receiving a permit to perform any work under this Chapter. Such a certificate will need to be filed
sufficiently in advance of the proposed work to allow time for investigation and approval.
5. Notice of completion shall be given within five (5) days to the Municipal Arborist for his
inspection.
B. Planting:
1. Application Data: The application required herein shall state the number of trees to be set out;
the location, grade, species, cultivar or variety of each tree; the method of planting; and such
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 159/349
other information as the Municipal Arborist shall find reasonably necessary to a fair
determination of whether a permit should be issued.
2. Improper Planting: Whenever any tree shall be planted or set out in conflict with the provisions
of this Section, it shall be lawful for the Municipal Arborist to remove or cause removal of the
same, and the exact cost thereof shall be assessed to the owner as provided by law in the case
of special assessments.
C. Maintenance, Application Data: The application required herein shall state the number and kinds of
trees to be sprayed, fertilized, pruned, or otherwise preserved; the kind of treatment to be
administered; the composition of the spray material to be applied; and such other information as
the Municipal Arborist shall find reasonably necessary to a fair determination of whether a permit
should be issued.
D. Removal, Planting, And Replacement:
1. Wherever it is necessary to remove a tree or trees from a treelawn in connection with the paving
of a sidewalk, or the paving or widening of the portion of a street or highway used for vehicular
traffic, the City shall replant such trees or replace them subject to the City's specifications.
2. No person or property owner shall remove a tree from the treelawn for the purpose of
construction, or for any other reason, without first filing an application and procuring a permit
from the Municipal Arborist. The person or property owner requesting the removal shall bear the
cost of all trees removed. The City shall bear the costs of trees removed for its purposes,
including those diseased or dangerous trees it deems hazardous. (Ord. 2-91, 2-5-1991)
7-9-6: OBSTRUCTION; TREES PRUNED:
It shall be the duty of the City to prune such trees in such manner that they will not obstruct or shade
the street lights, obstruct the passage of pedestrians on sidewalks, obstruct vision of traffic signs, or
obstruct view of any street or alley intersection. The minimum clearance of any overhanging portion
thereof shall be ten feet (10') over sidewalks, and twelve feet (12') over all streets except truck
thoroughfares which shall have a clearance of sixteen feet (16'). (Ord. 2-91, 2-5-1991)
7-9-7: ABUSE OR MUTILATION OF PUBLIC TREES:
Unless specifically authorized by the Municipal Arborist, no person shall intentionally damage, cut,
carve, transplant, or remove any tree; attach any rope, wire, nails, advertising posters, or other
contrivance to any tree; allow any gaseous liquid or solid substance which is harmful to such trees to
come in contact with them; or set fire or permit any fire to burn when such fire or the heat thereof will
injure any portion of any tree. (Ord. 2-91, 2-5-1991)
7-9-8: PROTECTION OF TREES:
A. Fence Or Frame: All trees on any street or other public place near any excavation or construction of
any building, structure, or street work shall be guarded with a good substantial fence, frame, or box
not less than four feet (4') high and eight feet (8') square, or at a distance in feet from the tree
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 160/349
equal to the diameter of the trunk in inches, measured at a height of five feet (5'), whichever is
greater, and all building material, dirt, or other debris shall be kept outside the barrier. (Ord. 2-91,
2-5-1991; amd. 1998 Code)
B. Excavation Permit Required: No person shall excavate any ditches, tunnels, or trenches, or lay any
drive within a radius of ten feet (10') from any public tree without first obtaining a written permit
from the Municipal Arborist.
C. Parking On Treelawn: No person shall park any vehicle on any treelawn or otherwise endanger the
roots of any tree, except by written permit of the Municipal Arborist.
D. Maintenance By Property Owners: Property owners shall maintain private trees located within
property lines in a manner consistent with horticulturally acceptable standards of safety. (Ord. 2-91,
2-5-1991)
E. City Tree Policy: The City tree policy shall include by reference subsection 11-4-3E of this Code.
(Ord. 2-91, 2-5-1991; amd. 1998 Code)
7-9-9: PLACING MATERIALS ON PUBLIC PROPERTY:
No person shall deposit, place, store, or maintain upon any public place of the City, any stone, brick,
sand, concrete, or other materials which may impede the free passage of water, air, and fertilizer to
the roots of any tree growing therein, except by written permit of the Municipal Arborist. (Ord. 2-91, 2-
5-1991)
7-9-10: PENALTY:
Any person violating or failing to comply with any of the provisions of this Chapter shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be subject to penalty as provided in Section 1-4-1 of
this Code. (Ord. 2-91, 2-5-1991; amd. 1998 Code)
Chapter 10
EXCAVATIONS WITHIN PUBLIC RIGHTS OF WAY
7-10-1: PERMIT REQUIRED:
A permit for the excavation in public rights of way shall be secured from the City Manager prior to
making said excavation. (Ord. 7-79, 5-15-1979)
7-10-2: PERMIT FEE:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 161/349
Upon submission of application and payment of a twenty five dollar ($25.00) permit fee, the City
Manager shall issue said permit, provided all requirements as set forth in Section 7-10-3 of this
Chapter are adhered to. (Ord. 7-79, 5-15-1979)
7-10-3: EXCAVATION REQUIREMENTS:
A. Clean Cut: Excavations shall be clean cut so as to permit proper surface replacement.
B. Backfilling: Trenches shall be backfilled and tamped in one foot (1') layers when required by the
Road Superintendent.
C. Subgrades: Street subgrades shall have eighteen inches (18") of compacted subsurface with four
inches (4") asphaltic top on asphalt streets or eight inches (8") concrete top on concrete streets.
D. Inspection: Final excavation repairs shall be inspected and approved by the City Road
Superintendent. (Ord. 7-79, 5-15-1979)
7-10-4: DEPOSIT TO ENSURE PROPER REPAIR OF EXCAVATION:
In addition to the nonrefundable twenty five dollar ($25.00) permit fee, the applicant shall deposit with
the City a sum of monies as estimated by the City to ensure proper repair of the excavation. Said
deposit shall be calculated on potential costs that the City may incur if the applicant fails to fulfill his
obligations in repairing the excavation satisfactorily. (Ord. 7-79, 5-15-1979)
7-10-5: PROOF OF INSURANCE:
The applicant shall provide to the City proof of having adequate liability insurance which will hold the
City harmless from any damages incurred. (Ord. 7-79, 5-15-1979)
Chapter 11
CABLE TELEVISION
7-11-1: TITLE:
This Chapter shall be known and may be cited as the WEST LIBERTY CABLE TELEVISION
REGULATORY AND FRANCHISING ORDINANCE OF 1995. (Ord. 3-95, 3-21-1995)
7-11-2: DEFINITIONS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 162/349
The following words shall have the meanings set forth in this Section unless the context shall clearly
require otherwise:
ACT OR CABLE ACT: The Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984 (47 USC 521 et seq.) as
amended by the Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 1992.
BASIC CABLE EQUIPMENT: The equipment used by subscribers to receive the basic service tier,
including, but not limited to, converter boxes, remote controls, connections for additional television
sets and cable home wiring,
BASIC CABLE SERVICE: Any service tier which includes, at a minimum, the transmission of local
television broadcast signals, and any other television signals other than superstations.
BROADCAST SERVICES: A broad category of programming which is received from broadcast
television, low-power television, and radio stations and is capable of being received in the City.
CABLE COMMUNICATION SYSTEM OR SYSTEM (Also Referred To As Cable Television System,
Cable System, CATV System, Or Community Antenna TV System): A facility consisting of a set of
closed transmission paths and associated signal generation, reception, and control equipment, that is
designed to provide cable service, which includes video programming and which is provided to
multiple subscribers within a community, but such term does not include:
A. A facility that serves only to retransmit the television signals of one or more television broadcast
stations;
B. A facility that serves only subscribers in one or more multiple unit dwellings under common
ownership, control, or management, unless such facility uses any public right of way;
C. A facility of a common carrier, except that such facility shall be considered a cable system to the
extent such facility is used in the transmission of video programming directly to subscribers; or
D. Any facilities of any electric utility used solely for operating its electric utility system.
CABLE SERVICE: The total of the following:
A. The one-way transmission to subscribers of video programming or other programming services;
and
B. Subscriber interaction, if any, which is required for the selection of such video programming or
other programming service.
CABLECAST SIGNAL: A nonbroadcast signal that originates within the facilities of the cable
communications system.
CHANNEL OR CABLE CHANNEL: A portion of the electromagnetic frequency spectrum which is used
in a cable system and which is capable of delivering a television channel as defined by the Federal
Communications Commission.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 163/349
COMMENCE CONSTRUCTION: The time and date when construction of the cable communications
system is considered to have commenced, which shall be when the first connection is physically made
to a utility pole, or undergrounding of cables is initiated, after preliminary engineering (including strand
mapping) and after all necessary permits and authorizations have been obtained.
COMMENCE OPERATION: That time and date when operation of the cable communications system
is considered to have commenced which shall be when sufficient distribution facilities have been
installed so as to permit the offering of full services to a dwelling unit located within the franchise area.
COMMERCIAL USE CHANNEL(S): The channel capacity designated for commercial use as defined
and required by Federal law.
COMPLETION OF CONSTRUCTION: That point in time when all distribution facilities specified in the
franchise agreement have been installed by the grantee so as to permit the offering of cable service to
all of the potential subscribers in the franchise area, as well as the provision, in an operational state, of
any facilities required by the franchise agreement.
CONTROL OR CONTROLLING INTEREST: Actual working control or ownership of a West Liberty
cable system in whatever manner exercised. A rebuttable presumption of the existence of control or a
controlling interest shall arise from the beneficial ownership, directly or indirectly, by any person or
entity (except underwriters during the period in which they are offering securities to the public) of fifty
percent (50%) or more of a West Liberty cable system or the franchise under which the system is
operated. A change in the control or controlling interest of an entity which has control or a controlling
interest in a grantee shall constitute a change in the control or controlling interest of the West Liberty
cable system under the same criteria. "Control" or "controlling interest" as used herein may be held
simultaneously by more than one person or entity.
CONVERTER: An electronic device which converts signal carriers from one form to another.
DEVELOPED PARCEL: Any area of the City where there are at least thirty (30) occupied homes per
mile to be served by either aerial cable plants or by cable underground plants as measured from the
closest cable television distribution facility.
DWELLING UNIT: Any individual or multiple residential place of occupancy.
FCC: The Federal Communications Commission and any legally appointed or elected successor.
FRANCHISE: The right granted through a franchise agreement between the grantor and a person by
which the grantor authorizes such person to erect, construct, reconstruct, operate, dismantle, test, use
and maintain a system in the City.
FRANCHISE AGREEMENT: A contractual agreement entered into between the grantor and any
grantee hereunder which is enforceable by grantor and said grantee and which sets forth the rights
and obligations between grantor and said grantee in connection with the franchise.
FRANCHISE FEE: Any assessment imposed hereunder by the grantor on a grantee solely because of
its status thereas. The term "franchise fee" does not include:
A. Any tax, fee, or assessment of general applicability, including any such tax for or assessment
imposed on both utilities and cable operators or their services, but not including a tax, fee or
assessment which is unduly discriminatory against grantee;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 164/349
B. Capital costs which are required by the franchise to be incurred by grantee for educational or
governmental access facilities;
C. Requirements or charges incidental to the awarding or enforcing of the franchise, including
payments for bonds, security funds, letters of credit, insurance, consulting or legal costs,
indemnification, penalties or liquidated damages; or
D. Any fee imposed under title 17, United States Code.
GRANTEE OR APPLICANT: Any person granted a franchise hereunder, its agents, employees, or
subsidiaries.
GRANTOR: The City.
GROSS SUBSCRIBER RECEIPTS: As the term is used in calculating franchise fees, the revenues
actually received by, rather than merely billed by, the grantee from its cable television subscribers
within the City after deducting the following: a) any fees or assessments levied on subscribers or
users of the system which are collected by the grantee for payment to a governmental entity; b)
franchise fees paid by the grantee to the City; c) State or local sales or property taxes imposed on the
grantee and paid to a governmental entity; and d) Federal copyright fees paid by the grantee to the
Copyright Tribunal in Washington, DC.
INITIAL SERVICE AREA: The area of the City which will receive service initially, as set forth in the
franchise agreement.
INSTALLATION: The connection of the system from feeder cable to subscribers, terminals, and the
initial provision of service.
LEASED ACCESS: The use of the system by any business enterprise or other entity whether profit,
nonprofit or governmental, to render services to the citizens of the City, and shall include, without
limitation, all use pursuant to section 532 of the Act.
LOCAL ORIGINATION CHANNEL: Any channel where the grantee or its designated agent is the
primary programmer, and provides locally-produced video programs to subscribers.
NORMAL BUSINESS HOURS: As applied to the grantee, those hours during which similar
businesses in the City are open to serve customers. In all cases, "normal business hours" must
include some evening hours at least one night per week and/or some weekend hours.
NORMAL OPERATING CONDITIONS: Those service conditions which are within the control of the
grantee. Those conditions which are not within the control of the grantee include, but are not limited
to, natural disasters, civil disturbances, power outages, telephone network outages, and severe or
unusual weather conditions. Those conditions which are ordinarily within the control of the grantee
include, but are not limited to, special promotions, pay-per-view events, rate increases, regular peak
or seasonal demand periods, and maintenance or upgrade of the cable system.
PERSON: Any individual, firm, corporation, limited liability company, partnership, association, joint
venture or organization of any kind and the lawful trustee, successor, assignee, transferee or personal
representative thereof.
PUBLIC/EDUCATION/GOVERNMENT ACCESS FACILITIES OR "PEG" ACCESS FACILITIES: The
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 165/349
total of the following:
A. Channel capacity designated for public, educational or governmental use; and
B. Facilities and equipment for the use of such channel capacity.
RESIDENT: Any person residing in the City as otherwise defined by applicable law.
SCHOOL: Any public or private elementary school, secondary school, junior college, college or
university which conducts classes or provides instructional services and which has been granted a
certificate of recognition by the State of Iowa.
SERVICE AREA OR FRANCHISE AREA: The entire geographic area within the City designated in a
franchise agreement to receive cable service.
SERVICE INTERRUPTION: The loss of picture or sound on one or more cable channels.
STREET: The surface of and the space above and below any public street, road, highway, freeway,
easement, lane, path, alley, court, sidewalk, parkway, driveway or other public way now or hereafter
existing as such within the City.
SUBSCRIBER: Any person who legally receives any one or more of the services provided by the
system. (Ord. 3-95, 3-21-1995)
7-11-3: INTENT:
The City finds that the development of cable communications systems has the potential of great
benefit and impact upon the residents of West Liberty. Because of the complex and rapidly changing
technology associated with cable television, the City finds that the public health, safety and general
welfare can best be served by establishing certain regulatory powers in the City as this Chapter shall
designate. It is the intent of this Chapter to provide for the means to attain the best possible
communication and developmental results in the public interest and for such public purpose, in these
matters. Any franchise granted pursuant to this Chapter shall be deemed to include these findings as
an integral part thereof. (Ord. 3-95, 3-21-1995)
7-11-4: FRANCHISE TERRITORY:
A franchise granted under this Chapter is for the territorial limits of the City as they may exist now and
in the future.
A. Conditions And Area Of Service: Grantee shall offer service within the franchise territory and to any
area annexed thereto during the term of the franchise, without regard to the race, religion, income,
national origin, disability status, age, or gender of the subscriber, subject to the following:
whenever the grantee receives a request for service from at least ten (10) single-family residence
connections within one thousand five hundred feet (1,500') of its distribution cable, it shall extend
the CATV system to such subscribers at no cost to the subscribers other than the usual connection
and service fees for all subscribers; provided, that such CATV system extension is technically and
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 166/349
physically feasible. Measurement of the general density standard for service to any area shall be
from the closest existing point of the grantee's CATV system. No person in the grantee's service
area shall be arbitrarily refused service. However, in unusual circumstances or service to
subscribers of a density of less than ten (10) single-family residences per one thousand five
hundred feet (1,500') of the distribution cable, in order that the existing subscribers shall not be
unfairly burdened, service may be made available on the basis of a capital contribution by the
prospective subscriber to the grantee, including reimbursement for the grantees cost of materials,
labor, and easements.
B. Uniform Rates; Exceptions: Grantee shall offer service at equal rates, and on an equal basis with
regard to deposits and service packages, to all residents. Grantee may, however, discontinue or
refuse service to subscribers and potential subscribers who have not paid applicable charges.
Further, the grantee may offer special services or rates to senior citizens, or services to
commercial subscribers at rates different from those charged residential subscribers, which shall
include, but not be limited to, charges for installation on a time and material basis. The grantee
may also enter into separate contracts with multiple dwelling unit buildings and may charge
discounted rates for services based upon single point billing or other contractual considerations.
This Section does not preclude the grantee from offering promotional rates for service
introductions or temporary promotional discounts.
C. Public Buildings, Access: Grantee shall provide a drop and basic service for one outlet, at no
charge, to all current and future public buildings, including, but not limited to, city halls, fire stations,
public libraries, and public schools, that are presently located in the existing cable TV service area.
Any new public buildings, schools, city halls, fire stations, public libraries must be located within
five hundred feet (500') of the CATV system to receive basic service for one outlet at no charge.
(Ord. 3-95, 3-21-1995)
7-11-5: POLICE POWERS:
Nothing in this Chapter or in any franchise agreement hereunder shall be construed as an abrogation
by the City of any of its police powers. (Ord. 3-95, 3-21-1995)
7-11-6: GRANT OF FRANCHISE:
A. Application: All applicants for a franchise under this Chapter shall prepare and file a written
application with the grantor in such form as the grantor shall designate.
B. Review Of Application: Upon receipt of an application under this Chapter, the grantor shall review
the same and make the application available for public inspection at such places as the grantor
shall designate. A decision shall be made on the application by the grantor after evaluation thereof.
The grantor may grant one or more franchises, or may decline to grant any franchise.
C. Franchise Required: Subject to Federal and State law, no cable system shall be allowed to occupy
or use the streets in the franchise area or be allowed to operate without a franchise granted in
accordance with the provisions of this Chapter.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 167/349
D. Franchise Nonexclusive: Any franchise granted under this Chapter shall be revocable and
nonexclusive.
E. Franchise Requirements: Grantor may establish appropriate requirements for new franchises or
franchise renewals, and may modify these requirements from time to time to reflect changing
conditions and technology in the cable industry.
F. Grant: In the event the grantor shall grant to a grantee or renew a nonexclusive, revocable franchise
to construct, operate, maintain and reconstruct a cable system within the franchise area, said
franchise shall constitute both a right and an obligation to provide the service of a cable system as
required by this Chapter and the terms of the franchise agreement.
G. Conflict With Federal Or State Laws: Any franchise granted under this Chapter shall be consistent
with Federal laws and regulations and State general laws and regulations. In the event of a conflict
between the terms and conditions of the franchise agreement and the terms and conditions of
Federal or State law under which grantor can grant a franchise, except where the application of
such Federal or State law would impose inconsistent or additional material obligations or duties
upon grantee, such general law or requirements shall control.
H. Revisions: Any franchise granted under this Chapter is hereby made subject to any revisions of this
Chapter and the general ordinances of the City; provided, that such revisions do not materially
alter or impair the obligations of grantee set forth in any franchise agreement.
I. Term: The term of any new or renewal franchise granted under this Chapter shall be established in
the franchise agreement; provided, that in no event shall any franchise granted under this Chapter
exceed the term of fifteen (15) years.
J. Other Licenses Or Permits: A franchise granted under this Chapter shall not take the place of any
other license or permit legally required of a grantee. (Ord. 3-95, 3-21-1995)
7-11-7: FRANCHISE ACCEPTANCE:
A. Bond; Insurance: To accept a franchise granted under this Chapter, a grantee must file any required
bonds, funds and proof of insurance, as well as written notice of acceptance with the City Clerk
within forty five (45) days of the effective date of the franchise agreement.
B. Certification: Such written notice shall include a certification that the grantee:
1. Will comply with this Chapter, any franchise agreements made pursuant to this Chapter, and all
applicable City, County, State and Federal regulations in regard to the construction, operation
and maintenance of a cable system;
2. Accepts the franchise relying on its own investigation and understanding of the power and
authority of the grantor to grant the franchise and the terms and conditions thereof;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 168/349
3. Acknowledges that it has not been induced to enter into the franchise by any understanding or
promise or by other statement, whether written or verbal, by or on behalf of the grantor or by any
other third person concerning any term or condition of the franchise or Chapter not expressed
herein;
4. Shall have no recourse whatsoever against the grantor for any loss, cost, expense or damage
arising out of any provision or requirement of a franchise or the enforcement thereof, or for the
failure of the grantor to have authority to grant any or all parts of the franchise;
5. Agrees that, in the event of any conflict between this Chapter and the franchise agreement, the
terms of the franchise agreement shall prevail;
6. Will not at any time claim in any proceeding involving the grantor that any condition or term of
the franchise or this Chapter is unreasonable, arbitrary, or void, or that the grantor had no power
or authority to make any such term or condition, but shall accept the validity of the terms and
conditions of the franchise and this Chapter in their entirety, except as provided by local, State,
Federal law or FCC rules and regulations.
C. Initial Payment: A grantee of a franchise granted or transferred under this Chapter may, at the time
of acceptance of the franchise, provide an initial payment to the grantor in the amount of the
grantor's cost for printing, and publication cost incurred in granting the franchise. (Ord. 3-95, 3-21-
1995)
7-11-8: TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP OR CONTROL:
A. Transfer Of Franchise: Any franchise granted under this Chapter shall be a privilege to be held for
the benefit of the public. Any franchise so granted cannot, in any event, be sold, transferred,
leased, assigned or disposed of, including, but not limited to, by forced or voluntary sale, merger,
consolidation, or other means, without the prior written consent of the grantor, and then only under
such reasonable conditions as the grantor may establish. Such consent as required by the grantor,
shall be given or denied no later than one hundred twenty (120) days following any request, and
shall not be unreasonably withheld. Prior consent shall not be required when transferring the
franchise between wholly-owned subsidiaries of the same entity.
B. Ownership Or Control: The grantee shall promptly notify in writing the grantor of any proposed
change in, or transfer of, or acquisition by any other party of, control of the grantee. A rebuttable
presumption that a transfer of control has occurred shall arise upon the acquisition or transfer by
any person or group of persons consisting of fifty percent (50%) or more of the beneficial
ownership interest of the grantee. Every change, transfer, or acquisition of control of the grantee
shall make the franchise subject to cancellation unless and until the grantor shall have consented
in writing thereto, which consent shall be given or denied no later than one hundred twenty (120)
days following any request, and shall not be unreasonably withheld. For the purpose of
determining whether it shall consent to such change, transfer or acquisition of control, the grantor
may inquire into the qualifications of the prospective controlling party, and the grantee shall assist
the grantor in any such inquiry. In seeking the grantee's consent to any change in ownership or
control, the grantee shall have the responsibility:
1. To show to the satisfaction of the grantor whether the proposed purchaser, transferee, or
assignee (the "proposed transferee"), which in the case of a corporation, shall include all
directors and all persons having a legal or equitable interest of fifty percent (50%) or more of the
voting stock:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 169/349
a. Has ever been convicted or held liable for acts involving moral turpitude including, but not
limited to, any violation of Federal, State or local laws or regulations, or is presently under an
indictment, investigation or complaint charging such acts;
b. Has ever had a judgment in an action for fraud, deceit or misrepresentation entered against it,
her, him, or them by any court of competent jurisdiction; or
c. Has pending any legal claim, lawsuit or administrative proceeding arising out of or involving a
cable system.
2. To establish, to the satisfaction of the grantor, the financial solvency of the proposed transferee
by submitting all current financial data for the proposed transferee which the grantee was
required to submit in its franchise application, and such other data as the grantor may request,
where the same shall be audited, certified and qualified by a certified public accountant.
3. To establish to the satisfaction of the grantor that the financial and technical capability of the
proposed transferee is such as shall enable it to maintain and operate the cable system for the
remaining term of the franchise under the existing franchise terms.
C. Default By Grantee; Control By Financial Institution: Any financial institution having a pledge of the
franchise or its assets for the advancement of money for the construction and/or operation of the
franchise shall have the right to notify the grantor that the financial institution, or its designee, as
approved in writing by the grantor, shall take control and operate the cable system in the event of a
grantee default in its financial obligations. Further, said financial institution shall also submit a plan
for such operation that will ensure continued service and compliance with all franchise
requirements during the term the financial institution exercises control over the system. The
financial institution shall not exercise control over the system for a period exceeding one year
unless extended by the grantor in its discretion, but during said period of time it shall have the right
to petition the grantor to transfer the franchise to another grantee. Except insofar as the
enforceability of this subsection may be limited by applicable bankruptcy, insolvency,
reorganization, moratorium or similar laws affecting creditors' rights generally, and further subject
to applicable Federal, State or local law, if the grantor finds that such transfer, after considering the
legal, financial, character, technical and other public interest qualities of the proposed transferee, is
satisfactory, the grantor shall transfer and assign the right and obligations of such franchise as in
the public interest. The consent of the grantor to such transfer shall be given or denied no less
than one hundred twenty (120) days after any request, and shall not be unreasonably withheld.
D. Approval Of Transfer: The consent or approval of the grantor to any transfer by the grantee shall
not constitute a waiver or release of the rights of the grantor in and to the streets, and any transfer
shall, by its terms, be expressly subject to the terms and conditions of any franchise.
E. Initial Construction: In the absence of extraordinary circumstances, the grantor shall not approve
any transfer or assignment of the franchise prior to completion of initial construction of the cable
system.
F. Successor In Interest: In no event shall a transfer of ownership or control be approved without the
successor in interest becoming a signatory of the franchise agreement.
G. Conditions Of Transfer Approval: The grantor may approve the transfer, deny the transfer with
cause, or conditionally approve the transfer; provided, that the grantor shall not unreasonably
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 170/349
refuse to approve the transfer or condition the transfer upon unreasonable conditions. The
conditions the grantor may attach to the transfer approval may include, but are not limited to:
reimbursement for reasonable and necessary expenses incurred in evaluating the transfer request;
remedy of any existing or historical violations of City ordinances or the franchise agreement;
payment of all fees and penalties owed by the grantee at the time of transfer approval, and a
guarantee by the proposed transferee to abide by any and all ordinances, agreements and
conditions placed upon the franchise and system by the grantor and existing grantee, unless
mutually removed by the grantor and grantee.
H. Acceptance By New Grantee: When the grantee approves a transfer under this Section, the new
grantee shall indicate acceptance of the franchise as specified in Section 7-11-7 of this Chapter,
including the filing of all necessary bonds, funds, proofs of insurance and certifications. (Ord. 3-95,
3-21-1995)
7-11-9: FRANCHISE RENEWAL:
A. Update Terms; Reevaluate Community Needs: The grantor may decide to renew a franchise
granted under this Chapter if the grantee files a written request for such a renewal. At the time of
such request, the grantor may update this Chapter and reevaluate the needs of the community for
cable service and the performance of the grantee.
B. Statutory Authority Applied: To the extent applicable, the Cable Act shall govern the procedures and
standards for renewal of any franchise awarded pursuant to this Chapter.
C. Conditions Established By Grantor: To the extent that the Cable Act is not applicable, the grantor in
its sole discretion and judgment shall have the right to grant, deny or conditionally grant renewal of
a franchise; provided, that the grantor shall not unreasonably refuse to renew the franchise or
unreasonably condition the renewal. The conditions the grantor may place on its approval shall
include, but are not limited to: reimbursement for reasonable expenses incurred in evaluating the
request for renewal; updating this Chapter and surveying community cable needs; remedy of
historical or existing violations of the franchise or this Chapter; payment of all fees and penalties
owed by the grantee at the time of the renewal; acceptance of any updated ordinance; and
acceptance of any updated franchise agreement.
D. Effective Date Of Amendments: Unless otherwise agreed upon, any amended cable ordinance or
provision thereunder adopted before the franchise renewal shall take effect at the franchise
renewal.
E. Acceptance Of Renewal: When the grantor approves a franchise renewal, the grantee shall accept
the renewed franchise under the procedures set out in Section 7-11-7 of this Chapter. (Ord. 3-95,
3-21-1995)
7-11-10: FRANCHISE FEE:
A. Basis For Franchise Payment: A grantee shall pay to the grantor a fee in an amount as designated
in the franchise agreement, which amount shall not be less than five percent (5%) of grantee's
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 171/349
gross subscriber receipts or such other maximum amount as allowed by applicable law. Such
payment shall commence as of the effective date of the franchise or any renewal date. The grantor
shall furnish, on an annual basis, a statement within one hundred twenty (120) days of the close of
the calendar year, either audited and certified by an independent certified public accountant or
certified by a financial officer of the grantee, reflecting the total amount of the revenue and all
payments, deductions and computations for the period covered by the payment. Upon ten (10)
days' prior written notice, grantor shall have the right to conduct an independent audit of grantee's
records, in accordance with generally accepted accounting procedures, and if such audit indicates
a franchise fee underpayment of five percent (5%) or more, the grantee shall assume all
reasonable costs of such an audit.
B. Acceptance By Grantor: No acceptance of any payment by the grantor shall be construed as a
release or as an accord and satisfaction of any claim the grantor may have for further or additional
sums payable as a franchise fee under this Chapter or for the performance of any other obligations
of the grantee.
C. Failure To Make Required Payment: In the event that any franchise payment or recomputed
amount is not made on or before the dates specified herein, grantee shall pay an additional
compensation:
1. An interest charge, computed from such due date, at an annual rate equal to the average rate of
return on invested funds of the grantor during the period for which payment was due.
2. If the payment is late by forty five (45) days or more, a sum of money equal to five percent (5%)
of the amount due in order to defray those additional expenses and costs incurred by the grantor
by reason of delinquent payment.
D. Quarterly Payment Schedule: The franchise fee shall be paid on a quarterly basis according to the
following schedule: revenues for January through March shall be reflected in a May 15 payment;
revenues for April through June shall be reflected in an August 15 payment; revenues for July
through September in a November 15 payment; and revenues for October through December in a
February 15 payment.
E. Pass Through: Any grantee "pass through" or itemization of franchise fee costs on subscribers' bills
shall be in accordance with Federal law. (Ord. 3-95, 3-21-1995)
7-11-11: REVOCATION OF FRANCHISE:
A. Grounds For Revocation: If the grantee has been given due notice and a reasonable opportunity to
cure, the grantor reserves the right to revoke any franchise granted hereunder and rescind all
rights and privileges associated with the franchise in the following circumstances, each of which
shall represent a default under this Chapter and a material breach of the franchise:
1. If the grantee shall default in the performance of any of its material obligations under this
Chapter or under such documents, agreements and other terms and provisions entered into by
and between the grantor and the grantee, subject to the provisions on cure.
2. If the grantee should fail to provide or maintain in full force and effect, the liability and
indemnification coverage or the security fund or bonds as required herein.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 172/349
3. If any court of competent jurisdiction, or any Federal or State regulatory body by rules, decisions
or other action, determines that any material provision of the franchise documents, including this
Chapter, the franchise agreement and grantee's proposal is invalid or unenforceable prior to the
commencement of initial system construction.
4. If the grantee ceases to provide service for a period exceeding thirty (30) days for any reason
within the control of the grantee over the cable system, or abandons the management and/or
operation of the system.
5. If the grantee wilfully violates any of the material provisions of this Chapter or the franchise
agreement or attempts to practice any fraud or deceit upon the grantor.
6. If the grantee becomes insolvent, or upon listing of an order for relief in favor of grantee in a
bankruptcy proceeding.
7. If the grantee transfers a controlling interest of the franchise without the prior approval or
consent of the grantor as required in Section 7-11-8 of this Chapter.
B. Procedure Prior To Revocation:
1. The grantor may make a written demand that the grantee comply with any such requirement,
limitation, term, condition, rule or regulation, or correct any action deemed cause for revocation.
Such written demand shall detail the exact nature of the alleged noncompliance. In the event the
stated violation is not reasonably curable within thirty (30) days, the franchise shall not be
terminated or revoked, or damages assessed, if the grantee provides within the said thirty (30)
days a plan, satisfactory to the grantor, to remedy the violation. If the failure, refusal or neglect of
the grantee continues for a period exceeding thirty (30) days following receipt of such written
demand by the grantee, the grantor may terminate the franchise agreement in accordance with
the procedures set forth in Section 7-11-12 of this Chapter.
2. The grantor shall hear any persons interested therein, and shall determine, within ninety (90)
days, based upon the preponderance of the evidence, whether the grantee has committed a
material breach of this Chapter or the franchise agreement, and if so, whether such breach was
wilful.
3. If the grantor determines that the grantee has wilfully committed a material breach, then the
grantor may, by resolution, declare that the franchise of such grantee shall be terminated and
security fund and bonds forfeited, or the grantor may, at its option and if the material breach is
capable of being cured by the grantee, direct the grantee to take appropriate remedial action
within such time and manner and upon such terms and conditions as the grantor shall determine
are reasonable under the circumstances. (Ord. 3-95, 3-21-1995)
7-11-12: PROCEDURES ON TERMINATION:
A. Disposition Of Facilities: Subject to Federal, State and local laws, in the event a franchise expires,
is revoked, or otherwise terminated, the grantor may order the removal of the aboveground system
facilities from the franchise area within a reasonable period of time as determined by the grantor or
require the original grantee to maintain and operate its cable system for a period not to exceed
twenty four (24) months as indicated in subsection D below.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 173/349
B. Restoration Of Property: In removing its plant, structures, and equipment, the grantee shall refill, at
its own expense, any excavation that shall be made by it and shall leave all public ways and places
in as good condition as that prevailing prior to the grantee's removal of its plant, structures and
equipment without affecting the electrical or telephone cable wires, or attachments. The grantee's
insurance, indemnity obligations, performance bond(s) and security fund(s) required by this
Chapter and by the franchise agreement, shall continue in full force and effect during the period of
removal and until full compliance by the grantee with the terms and conditions of this Section.
C. Restoration By Grantor; Reimbursement Of Costs: In the event of a failure by the grantee to
complete any work required by subsection A above and/or subsection B above, or any other work
required by grantor by law or ordinance, within thirty (30) days after receipt of written notice, and to
the satisfaction of the grantor, the grantor may cause such work to be done and the grantee shall
reimburse the grantor the cost thereof within thirty (30) days after receipt of an itemized list of such
costs or the grantor may recover such costs through the security fund or bonds provided by
grantee. The grantor shall be permitted to seek legal and equitable relief to enforce the provisions
of this Section.
D. Extended Operation: Subject to Federal, State and local law, upon either the expiration or
revocation of a franchise, the grantor may require the grantee to continue to operate the cable
system for a defined period of time not to exceed twenty four (24) months from the date of such
expiration or revocation. The grantee shall, as trustee for its successor in interest, continue to
operate the cable communications system under the terms and conditions of this Chapter and the
franchise agreement and to provide the regular cable service and any of the other services that
may be provided at that time.
E. Grantor's Right Not Affected: The termination and forfeiture of any franchise shall in no way affect
any of the rights of the grantor under any provision of law. (Ord. 3-95, 3-21-1995)
7-11-13: RECEIVERSHIP, CONDEMNATION AND FORECLOSURE:
A. Operation By Receiver: Any franchise granted shall, at the option of the grantor, cease and
terminate one hundred twenty (120) days after the appointment of a receiver or receivers or trustee
or trustees designated to take over and conduct the business of the grantee, whether in a
receivership, reorganization, condemnation, bankruptcy or other action or proceeding unless such
receivership or trusteeship shall have been vacated prior to the expiration of said one hundred
twenty (120) days, or unless:
1. Such receivers or trustees shall have, within one hundred twenty (120) days after their election
or appointment, fully complied with all the terms and provisions of this Chapter and the franchise
granted pursuant hereto, and the receivers or trustees within said one hundred twenty (120)
days shall have remedied all defaults under the franchise; and
2. Such receivers or trustees shall, within said one hundred twenty (120) days, execute an
agreement duly approved by the court having jurisdiction in the premises, whereby such
receivers or trustees assume and agree to be bound by each and every term, provision and
limitation of the franchise agreement.
B. Involuntary Sale: In the case of a foreclosure or other involuntary sale of the plant, property and
equipment of the grantee, or any part thereof, the grantor may serve notice of termination upon the
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 174/349
grantee and to the purchaser at such sale, in which event the franchise and rights and privileges of
the grantee hereunder shall cease and terminate thirty (30) days after service of such notice,
unless:
1. The grantor shall have approved the transfer of the franchise, as and in the manner in this
Chapter provided; and
2. Such successful purchaser shall have covenanted and agreed with the grantor to assume and
be bound by all the terms and conditions of the franchise agreement. (Ord. 3-95, 3-21-1995)
7-11-14: FRANCHISE PROCESSING COSTS:
A. New Franchises: For a new franchise awarded, the costs to be borne by the grantee shall include,
but shall not be limited to, all costs of publication of notices prior to any public meeting, publication
of relevant ordinances and franchise agreements, incurred by the grantor in its study, preparation
of proposal solicitation documents, evaluation of all applications.
B. Franchise Renewal: For a franchise renewal, the grantee shall reimburse the grantor cost of
publication of notices, publication of relevant ordinances and franchise agreements.
C. Franchise Transfer: For a franchise transfer, the grantee shall reimburse the grantor cost of
publication of notices, publication of relevant ordinances and franchise agreements.
D. Other Costs: The processing costs provided for in this Section shall be in addition to any other
inspection or permit fee or other fees due to grantor under any other ordinance. (Ord. 3-95, 3-21-
1995)
7-11-15: AUTHORITY FOR USE OF STREETS:
A. Use Of Streets: For the purposes of operating and maintaining a system in the City, grantee may
erect, install, construct, repair, replace, reconstruct and retain in, on, over, under, across and along
the streets within the City, lines, cables, conductors, ducts, conduits, vaults, manholes, amplifiers,
appliances, pedestals, attachments and other property and equipment as are necessary and
appurtenant to the operation of the system; provided, that all applicable permits are applied for and
granted, all fees paid and all other City codes and ordinances otherwise complied with. However,
no rights hereunder may be transferred by grantee to any other entity except grantee's
construction agents.
B. Filing Plans: Prior to construction or alteration, grantee shall in each case file plans with all
appropriate City departments and receive written approval of such plans, which approval shall not
be unreasonably withheld. Grantee shall provide in writing a monthly progress report to grantor
through the completion of construction or alteration.
C. Noninterference: Grantee shall construct and maintain the system so as not to interfere with other
uses of streets. Grantee shall make use of existing poles and other facilities available to grantee
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 175/349
whenever practicable. Grantee shall notify all residents directly affected by proposed construction
prior to the commencement of that work.
D. Denial Of Use By Grantor: Notwithstanding the above grant to use the streets, no street shall be
used by grantee if grantor, in its sole opinion, determines that such use is inconsistent with the
conditions or provisions by which such street was created or dedicated, or presently used. (Ord. 3-
95, 3-21-1995)
7-11-16: CONDITIONS ON USE OF STREETS:
A. Limit Interference: All transmission and distribution structures, lines and equipment erected by
grantee within the City shall be so located as to cause minimum interference with the proper use of
streets and other public places and the rights and reasonable convenience of property owners who
adjoin such streets and other public places.
B. Restoration Of Streets: In case of disturbance of any street or public place, the grantee shall, at its
own cost and expense and in a manner approved by the City Engineer, replace and restore such
area in as good a condition as before the work involving such disturbance was done.
C. Tree Trimming: The grantee shall comply with the provisions of the West Liberty Tree Ordinance
(Chapter 9 of this Title), as amended. Each grantee shall be responsible for, shall indemnify,
defend and hold harmless the grantor and its officers, agents and employees from and against any
and all damages arising out of or resulting from the removal, trimming, mutilation of or injury to any
tree or trees proximately caused by the grantee or its officers, agents, employees, contractors or
subcontractors. (Ord. 3-95, 3-21-1995)
7-11-17: ERECTION OF POLES:
A. Consent To Erect Poles: No franchise shall be deemed to expressly or impliedly authorize the
grantee to construct or install poles or wire-holding structures within streets for the purpose of
placing cables, wires, lines or otherwise without the written consent of the grantor. Such consent
shall be given upon such terms and conditions as the City Engineer may prescribe, which shall
include a requirement that the grantee perform, at its sole expense, all tree trimmings required to
maintain the poles clear of obstructions.
B. Access To Poles: With respect to any poles or wire-holding structures which a grantee is authorized
to construct and install within streets, a public utility serving the grantor may, if denied the privilege
of utilizing such poles or wire-holding structures by the grantee, apply for such permission to the
City Engineer. If the City Engineer finds that such use would enhance the public convenience and
would not unduly interfere with the grantee's operations, the City Engineer may authorize such use
subject to such terms and conditions as the City Engineer deems appropriate. Such authorization
shall include the condition that the public utility pay to the grantee any and all actual and necessary
costs incurred by the grantee in permitting such use. Nothing herein shall be construed as a right
for the grantee to utilize public utility property. (Ord. 3-95, 3-21-1995)
7-11-18: UNDERGROUNDING:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 176/349
A. Underground Installation Required: Except as hereinafter provided, in all areas of the City where
the cables, wires and other like facilities of a public utility are placed underground, each grantee
shall construct and install its cables, wires and other facilities underground. Amplifier boxes and
pedestal mounted terminal boxes may be placed aboveground if existing technology reasonably
requires, but shall be of such size and design and shall be so located as not to be unsightly or
unsafe. In any area of the City where there are certain cables, wires and other like facilities of a
public utility underground and at least one operable cable, wire or like facility of a public utility is
suspended above the ground from poles, a grantee may construct and install its cables, wires and
other facilities from the same pole with permission of the utility company which owns the poles.
B. Relocation Underground: With respect to any cables, wires and other like facilities constructed and
installed by a grantee aboveground, the grantee shall, at its sole expense, reconstruct and reinstall
such cables, wires, or other facilities underground pursuant to any project under which the cables,
wires or other like facilities of all like utilities are placed underground within an area. (Ord. 3-95, 3-
21-1995)
7-11-19: RELOCATION:
If, during the term of a franchise, the grantor, a public utility, a sanitary district or any other similar
special district elects to alter, repair, realign, abandon, improve, vacate, reroute or change the grade of
any street, or to replace, repair, install, maintain, or otherwise alter any aboveground or underground
cable, wire, conduit, pipe, line pole, wire-holding structure, or other facility utilized for the provisions of
utility or other services or transportation of drainage, sewage or other liquids, the grantee shall, except
as otherwise hereinafter provided, at its sole expense, remove or relocate as necessary its poles,
wires, cables, underground conduits, manholes and any other facilities which it has installed. If such
removal or relocation is required within the subdivision in which all utility lines, including those for the
system, were installed at the same time, the entities may decide among themselves who is to bear the
cost of relocating; provided, that the grantor shall not be liable to a grantee for such costs. Regardless
of who bears the costs, a grantee shall take action to remove or relocate at such time or times as are
directed by the agency undertaking the work. Reasonable advance written notice shall be mailed to
the grantee advising the grantee of the date or dates that the removal or relocation is to be
undertaken. (Ord. 3-95, 3-21-1995)
7-11-20: ACCOMMODATE MOVEMENT OF BUILDINGS:
Each grantee shall, upon request by any person holding a building moving permit or other approval
issued by the grantor, temporarily remove, raise or lower its wires to permit the movement of buildings.
The expense of such removal, raising or lowering shall be paid by the persons requesting same, and a
grantee shall be authorized to require such payment in advance. A grantee shall be given not less
than thirty (30) days' written notice to arrange for such temporary wire changes. (Ord. 3-95, 3-21-
1995)
7-11-21: SYSTEM DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION:
A. System Design: A cable system shall be a minimum of three hundred (300) MHz bandwidth or its
functional equivalent.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 177/349
B. Service Policy: Service shall be provided to subscribers in accordance with the schedules and line
extension policies specified in Section 7-11-4 of this Chapter. Cable system construction and
provision of service shall be nondiscriminatory and grantee shall not delay or deter service to any
section of the franchise area on the grounds of economic preference.
C. PEG Facilities And Access Channel: Grantee shall provide a channel for use by the grantor for
public, educational, and government (PEG) cablecasting. Grantee will also provide to grantor, at no
charge, technical and engineering assistance in the development by grantor of PEG access
facilities. Grantee will also order for grantor, equipment for PEG access facilities at grantee's
discounts. Any equipment ordered by grantee for grantor will be at the expense of the grantor and
said equipment shall be owned by grantor.
D. System Construction Schedule:
1. Grantee shall comply with the requirements of the system construction or upgrade schedule
contained in the franchise agreement.
2. Grantee shall provide a detailed construction or upgrade plan indicating progress schedules,
area construction maps, test plan, and projected dates for adding service. In addition, grantee
shall update this information on a monthly basis, by submitting a copy of its normal internal
progress reports, showing specifically whether schedules are being met and the reason for any
delays.
E. Provision Of Service: After service has been established by activating trunk and distribution cables
for any area, grantee shall provide service to any requesting subscriber within the area within thirty
(30) days from the date of the request. (Ord. 3-95, 3-21-1995)
7-11-22: CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS:
A. Installation And Maintenance: Each grantee shall construct, install and maintain its system in a
manner consistent and in compliance with all applicable laws, ordinances, construction standards,
governmental requirements, and technical standards equivalent to those established by the FCC.
Each grantee shall provide to the grantor written reports of the grantee's annual proof of
performance tests conducted pursuant to FCC standards and requirements.
B. Compliance With Codes And Ordinances: Each grantee shall at all times comply with the National
Electrical Safety Code (established by the National Bureau of Standards); National Electrical Code;
National Bureau of Fire Underwriters; applicable FCC and other Federal, State and local
regulations; and codes and other ordinances of the City.
C. Safety Precautions: In any event, the system shall not endanger or interfere with the safety of
persons or property within the City or other areas where the grantee may have equipment located.
D. Compliance With Safety Standards: All working facilities, conditions and procedures used or
occurring during construction and maintenance of the system shall comply with the standards of
the Occupational Safety and Health Administration.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 178/349
E. Public And Private Utilities: Construction, installation and maintenance of the system shall be
performed in an orderly and workmanlike manner, and in close coordination with public and private
utilities serving the City, following accepted construction procedures and practices and working
through existing committees and organizations.
F. Installation Of Cables And Wires: All cable and wires shall be installed, where possible, parallel with
electric and telephone lines, and multiple cable configurations shall be arranged in parallel and
bundled with due respect for engineering considerations.
G. Antenna Structures: Any antenna structure used in the system shall comply with construction,
marking and lighting of antenna structures required by the United States Department of
Transportation.
H. Interference Signals: RF leakage shall be checked at reception locations for emergency radio
services so as to prove no interference signal combinations are possible.
I. Radiation: Radiation shall be measured adjacent to any proposed aeronautical navigation or
communication radio sites to prove no interference to air navigational reception. (Ord. 3-95, 3-21-
1995)
7-11-23: TECHNICAL STANDARDS:
A. Standards: The cable communications system shall meet all technical and performance standards
contained in the franchise agreement and as required by the FCC.
B. Test And Compliance Procedure: The grantee shall submit, within sixty (60) days after the effective
date of the franchise agreement, a detailed test plan describing the methods and schedules for
testing the cable system on an ongoing basis to determine compliance with the provisions of the
franchise agreement. The tests for basic cable service shall be performed at intervals no greater
than twelve (12) months. The tests may be witnessed by representatives of the grantor, and written
test reports shall be submitted to the grantor. If more than ten percent (10%) of the locations tested
fail to meet the performance standards, the grantee shall be required to indicate what corrective
measures have been taken, and the entire test shall be repeated. A second failure of more than
ten percent (10%) may be considered a breach of the franchise agreement.
C. Special Tests: At any time after commencement of service to subscribers, the grantor may require
additional tests, full or partial repeat tests, different test procedures, or tests involving a specific
subscriber's terminal. Requests for such additional tests will be made on the basis of complaints
received or other evidence indicating an unresolved controversy or significant noncompliance, and
such tests shall be limited to the particular matter in controversy. The grantor shall endeavor to so
arrange its requests for such special tests so as to minimize hardship or inconvenience to grantee
or to the subscriber.
D. Costs Of Tests: The costs of all tests required by subsections B and C of this Section, and retesting
as necessary, shall be borne by the grantee, except that if grantor requires the utilization of outside
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 179/349
consultants or test personnel, then such costs shall be borne by the grantor. (Ord. 3-95, 3-21-
1995)
7-11-24: SERVICES:
A. Services Provided: The grantee shall provide, as a minimum, the initial services listed in the
franchise agreement. Services shall not be reduced without prior notification to grantor.
B. Basic Cable Service: The "basic cable service" shall include any service tier which includes the
retransmission of local television signals. This service shall be provided to all subscribers at the
established monthly subscription rates.
C. Public Educational And Government (PEG) Access Channel: The grantee shall provide a channel
for use by the grantor for PEG purposes. Any equipment, interface equipment and cabling to
permit operation will be at the expense of the grantor.
D. Cable Channel For Commercial Use: The grantee shall designate channel capacity for commercial
use as required by the Act and applicable law. (Ord. 3-95, 3-21-1995)
7-11-25: CONSUMER SERVICE STANDARDS:
Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed to prevent or prohibit: a) the grantor and the grantee from
agreeing to exceed the customer service standards set forth herein; b) the establishment or
enforcement of any State or Municipal law or regulation concerning customer service or consumer
protection that imposes customer service or consumer protection requirements that exceed the
standards set forth herein, or address matters not addressed herein. The grantee shall maintain a
local office to provide the necessary facilities, equipment and personnel to comply with the following
consumer standards under normal conditions of operation:
A. Service Standards: The grantee shall render efficient service, make repairs promptly, and interrupt
service only for good cause and for the shortest time possible. Scheduled service interruptions,
insofar as possible, shall be preceded by notice and shall occur during periods of minimum use of
the system. A written log or an equivalent stored in computer memory and capable of access and
reproduction shall be maintained for all service interruptions and requests for cable service as
required by this Chapter.
B. Telephone Lines: Local toll-free or collect call telephone line capacity shall be made available by
grantee to customers twenty four (24) hours per day, seven (7) days a week, including holidays.
The grantee shall use best efforts under normal operating conditions during normal business hours
to ensure that a minimum average of ninety percent (90%) of all callers (measured on a quarterly
basis) for service will not be required to wait more than thirty (30) seconds before being connected
to a trained customer service representative, and shall receive a busy signal less than three
percent (3%) of the time (measured on a quarterly basis). If the call needs to be transferred, the
transfer time shall not exceed thirty (30) seconds. Inquiries received after normal business hours
may be answered by a service or an automated response system, and such calls must be
responded to by a trained company representative on the next business day.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 180/349
C. Regional Customer Service Center: Grantee shall maintain a regional customer service center with
a toll-free telephone number for the purpose of receiving inquiries, requests, and complaints
concerning all aspects of the establishment, construction, maintenance, and operation of the
system. The regional customer service center shall be open during normal business hours.
D. Installation Staff: An installation staff shall install service to any subscriber located up to two
hundred fifty feet (250') from the existing distribution system within seven (7) days after receipt of a
request. This standard shall be met no less than ninety five percent (95%) of the time, measured
on a quarterly basis.
E. Installation, Outages And Service Call Scheduling: Grantee shall schedule, either at a specific time,
or, at maximum, within a specified four (4) hour time period, all appointments with subscribers for
installation or service. Grantee may not cancel an appointment with a customer after the close of
business on the business day prior to the scheduled appointment. If a grantee representative is
running late for an appointment with a customer and will not be able to keep the appointment as
scheduled, the customer will be contacted. The appointment will be rescheduled, as necessary, at
a time which is convenient for the customer. These standards shall be met no less than ninety five
percent (95%) of the time, measured on a quarterly basis.
F. Repair Standards: The grantee shall maintain a repair force of technicians who, under normal
operating conditions, are capable of responding to subscriber requests for service within the
following time frames:
1. System Service Interruption: Under normal operating conditions, within two (2) hours, including
weekends, of receiving subscribers' calls which by number identify a system service interruption
of sound or picture on one or more channels, affecting all the subscribers of the system or two
percent (2%) thereof.
2. Isolated Service Interruption: Within twenty four (24) hours, including weekends, of receiving
requests for service identifying an isolated service interruption (less than 2 percent of
subscribers) of sound or picture for one or more channels. This standard shall be met no less
than ninety five percent (95%) of the time, measured on a quarterly basis.
3. Inferior Reception Quality: Within forty eight (48) hours, including weekends, of receiving a
request for service identifying a problem concerning picture or sound quality.
Grantee shall be deemed to have responded to a request for service under the provisions of this
Section when a technician arrives at the service location and begins work on the problem. In the
case of a subscriber not being home when the technician arrives, response shall be deemed to
have taken place if the technician leaves written notification of arrival.
G. Notification Of Service Interruption To City Manager: The grantee shall promptly notify the City
Manager, in writing, or, if appropriate, by oral communication, of any significant interruption in the
operation of the system. For the purposes of this Section, a "significant interruption in the operation
of the system" shall mean any interruption of sound or picture on one or more channels of a
duration of at least twenty four (24) hours to at least five percent (5%) of the subscribers.
H. Subscriber Credit For Service Interruption: Upon service interruption of subscriber's cable service,
the following shall apply:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 181/349
1. Grantee shall provide, at subscribers request, a credit for service interruptions of over four (4)
hours and up to seven (7) days a credit of one-thirtieth (1/30) of one month's fee for affected
service for each twenty four (24) hour period service is interrupted for four (4) or more hours.
2. For interruption of seven (7) days or more in one month, the grantee shall provide, at the
subscribers request, a credit that will be issued based on the hourly rate the subscriber pays for
all monthly service and the number of hours of the service interruption. (Ord. 3-95, 3-21-1995)
7-11-26: PROOF OF COMPLIANCE:
A. Compliance Records: Upon reasonable notice, grantee shall demonstrate compliance with any or
all of the standards required by this Chapter. Grantee shall provide sufficiently detailed information
to permit grantor to readily verify the extent of compliance.
B. Breach For Noncompliance: A repeated and verifiable pattern of noncompliance with the consumer
protection standards of Section 7-11-25 of this Chapter, after grantee's receipt of due notice and an
opportunity to cure, may be termed a breach of franchise, subject to any and all remedies
prescribed in this Chapter, the Act and applicable law. The grantee shall not be required to acquire
equipment or perform surveys to measure compliance with the telephone answering standards in
subsection 7-11-25B of this Chapter unless a historical record of complaints indicates a clear
failure to comply. (Ord. 3-95, 3-21-1995)
7-11-27: COMPLAINT PROCEDURES:
A. Complaints To Grantee: Grantee shall establish written procedures for receiving, acting upon and
resolving subscriber complaints without intervention by the grantor. The procedures shall prescribe
the manner in which a subscriber may submit a complaint, either orally or in writing. At the
conclusion of grantee's investigation of a subscriber complaint, but in no event more than ten (10)
days after receiving the complaint, grantee shall notify the subscriber of the results of the
investigation and its proposed action or resolution, if any. The grantee shall also notify the
subscriber of the subscriber's right to file a complaint with the grantor in the event the subscriber is
dissatisfied with the grantee's decision.
B. Complaints To Grantor: A subscriber who is dissatisfied with grantee's proposed decision shall be
entitled to have the complaint reviewed by the grantor. The subscriber shall initiate the review by
filing a complaint, together with the grantee's decision, if any, with the grantor, and by the grantor
notifying the grantee of the filing. The subscriber shall make such filing and notification within
twenty (20) days of receipt of grantee's decision or, if no grantee decision has been provided,
within thirty (30) days after filing the original complaint with grantee. The grantor may extend these
time limits for reasonable cause.
C. Review By Grantor: The grantor shall determine, upon a review of a subscriber complaint and the
grantee's decision, if any, whether further action is warranted. In the event the grantor does not
initiate further proceedings within fifteen (15) days of the filing of the complaint, the grantee's
proposed action or resolution shall be final. If the grantor decides to initiate further investigation,
the grantor shall require the grantee and the subscriber to submit, within ten (10) days of notice
thereof, a statement of the facts and arguments in support of their respective positions. The
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 182/349
grantor shall issue a written decision within fifteen (15) days of receipt of the statements or, if a
hearing is requested, within fifteen (15) days of the conclusion of the hearing, setting forth the
basis of the decision.
D. Remedies For Violations: The grantor may, as a part of a subscriber complaint decision issued
under the provisions of this Chapter, impose damages on the grantee. Damages may be imposed
only if the grantor finds that the grantee has arbitrarily refused or failed without justification, to
comply with the provisions of this Section. (Ord. 3-95, 3-21-1995)
7-11-28: SUBSCRIBER NOTICE:
A. Operating Policies: As subscribers are connected or reconnected to the cable system, and at least
annually, and at any time upon request, and when grantee's procedures change, under normal
operating conditions, the grantee shall provide each subscriber with written information concerning
products and services offered, prices and options for programming services and conditions of
subscription to programming and other services, installation and service maintenance policies,
instructions on how to use the cable services, channel positions of programming carried on the
system, the procedures for billing and making inquiries or complaints (including the name, address
and local telephone number of the employee or employees or agent to whom such inquiries or
complaints are to be addressed) and also furnish information concerning the grantor office
responsible for administration of the franchise including the name and telephone number of the
office. The notice shall also indicate grantee's business hours, legal holidays and procedures for
responding to inquiries after normal business hours. The grantee shall provide all subscribers and
the grantor written notice no less than thirty (30) days prior to any proposed change in these
policies.
B. Rates, Programming Service And Channel Position: The grantee, under normal operating
conditions, shall provide all subscribers and the grantor with notice of any change in rates,
programming services, or channel position at least thirty (30) days prior to the change(s) through
announcements on the cable system and in writing.
C. Billing: Bills shall be clear, concise, understandable and shall include the grantee's toll-free or
collect telephone number required by Section 7-11-25 of this Chapter. Bills shall be fully itemized,
with itemizations including, but not limited to, basic and premium service charges and equipment
charges. Bills shall also clearly delineate all activity during the billing period, including optional
charges, rebates and credits. In case of a billing dispute, the grantee shall respond to a written
complaint from a subscriber within thirty (30) days. Refund checks will be issued promptly, and no
later than either: 1) the customer's next billing cycle following resolution of the request, or thirty
(30) days, whichever is earlier; or 2) the return of the equipment supplied by the grantee, if service
is terminated. Credits for service shall be issued no later than the customer's next billing cycle
following the determination that a credit is warranted.
D. Copies To Grantor: Copies of all notices provided to subscribers shall be filed concurrently with the
grantor. (Ord. 3-95, 3-21-1995)
7-11-29: QUALITY OF SERVICE:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 183/349
The overall quality of service provided by grantee to subscribers may be subject to evaluation by
grantor, not less often than once annually. In addition, grantor may evaluate the quality of service at
any time, based upon the number of subscriber complaints received by the grantee, and the grantor,
and grantee's response to those complaints. Grantor's evaluation that service quality is inadequate
may lead to direction to grantee to cure the inadequacies. Grantee shall commence corrective action
within thirty (30) days after receipt of written notice. Failure to do so shall be deemed to be a breach of
the franchise and subject to the remedies prescribed in this Chapter. Grantor, after due process, may
utilize the performance bond and/or security fund provided for in this Chapter to remedy any such
franchise breach. (Ord. 3-95, 3-21-1995)
7-11-30: TENANT'S RIGHTS:
It is grantor's intent that tenants not be discriminated against in the ability to subscribe to cable
service. Grantee shall be required to provide service to tenants in individual units of a multiple housing
facility with all services offered to other dwelling units within the franchise area, so long as the owner
of the facility consents in writing, if requested by grantee, to the following:
A. Grantee's providing the service to units of the facility;
B. Reasonable conditions and time for installation, maintenance, and inspection of the system on the
facility premises;
C. Reasonable conditions promulgated by grantee to protect grantee's equipment and to encourage
widespread use of the system; and
D. No discrimination in rental charges, or otherwise, between tenants who receive cable service and
those who do not. (Ord. 3-95, 3-21-1995)
7-11-31: RIGHTS OF INDIVIDUALS:
A. Discrimination Prohibited: Grantee shall not deny service, deny access, or otherwise discriminate
against subscribers, PEG access channel users, or general citizens on the basis of income, race,
color, religion, national origin, age, gender, marital status or physical or mental disability. Grantee
shall comply at all times with the Act and all other applicable Federal, State and local laws and
regulations, and all executive and administrative orders relating to nondiscrimination which are
hereby incorporated and made part of this Chapter by reference.
B. Equal Employment: Grantee shall strictly adhere to the equal employment opportunity requirements
of Federal, State and local law and regulations in effect on the date of the franchise grant, and as
amended from time to time.
C. Personal Information: The grantee's policy with regard to personally identifiable information shall be
consistent with Federal law.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 184/349
D. Equal Accessibility: The entire system of the grantee shall be operated in a manner consistent with
the principle of fairness and equal accessibility of its facilities, equipment, channels, studios and
other services to all citizens, businesses, public agencies and other entities having a legitimate use
for the system, and no one shall be arbitrarily excluded from its use.
E. Discontinuation Of Service:
1. If a subscriber fails to pay any proper fee or charge for any service, the grantee may discontinue
said service; provided, that the subscriber has been given no less than thirteen (13) days' prior
notice of the intention to discontinue service.
2. If the grantee receives payment of all outstanding fees and charges, including any late charges,
prior to the expiration of the fifteenth day after receipt transmittal of said notice from the grantee,
then the grantee shall not discontinue said service. After any service has been discontinued,
upon request of the subscriber accompanied by payment in full of all fees or charges due the
grantee and the payment of an appropriate reconnection charge, if any, the grantee shall
promptly reinstate said service.
3. Subscribers and users shall retain the right to deactivate their terminals, but shall continue to be
responsible for charges until the grantee is notified to terminate service. The subscriber shall not
be charged any fee for the cancellation or downgrading of cable service. (Ord. 3-95, 3-21-1995)
7-11-32: CONTINUITY OF SERVICE:
A. Right To Continuous Service: It shall be the right of all subscribers to continue receiving service
insofar as their financial and other obligations to the grantee are honored. In the event that the
grantee elects to overbuild, rebuild, modify, or sell the system, or the grantor gives notice of intent
to terminate or fails to renew this franchise, the grantee shall act so as to ensure that all
subscribers receive continuous, uninterrupted service. In the event of a change of grantee, or in
the event a new operator acquires the system, the original grantee shall cooperate with the
grantor, new grantee or operator in maintaining continuity of service to all subscribers. During such
period, grantee shall be entitled to the revenue for any period during which it operates the system,
and shall be entitled to reasonable costs for its services when it no longer operates the system.
B. Right Of Grantor To Operate System: In the event grantee fails to operate the system for seven (7)
consecutive days without prior approval of the grantor or without just cause, the grantor may,
working in conjunction with any financial institution having a pledge of the franchise or its assets for
the advancement of money for the construction and/or operation of the franchise, operate the
system or designate an operator until such time as grantee restores service under conditions
acceptable to the grantor or a permanent operator is selected. If the grantor is required to fulfill this
obligation for the grantee, then during such period as the grantor fulfills such obligation, the grantor
shall be entitled to collect all revenues from the system, and the grantee shall reimburse the
grantor for all reasonable costs or damages in excess of the revenues collected by the grantor that
are the result of the grantee's failure to perform. (Ord. 3-95, 3-21-1995)
7-11-33: IDENTIFICATION OF EMPLOYEES:
Every employee of the grantee or its agents shall be clearly identified. All employees of the grantee
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 185/349
shall display proper identification upon request of a subscriber. Every vehicle of the grantee shall be
similarly identified. The grantee's telephone number shall also be clearly marked on all such vehicles.
(Ord. 3-95, 3-21-1995)
7-11-34: RECORDS:
A. Open Books And Records: The grantee shall manage all of its operations in accordance with a
policy of totally open books and records. The grantor, upon reasonable notice, shall have the right
to inspect at any time during normal business hours, all books, records, maps, plans, service
complaint logs, performance test results and other like materials of the grantee which relate to the
regulation of the franchise and are maintained at the local office required by Section 7-11-25 of this
Chapter; provided, that the grantor shall maintain the confidentiality of any trade secrets or other
proprietary information in the possession of the grantee; and provided further, that records shall be
exempt from inspection pursuant to this Section to the extent required by applicable law regarding
subscriber privacy and to the extent such records are protected by law against discovery in civil
litigation. If any such books or records are not kept by the local office, or upon reasonable request
made available to the grantor, and if the grantor shall determine that an examination of such
records is necessary or appropriate to the performance of any of grantor's duties, then grantee
shall make such records available locally.
B. Required Records: In any event, the grantee shall at all times maintain:
1. The complaint file required by Sections 7-11-25 and 7-11-43 of this Chapter.
2. A full and complete set of plans, records, and as-built maps showing the exact location of all
cable system equipment installed or in use in the franchise area, exclusive of subscriber service
drops. (Ord. 3-95, 3-21-1995)
7-11-35: REGULATORY AUTHORITY:
The grantor shall exercise regulatory authority under the provisions of this Chapter, the Act, and
applicable law. If the franchise area served by the cable system also serves other contiguous or
neighboring communities, grantor may, at its sole option, participate in a joint regulatory agency, with
delegated responsibility in the area of cable and related communications. (Ord. 3-95, 3-21-1995)
7-11-36: REGULATORY RESPONSIBILITY:
The grantor, acting alone or acting jointly with other grantors, may exercise or delegate the following
regulatory responsibilities:
A. Administering and enforcing the provisions of the cable communications system franchise(s),
B. Coordinating the operation of public, educational and government (PEG) access channel and
facilities,
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 186/349
C. Providing technical, programming and operational support to public agency users, such as
government departments, schools and health care institutions,
D. Establishing jointly with the grantee, or as otherwise specified in the franchise agreement,
procedures and standards for use of channels dedicated to public use and sharing of public
facilities, if provided for in any franchise agreement,
E. Planning expansion and growth of public benefit cable services,
F. Analyzing the possibility of integrating cable communications with other local, regional or national
telecommunications networks,
G. Formulating and recommending long-range telecommunications policy. (Ord. 3-95, 3-21-1995)
7-11-37: PUBLIC USAGE OF SYSTEM:
A. Noncommercial Cable Services: If so specified in the franchise agreement, the grantor may utilize a
portion of the cable communication system capacity, and associated facilities and resources, to
develop and provide noncommercial cable services that will be in the public interest. In furtherance
of this purpose, the grantor may establish a commission, public corporation, or other entity to
receive and allocate PEG and institutional network facilities, support funds and other
considerations provided by the grantor, the grantee, and/or others.
B. Cable Communications Commission Established; Duties: A Commission, to be known as the West
Liberty Cable Communications Commission, is hereby established, and this Commission shall be
appointed and shall have duties and authority as set forth herein:
1. Number, Qualifications And Tenure: The Commission shall consist of five (5) members, each of
whom shall be a resident of the City and shall hold office for a term of five (5) years; provided,
that appointments to the first Commission shall be for one, two (2), three (3), four (4) and five (5)
year terms, respectively.
2. Appointment Of Commissioners: Each Commissioner shall be appointed by the City Council and
any vacancy shall be filled by the Council for the unexpired portion of the predecessor's term.
3. Disqualified Persons: No person who is an employee of or has any ownership interest in a
franchise granted pursuant to this Chapter shall be eligible for membership on the Commission.
4. City Manager: The Manager shall serve as an ex officio advisor to the Commission.
5. Source Of Funds: The primary source of Commission funds shall be derived from the franchise
fee charged by the City.
6. Duties And Authority: The Commission is delegated the following responsibilities:
a. Receive and utilize or reallocate for utilization, channel capacity, facilities, funding and other
support provided specifically for PEG and institutional network usage of the cable
communications system.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 187/349
b. Establish, jointly with the grantee, operational procedures and guidelines for PEG and
institutional network usage.
c. Review the status and progress of each service developed for public benefit.
d. Reallocate resources jointly with the grantee on a periodic basis to conform with changing
priorities and public needs.
e. Report to the grantor and the grantee annually on the utilization of resources, the new public
services developed and the benefits achieved for the grantor and its residents. (Ord. 3-95, 3-
21-1995)
7-11-38: RATES:
The grantee shall establish rates for its services which shall be applied on a nondiscriminatory basis in
the service area, except for commercial and bulk account rates, which are negotiated individually.
Pursuant to Federal law, the grantor reserves the right to assume regulation of rates paid by cable
subscribers; such rate regulation shall be performed by the West Liberty Cable Commission as
advisory to the City Council in accordance with FCC Rules and Regulations (part 76, subpart N). As
specified by the FCC's Rules (part 76, subpart N), such rate regulation shall cover basic service rates
and customer premises, installations and equipment rates (including charges for, but not be limited to:
converter boxes, remote control units, connections for additional television receivers and other cable
home wiring). Grantor reserves the right to further regulate rates pursuant to any additional powers
granted it by either the FCC or Federal or State law.
A. Rate Regulatory Procedures: In the event that rate regulatory powers are assumed by grantor, the
following shall apply:
1. The grantor shall notify the grantee of grantor's FCC certification and of grantor's adoption of
rate regulations which are consistent with the FCC regulations and which provide for a
reasonable opportunity for consideration of the views of interested parties.
2. Upon receipt of such notification by grantee, basic service regulation shall become effective.
Grantee shall be prohibited from raising basic service rates without the approval of the Cable
Commission, and grantee shall, within thirty (30) days, submit for review its basic service,
installation and equipment rates and supporting documentation using either the FCC's
benchmark calculations or the FCC's cost-of-service standards.
B. Proprietary Information: To aid in the evaluation of the grantee's proposed rates, the Cable
Commission may require the production of proprietary information, and in such cases will apply
procedures analogous to those set forth in FCC regulations (47 CFR section 0.459), and
consistent with Federal and State law.
C. Refunds: As specified in the FCC regulations, the Cable Commission may order the grantee to
refund to subscribers that portion of previously paid rates which have been found to be
unreasonable. Before ordering the grantee to refund previously paid rates to subscribers, the
Cable Commission must give the grantee notice and opportunity to comment.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 188/349
D. Basic Service Rate Increases And Equipment Charges: Subject to FCC rules, the grantee shall not
file for increases in equipment charges and/or basic service rates more than once per year. All
subsequent requests by the grantee for increases in equipment changes and/or basic service rates
shall be subject to the procedures outlined in this Section.
E. Service Disconnection: A subscriber shall have the right to have its service disconnected without
charge, which shall include the removal of any equipment owned by the grantee from the
subscriber's residence. Such disconnection shall be made as soon as practicable and in no case
later than thirty (30) days following written notice to the grantee of same. No grantee shall enter
into any agreement with a subscriber which imposes any charge following disconnection of
service, except for reconnection and subsequent monthly or periodic charges, and those charges
shall be no greater than charges for new customers. This Section shall not prevent a grantee from
refusing service to any person because of the grantee's prior accounts with that person which
remain due and owing. (Ord. 3-95, 3-21-1995)
7-11-39: PERFORMANCE REVIEW:
At grantor's sole option, within ninety (90) days of the first anniversary of the effective date of each
franchise, and each year thereafter throughout the term of the franchise, the grantor may hold a public
hearing at which the grantee shall be present and shall participate, to review the performance and
quality of service of the cable system. The report required in this Chapter regarding subscriber
complaints, the records of performance tests and the opinion survey reports shall be utilized as the
basis for review. In addition, any subscriber may submit comments or complaints during the review
meetings, either orally or in writing, and these shall be considered.
A. Performance Report: Within thirty (30) days after the conclusion of the public hearing, grantor shall
issue a report with respect to the adequacy of system performance and quality of service. If
inadequacies are found, grantor may direct grantee to correct the inadequacies within a
reasonable period of time.
B. Breach Upon Failure To Cure: Failure of grantee, after due notice, to correct the inadequacies, shall
be considered a breach of the franchise, and grantor may, at its sole discretion, exercise any
remedy within the scope of this Chapter considered appropriate. (Ord. 3-95, 3-21-1995)
7-11-40: SYSTEM REVIEW:
To provide for technological, economic, and regulatory changes in the state of the art of cable
communications, to facilitate renewal procedures, to promote the maximum degree of flexibility in the
cable system, and to achieve a continuing, advanced modern system, the following system and
services review procedures are hereby established:
A. Public Hearing: At grantor's sole option, the grantor may hold a public hearing on or about the third
anniversary date of the franchise agreement at which the grantee shall be present and shall
participate, to review the cable communication system and service. Subsequent system and
services review hearings may be scheduled by the grantor each three (3) years thereafter.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 189/349
B. Submit Report: Sixty (60) days prior to the scheduled system and service review hearing, grantee
shall submit a report to grantor indicating the following:
1. All cable system services reported in cable industry trade journals that are being commonly
provided on an operational basis, excluding tests and demonstrations, to communities in the
State of Iowa with comparable populations that are not provided to the grantor.
2. Any specific plans for provision of such new services by the grantee, or a justification indicating
why grantee believes that such services are not feasible for the franchise area.
C. Topics For Discussion And Review: Topics for discussion and review at the system and services
review hearing shall include, but shall not be limited to, services provided, feasibility of providing
new services, application of new technologies, system performance, programming, subscriber
complaints, user complaints, rights of privacy, amendments to the franchise, undergrounding
processes, developments in the law, and regulatory constraints.
D. Additional Topics: Either the grantor or the grantee may select additional topics for discussion at
any review hearing. (Ord. 3-95, 3-21-1995)
7-11-41: ANNUAL REPORTS:
Within one hundred twenty (120) days after the close of grantee's fiscal year, the grantee may be
required to submit a written annual report, in a form requested by the grantor, including, but not limited
to, the following information:
A. A summary of the previous year's (or, in the case of the initial report year, the initial year's) activities
in development of the cable system, including, but not limited to, services begun or discontinued
during the reporting year, and the number of subscribers for each class of service.
B. A revenue statement, audited by an independent certified public accountant, or certified by an
officer of the grantee.
C. A statement of projected construction, if any, for the next two (2) years.
D. A list of grantee's officers, members of its council of directors, and other principals of grantee.
E. A list of stockholders or other equity investors holding five percent (5%) or more of the voting
interest in the grantee and its parent, subsidiary and affiliated corporations and other entities, if
any, unless the parent is a public corporation whose annual reports are publicly available. (Ord. 3-
95, 3-21-1995)
7-11-42: SYSTEM SURVEY REPORTS:
At the grantor's request, grantee shall submit to the grantor an annual system survey report which
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 190/349
shall be a survey of the grantee's plans and a report thereon. Said report shall include, but not be
limited to, a description and as-built maps of the portions of the franchise area that have been cabled
and have all services available, an appropriate engineering test report or evaluation including suitable
electronic measurements conducted in conformity with such requirements. Said report shall be in
sufficient detail to enable the grantor to ascertain that the service requirements and technical
standards of the franchise are achieved and maintained. (Ord. 3-95, 3-21-1995)
7-11-43: COMPLAINT FILE AND REPORTS:
An accurate and comprehensive file shall be kept by the grantee of any and all complaints regarding
the cable system. A procedure shall be established by the grantee by the time of installation of the
cable system to remedy complaints quickly and reasonably to the satisfaction of the grantor. Complete
records of grantee's actions in response to all complaints shall be kept.
A. A summary of service requests, identifying the number and nature of the requests and their
disposition, upon grantor request, shall be completed for each month and submitted to the grantor
by the tenth day of the succeeding month,
B. A log and summary of all major service outages.
C. If requested by the grantor, the results of an annual opinion survey report which identifies
satisfaction or dissatisfaction among subscribers with cable communications services offered by
the grantee shall be submitted to the grantor no later than two (2) months after the end of grantee's
fiscal year. The survey required to make said report shall be in a form that can be transmitted to
subscribers with one or more bills for service, such as postage-paid self-addressed post cards. At
the grantor's option and expense, the grantor may prepare the survey form and request its
inclusion with a monthly bill to subscribers. The survey shall request only information over which
grantor has lawful jurisdiction. (Ord. 3-95, 3-21-1995)
7-11-44: OTHER REPORTS AND INSPECTIONS:
In addition to other reports or inspections provided by this Chapter, grantee shall provide the following
reports to, or permit the following inspections by, grantor:
A. Copies Of Federal And State Reports: The grantee may be required to submit to the grantor copies
of all pleadings, applications, notifications, communications and documents of any kind, submitted
by the grantee to, as well as copies of all decisions, correspondence and actions by, any Federal,
State and local courts, regulatory agencies and other government bodies relating to its cable
television operations within the franchise area. Grantee shall submit such documents to the grantor
no later than thirty (30) days after receipt of a grantor request.
B. Public Reports: A copy of each of grantee's annual and other periodic public financial reports and
those of its parent, subsidiary and affiliated corporation and other entities, as the grantor requests,
shall be submitted to the grantor within thirty (30) days after receipt of a request.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 191/349
C. Miscellaneous Reports: Grantee shall submit to the grantor such other information or reports in
such forms and at such times as the grantor may reasonably request or require.
D. Inspection Of Facilities: The grantee shall allow the grantor to make inspections of any of the
grantee's facilities and equipment at any time upon at least ten (10) days' notice, or in case of
emergency, upon demand without prior notice, to allow grantor to verify the accuracy of any
submitted report.
E. Public Inspection: All reports subject to public disclosure shall be available for public inspection at a
designated grantor office during normal business hours.
F. Failure To Report: The wilful refusal, failure or neglect of the grantee to file any of the reports
reasonably required, or such other reports as the grantor reasonably may request, may be deemed
a breach of the franchise, and may subject the grantee to all remedies, legal or equitable, which
are available to the grantor under the franchise or otherwise.
G. False Statements: Any materially false or misleading statement or representation made knowingly
and wilfully by the grantee in any report required under the franchise, may be deemed a breach of
the franchise and may subject the grantee to all remedies, legal or equitable, which are available to
the grantor under the franchise or otherwise.
H. Cost Of Reports: One copy of all reports and records required under this or any other section shall
be furnished at the sole expense of the grantee. (Ord. 3-95, 3-21-1995)
7-11-45: REMEDIES FOR FRANCHISE VIOLATIONS:
If the grantee fails to perform any material obligation under the franchise, or fails to do so in a timely
manner, the grantor may at its option, and in its sole discretion:
A. Assess against the grantee monetary damages up to the limits established in the franchise
agreement for material franchise violations, said assessment to be collected by grantor after
completion of the procedures specified in Section 7-11-46 of this Chapter. The amount of such
assessment shall be deemed to represent liquidated damages actually sustained by grantor by
reason of grantee's failure to perform. Such assessment shall not constitute a waiver by the
grantor of any other right or remedy it may have under the franchise or under applicable law,
including, without limitation, its right to recover from grantee such additional damages, losses,
costs and expenses, including actual attorney fees, as may have been suffered or incurred by
grantor by reason of or arising out of such breach of the franchise. This provision for assessment
of damages is intended by the parties to be separate and apart from grantor's right to enforce the
provisions of the construction and performance bonds provided for in this Chapter and is intended
to provide compensation to grantor for actual damages.
B. Terminate the franchise, for any of the causes stated in this Chapter.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 192/349
C. No remedy shall be imposed by grantor against grantee for any violation of the franchise without
grantee being afforded due process of law, as provided for in Section 7-11-46 of this Chapter.
D. If the grantee fails to perform any material obligations under the franchise, grantor may access
monetary damages against the grantee. Grantee shall be provided due process of law as provided
in Section 7-11-46 of this Chapter and applicable local, State, Federal laws and FCC Rules and
Regulations prior to any actual assessments of monetary damages. Monetary damages may be
assessed as follows:
1. Failure to furnish, maintain, or offer cable services to any potential subscriber within the existing
cable TV system service area upon order of the grantor: two hundred dollars ($200.00) for any
such occurrence.
2. Failure to obtain or file evidence of required insurance or other required financial security: three
hundred dollars ($300.00) for any such occurrence.
3. Failure to provide access to data documents, records or reports to the grantor as required by
this Chapter: one hundred dollars ($100.00) for any such occurrence.
4. Failure to comply with applicable construction, operation, or maintenance standards: three
hundred dollars ($300.00) for any such occurrence.
5. Failure to comply with a rate decision or refund order under the FCC Rules and Regulations: five
hundred dollars ($500.00) for any such occurrence.
Grantor may impose any or all of the above enumerated measures against grantee, which shall
be in addition to any and all other legal or equitable remedies it has under the franchise or under
any applicable law. (Ord. 3-95, 3-21-1995)
7-11-46: PROCEDURE FOR REMEDYING FRANCHISE VIOLATIONS:
In the event that the grantor determines that the grantee has violated any material provision of the
franchise, the grantor may make a written demand on the grantee stating the exact nature of the
alleged violation, and requesting that grantee remedy such violation. If the violation is not remedied, or
in the process of being remedied, to the satisfaction of the grantor within thirty (30) days following
such demand, the grantor shall determine whether or not such violation by the grantee was excusable,
in accordance with the following procedures:
A. An administrative hearing shall be held to review the alleged violation. If this hearing does not result
in a satisfactory resolution, and/or the grantee requests a public hearing, then a public hearing
shall be held, and the grantee shall be provided with an opportunity to be heard upon thirty (30)
days' written notice to the grantee of the time and the place of the hearing provided and the
allegations of franchise violations.
B. If, after notice is given and, at the grantee's option, a full public proceeding is held, the grantor
determines that such violation by the grantee was excusable as provided in Section 7-11-47 of this
Chapter, the grantor shall direct the grantee to correct or remedy the same within such additional
time, in such manner and on such terms and conditions as the grantor may reasonably direct.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 193/349
C. If, after notice is given and, at the grantee's option, a full public proceeding is held, the grantor
determines that such violation was inexcusable, then the grantor may impose a remedy in
accordance with Section 7-11-45 of this Chapter. (Ord. 3-95, 3-21-1995)
7-11-47: EXCUSE OF NONPERFORMANCE:
In the event grantee's performance of any of the terms, conditions, obligations, or requirements of the
franchise is prevented or impaired due to any cause beyond its reasonable control or not reasonably
foreseeable, such inability to perform shall be deemed to be excused and no penalties or sanctions
shall be imposed as a result thereof, provided grantee has notified grantor within a reasonable time
after grantee's discovery of the occurrence of such an event. Such causes beyond grantee's
reasonable control or not reasonably foreseeable shall include, but shall not be limited to, acts of
nature and civil emergencies. (Ord. 3-95, 3-21-1995)
7-11-48: CONSTRUCTION BOND:
A. Requirement Of Bond: Within thirty (30) days after the granting of a new franchise, or a renewal
which requires significant system construction, and prior to the commencement of any construction
work by the grantee, the grantee shall file with the grantor a construction bond in the amount
specified in the franchise agreement in favor of the grantor and any other person who may claim
damages as a result of the breach of any duty by the grantee assured by said bond.
B. Form Of Bond: Such bond as contemplated herein shall be in the form approved by the grantor and
shall, among other matters, cover the cost of removal of any properties installed by the grantee in
the event said grantee shall default in the performance of its franchise obligations.
C. No Limitation On Liability: In no event shall the amount of said bond be construed to limit the
liability of the grantee for damages.
D. Waiver Of Bond: Grantor, at its sole option, may waive this requirement, or permit consolidation of
the construction bond with the performance bond specified, respectively in Section 7-11-49 of this
Chapter.
E. Release Of Bond: Upon completion of construction, any construction bonds then in force shall be
released. (Ord. 3-95, 3-21-1995)
7-11-49: PERFORMANCE BOND:
A. Requirement Of Bond: Grantor may require grantee, at least thirty (30) days prior to the
commencement of operation, to file with the grantor a performance bond in the amount of one
thousand dollars ($1,000.00) in favor of the grantor who may be entitled to damages as a result of
any occurrence in the operation of or termination of the cable operated under this Chapter and
franchise agreement.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 194/349
B. Form Of Bond: Such bond as contemplated herein shall be in the form approved by the grantor.
C. No Limitation Of Liability: In no event shall the amount of said bond be construed to limit the liability
of the grantee for damages. (Ord. 3-95, 3-21-1995)
7-11-50: WORK PERFORMED BY OTHERS:
A. The grantee shall give prior notice to the grantor specifying the names and addresses of any entity,
other than the grantee, that performs construction services in excess of ten thousand dollars
($10,000.00) pursuant to the franchise; provided, however, that all provisions of the franchise
remain the responsibility of the grantee.
B. All provisions of a franchise shall apply to any subcontractor or others performing any work or
services pursuant to the provisions of the franchise.
C. Nothing in this Section shall be construed as allowing the transfer of any rights or responsibilities of
the grantee without approval of the grantor in writing. (Ord. 3-95, 3-21-1995)
7-11-51: GRANTEE INSURANCE:
A. Insurance Required: The grantee shall maintain throughout the term of the franchise, insurance in
amounts at least as follows:
1. Worker's Compensation: Worker's compensation with Coverage A at statutory limits and
Coverage B at limits of $500,000.00/$500,000.00, $500,000.00. Insurance shall cover the
employees of the grantee in compliance with the State of Iowa and all other states having
jurisdiction over each employee.
2. Comprehensive General Liability: Comprehensive general liability including
premises/operations; products/completed operations; broad form property damage; contractual
liability; coverage for explosion, collapse and underground hazards; and pollution control liability
shall include limits of not less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) for bodily injury (including
death) and property damage for each occurrence and not less than one million dollars
($1,000,000.00) in the aggregate.
3. Umbrella Liability: Umbrella liability with limits of not less than five million dollars ($5,000,000.00)
and shall carry the following endorsement:
It is hereby understood and agreed that despite anything to the contrary where underlying
insurance, as described herein, provides greater protection or indemnity to the insured than the
terms and conditions of this policy, this insurance shall pay on behalf of the insured the same
terms, conditions and coverage which apply to the basic underlying insurance. Where no such
broader underlying insurance exists, this policy shall pay on behalf of the insured upon terms
and conditions and limitations of the carrier's umbrella excess policy.
B. Certificates To Grantor: The grantee shall furnish the grantor with copies of such insurance policies
or certificates of insurance within forty five (45) days of the effective date of the franchise
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 195/349
agreement. Certificates of insurance shall be furnished by the grantee to the grantor annually
thereafter.
C. Grantor As Additional Insured: Such insurance policies provided for herein shall name the grantor
as additional insured, and shall be primary to any insurance carried by grantor, and shall contain
the following endorsement:
Should any of the above described policies be canceled before the expiration date thereof, the
issuing company will endeavor to mail thirty (30) days' written notice to the certificate holder
named to the left, but failure to mail such notice shall impose no obligation or liability of any kind
upon the company, its agents or representatives.
D. No Limitation On Liability: The minimum amounts set forth in the franchise agreement for such
insurance shall not be construed to limit the liability of the grantee to the grantor under the
franchise issued hereunder to the amount of such insurance.
E. Approved Insurers: All insurance carriers providing coverage under subsection A above shall be
duly licensed to operate in the State of Iowa. (Ord. 3-95, 3-21-1995)
7-11-52: INDEMNITY:
A. Extent Of Indemnity: The grantee shall, by acceptance of any franchise granted, indemnify, defend
and hold harmless the grantor, its officers, boards, commissions, agents, and employees from any
and all claims, suits, judgments, for damages or other relief, costs and attorney fees in any way
existing out of or through or alleged to arise out of or through:
1. The act of the grantor in granting the franchise.
2. The acts or omissions of grantee, its servants, employees, or agents including, but not limited to,
any failure or refusal by grantee, its servants, employees or agents to comply with any obligation
or duty imposed on grantee by this Chapter or the franchise agreement.
3. The exercise of any right or privilege granted or permitted by this Chapter or the franchise
agreement.
Such indemnification shall include, but not be limited to, all claims arising in tort, contract,
infringements of copyright, violations of statutes, ordinances or regulations or otherwise.
B. Defense Of Claims: In the event any claims shall arise, the grantor or any other indemnified party
shall tender the defense thereof to the grantee. Provided, however, that the grantor or other
indemnified party in its sole discretion may participate in the defense of such claims at grantee's
sole expense, and in such event, such participation shall not relieve the grantee from its duty or
defense against liability or of paying any judgment entered against such party. Grantee shall not
agree to any settlement of claims without grantor approval.
C. Grantor's Negligence: The grantee shall not be required to indemnify the grantor for negligence or
wilful misconduct on the part of grantor's officials, boards, commissions, agents or employees.
(Ord. 3-95, 3-21-1995)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 196/349
7-11-53: ALTERNATIVE REMEDIES:
No provision of this Chapter shall be deemed to bar the right of the grantor to seek or obtain judicial
relief from a violation of any provision of the franchise or any rule, regulation, requirement or directive
promulgated thereunder. Neither the existence of other remedies identified in this Chapter, nor the
exercise thereof, shall be deemed to bar or otherwise limit the right of the grantor to recover monetary
damages (including all dispute related expenses such as attorney fees and except where liquidated
damages are otherwise prescribed) for such violation by the grantee, or judicial enforcement of the
grantee's obligations by means of specific performance, injunctive relief or mandate, or any other
judicial remedy available at law or in equity. All judicial action sought for a violation of any provision of
the franchise or any rule, regulation, requirement or directive promulgated thereunder shall be
commenced in the Muscatine County Circuit Court. (Ord. 3-95, 3-21-1995)
7-11-54: NONENFORCEMENT:
Subject to the provisions of the Act, a grantee shall not be relieved of any obligation to comply with
any of the provisions of the franchise or any rule, regulation, requirement or directive promulgated
thereunder by reason of any failure of the grantor or its officers, agents or employees to enforce
prompt compliance nor shall such be considered a waiver thereof. (Ord. 3-95, 3-21-1995)
7-11-55: COMPLIANCE WITH LAW:
Notwithstanding any other provisions of the franchise to the contrary, the grantee shall at all times
comply with all laws and regulations of the State and Federal government or any administrative
agencies thereof. Provided, however, if any such State or Federal law or regulation shall require the
grantee to perform any service, or shall permit the grantee to perform any service, or shall prohibit the
grantee from performing any service, in conflict with the terms of the franchise or any law or regulation
of the grantor, then as soon as possible following knowledge thereof, the grantee shall notify the
grantor of the point of conflict believed to exist between such regulation or law and the laws or
regulations of the grantor or the franchise. (Ord. 3-95, 3-21-1995)
7-11-56: UNAUTHORIZED RECEPTION, USE OR SALE OF CABLE SERVICES:
A. Resale Of Signal Or Service: It shall be unlawful for any person to lawfully obtain any cable signal
or service from a grantee and to resell such cable signal or service without the prior written
consent of such grantee.
B. Descrambling Or Decoding: It shall be unlawful for any person to intercept, descramble, decode, or
receive or assist in the interception, descrambling, decoding or receiving of any cable signal or
service of a grantee without the prior written consent of grantee. As used in this subsection, "assist
in interception, descrambling, decoding or receiving" shall include the manufacture or distribution
of equipment intended by the manufacturer or distributor for unauthorized reception of cable signal
or service.
C. Damaging Cables Or Equipment: It shall be unlawful for any person to intentionally damage any
cables, lines or equipment of any grantee used in or for the purpose of transmitting cable signals or
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 197/349
service.
D. Obtaining Service By Fraud: It shall be unlawful for any person to obtain cable signals or service
from any grantee by means of fraud, deceit or theft. (Ord. 3-95, 3-21-1995)
7-11-57: WAIVER OR EXEMPTION:
The grantor reserves the right to waive provisions of this Chapter, or exempt a grantee from meeting
provisions of this Chapter, if the grantor determines such waiver or exemption is in the public interest.
(Ord. 3-95, 3-21-1995)
7-11-58: SECTION TITLES:
The section titles appearing in this Chapter are used solely for convenience and are not intended to
affect the meaning of this Chapter. (Ord. 3-95, 3-21-1995)
7-11-59: FORCE MAJEURE:
Any delay, preemption, or other failure to provide cablevision service and to perform other duties
contained in this Chapter and the franchise agreement by the grantee caused by factors beyond the
grantee's control, such as acts of God, labor disputes, nondelivery by program suppliers, war, riots,
government order or regulation shall not result in a breach of the terms of this Chapter and franchise
agreement. Grantee shall exercise its reasonable efforts to cure any such delays and the cause
thereof, and performance under the terms of this Chapter and franchise agreement shall be excused
by grantor, for the period of time during which such factors continue. (Ord. 3-95, 3-21-1995)
Title 8
MOTOR VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
Chapter 1
TRAFFIC DEFINITIONS
8-1-1: TRAFFIC DEFINITIONS:
The following words and phrases when used in this Title shall, for the purpose of this Title, have the
meanings respectively ascribed to them herein:
ALLEY: That portion of a platted block intended for purposes of vehicular traffic and ordinarily known
as an alley.
AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLE: Vehicles of the Fire Department, police vehicles, emergency
unit vehicles, and such ambulances and emergency vehicles as may be designated or authorized by
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 198/349
the Chief of Police, either by order of or consent of the City Council.
BICYCLE: Every device propelled by human power upon which any person may ride, having two (2)
tandem wheels either of which is over twenty inches (20") in diameter, and including any device
generally recognized as a bicycle though equipped with two (2) front or two (2) rear wheels.
BUSINESS DISTRICT: The territory contiguous to and including a roadway when within any six
hundred feet (600') along such roadway there are buildings in use for business or industrial purposes,
including but not limited to hotels, banks or office buildings, railroad stations, and public buildings
which occupy at least three hundred feet (300') of frontage on one side or three hundred feet (300')
collectively on both sides of the roadway.
CENTRAL BUSINESS OR TRAFFIC DISTRICT: The following streets and the alleys and areas
intersecting and adjacent thereto are hereby designated as the "central business" or "traffic district":
East and West Third Street from Columbus Street to Prairie Street;
East and West Fourth Street from Columbus Street to Clay Street;
Columbus Street from the railroad right of way to Fourth Street;
Spencer Street from the railroad right of way to Fourth Street; and,
Calhoun Street from First Street to Fourth Street.
CITY MANAGER: The duly appointed City Manager of the City of West Liberty, Iowa.
CROSSWALK: A. That part of a roadway at an intersection included within the connections of the
lateral lines of the sidewalks on opposite sides of the highway measured from the curbs, or in the
absence of curbs, from the edges of the traversable roadway.
B. Any portion of a roadway at an intersection or elsewhere distinctly indicated for pedestrian
crossing by lines or other markings on the surface.
CURB LOADING ZONE: A space adjacent to a curb reserved for the exclusive use of vehicles during
loading or unloading of passengers or materials.
DRIVER: Every person who drives or is in actual physical control of a vehicle.
FREIGHT CURB LOADING ZONE: A space adjacent to a curb reserved for the exclusive use of
vehicles during the loading or unloading of freight.
INTERSECTION: The area embraced within the prolongation or connection of the lateral curb lines,
or, if none, then the lateral boundary lines of the roadways of two (2) highways which join one another
at or approximately at right angles, or the area within which vehicles traveling upon different highways
joining at any other angle may come in conflict.
LANED ROADWAY: A roadway which is divided into two (2) or more clearly marked lanes for
vehicular traffic.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 199/349
MOTOR VEHICLE: Every vehicle which is self-propelled.
MOTORCYCLE: Every motor vehicle having a saddle for the use of the rider and designed to travel on
not more than three (3) wheels in contact with the ground, but excluding a tractor.
OFFICIAL TIME STANDARD: Whenever certain hours are named herein they shall mean Central
Standard Time or daylight- saving time, as may be currently in use in the City,
OFFICIAL TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES: All signs, signals, markings and devices not inconsistent
with this Title placed or erected by authority of a public body or official having jurisdiction, for the
purpose of regulating, warning or guiding traffic.
PARK: The word "park", when prohibited, shall mean the standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or
not, otherwise than temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading.
PASSENGER CURB LOADING ZONE: A place adjacent to a curb reserved for the exclusive use of
vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers.
PEDESTRIAN: Any person afoot.
PERSON: Every natural person, firm, copartnership, association or corporation.
POLICE OFFICER: Every officer of the City Police Department or any officer authorized to direct or
regulate traffic or to make arrests for violation of traffic regulations.
PRIVATE ROAD OR DRIVEWAY: Every way or place in private ownership and used for vehicular
travel by the owner and those having express or implied permission from the owner, but not by other
persons.
RAILROAD: A carrier of persons or property upon cars, operated upon stationary rails.
RAILROAD TRAIN: A steam engine, electric or other motor, with or without cars coupled thereto,
operated upon rails.
RESIDENCE DISTRICT: The territory contiguous to and including a highway not comprising a
business district when the property on such highway for a distance of three hundred feet (300') or
more is in the main improved with dwellings or dwellings and buildings in use for schools or small
businesses or churches.
RIGHT OF WAY: The privilege of the immediate use of the roadway.
ROADWAY: That portion of a street or highway improved, designed or ordinarily used for vehicular
travel. In the event a highway includes two (2) or more separate roadways, the term roadway as used
herein shall refer to any such roadway separately but not to all such roadways collectively.
SAFETY ZONE: The area or space officially set apart within a roadway for the exclusive use of
pedestrians and which is protected or is so marked or indicated by adequate signs as to be plainly
visible at all times while set apart as a safety zone.
SCHOOL ZONES: That part of the main traveled street or streets upon which is located any public,
parochial or private school or other institution of learning; between signs now in place or where signs
may hereafter be placed in accordance with these regulations; bearing the word "school", is hereby
designated as a "school zone".
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 200/349
SIDEWALK: That portion of a street between the curb lines, or the lateral lines of a roadway, and the
adjacent property lines intended for the use of pedestrians.
STOP: When required, shall mean complete cessation of movement.
STOP, STOPPING OR STANDING: When prohibited, shall mean any stopping or standing of a vehicle
whether occupied or not, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance
with the direction of a police officer or traffic-control sign or signal.
STREET OR HIGHWAY: The entire width between the boundary lines of every way publicly
maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel.
THROUGH HIGHWAY: Every street or highway or portion thereof at the entrances of which vehicular
traffic from intersecting streets or highways is required to stop before entering or crossing the same
and when stop signs are erected as provided in this Title.
TRAFFIC: Pedestrians, ridden or herded animals, vehicles and other conveyances either singly or
together, while using any street for purposes of travel.
TRAFFIC-CONTROL SIGNAL: Any device, whether manually, electrically or mechanically operated,
by which traffic is alternately directed to stop and to proceed.
VEHICLE: Every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be transported or
drawn upon a highway, except devices moved by human power or used exclusively upon stationary
rails or tracks. (1975 Code § 8-1-1)
Chapter 2
GENERAL PROVISIONS
8-2-1: SHORT TITLE:
This Title may be known and cited as the TRAFFIC ORDINANCE OF THE CITY. (1975 Code § 8-2-1)
8-2-2: STATE LAWS ADOPTED:
It shall be unlawful for any person within the corporate limits of the City to violate any provisions of
Iowa Code chapter 321, or amendments thereto, where the violation of such statute or statutes is
declared, directly or indirectly, to be a misdemeanor by the provisions of said chapter 321, or
amendments thereto, except such provisions as are by their nature inapplicable and not within the
powers granted to cities and towns of the size of West Liberty to adopt by City ordinance. (1975 Code
§ 8-2-2)
8-2-3: AUTHORITY OF POLICE AND FIRE DEPARTMENT OFFICIALS:
A. Enforcement Of Traffic Laws: It shall be the duty of the officers of the Police Department, or such
officers as are assigned by the Chief of Police, to enforce all street traffic laws of the City and all
the State vehicle laws applicable to street traffic in the City.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 201/349
B. Direct Traffic: Officers of the Police Department or such officers as are assigned by the Chief of
Police are hereby authorized to direct all traffic by voice, or signal in conformity with traffic laws;
provided, that in the event fire or other emergency or to expedite traffic or to safeguard
pedestrians, officers of the Police Department may direct traffic as conditions require,
notwithstanding the revisions of the traffic laws.
C. Scene Of Fire: Officers of the Fire Department, when at the scene of a fire, may direct or assist the
police in directing traffic, thereat or in the immediate vicinity. (1975 Code § 8-2-3)
8-2-4: AUTHORITY OF CITY MANAGER:
Subject to the approval of the City Council, the City Manager is hereby authorized:
A. Crosswalks: To designate and maintain, by appropriate devices, marks or lines upon the surface of
the roadway, crosswalks at intersections where, in his opinion, there is a particular danger to
pedestrians crossing the roadway, and at such other places as he may deem necessary.
B. Safety Zones: To establish safety zones of such kind and character and at such places as he may
deem necessary for the protection of pedestrians.
C. Traffic Lanes: To mark lanes for traffic on street pavements at such places as he may deem
advisable, consistent with the traffic regulations of the City. (1975 Code § 8-2-11)
8-2-5: REQUIRED OBEDIENCE TO TRAFFIC REGULATIONS:
It shall be a misdemeanor for any person to do any act forbidden or to perform any act required in this
Title. (1975 Code § 8-2-4)
8-2-6: OBEDIENCE TO POLICE AND FIRE DEPARTMENT OFFICIALS:
No person shall wilfully fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order or direction of a police officer or
Fire Department official. (1975 Code § 8-2-5)
8-2-7: PUBLIC EMPLOYEES TO OBEY TRAFFIC REGULATIONS:
The provisions of this Title shall apply to the driver of any vehicle owned by or used in the service of
the United States Government, this State, County or City, and it shall be unlawful for any said driver to
violate any of the provisions of this Title except as otherwise permitted in this Title or by State statute.
(1975 Code § 8-2-6)
8-2-8: PLAY STREETS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 202/349
A. Authority To Establish: The Chief of Police shall, upon motion of the City Council, have authority to
declare any street or part thereof a play street or a street upon which sleds may be used for sliding
or coasting, and place appropriate signs or devices in the roadway indicating and helping protect
the same.
B. Driving On Play Street: Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating any street or part thereof
as a play street or a street where sliding or coasting is permitted, no person shall drive a vehicle
upon any such street or portion thereof except drivers of vehicles having business or whose
residences are within such closed area, and then any said driver shall exercise the greatest care in
driving upon any such street or portion thereof. (1975 Code § 8-2-7)
8-2-9: AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLES:
A. Exemptions: The provisions of this Title regulating the operation, parking and standing of vehicles
shall apply to "authorized emergency vehicles" as defined by this Title, except as follows: a driver
when operating any such vehicle in an emergency, except when otherwise directed by a police
officer, may:
1. Park or stand notwithstanding the provisions of this Title;
2. Proceed past a red or stop signal or stop sign, but only after slowing down as may be necessary
for safe operation;
3. Exceed the prima facie speed limits so long as he does not endanger life and property;
4. Disregard regulations governing direction of movement or turning in specified directions so long
as he does not endanger life or property.
B. Sounding Of Siren: Those exemptions hereinbefore granted in reference to the movement of an
authorized emergency vehicle shall apply only when the driver of said vehicle sounds a siren, bell
or exhaust whistle as may be reasonably necessary, and the vehicle displays a lighted red lamp
visible from the front as a warning to others.
C. Reckless Driving: The foregoing exemptions shall not, however, protect the driver of any such
vehicle from the consequences of his reckless disregard for the safety of others. (1975 Code § 8-2-
8)
8-2-10: PUSHCARTS, RIDING ANIMALS:
Every person propelling any pushcart or riding any animal upon a roadway, and every person driving
any animal-drawn vehicle, shall be subject to the provisions of this Title applicable to the driver of any
vehicle, except those provisions of this Title which by their nature can have no application. (1975
Code § 8-2-9)
8-2-11: ROLLER SKATES; SIMILAR DEVICES:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 203/349
A. Riding On Roadways Restricted: No person upon roller skates or riding in or by means of any
coaster, toy vehicle or similar device shall go upon any roadway except while crossing a street on
a crosswalk, and when so crossing such person shall be granted all of the rights and shall be
subject to all of the duties applicable to pedestrians. This Section shall not apply upon any street
while set aside as a play street as authorized by ordinance of the City. (1975 Code § 8-2-10)
B. Skateboards; Rollerblades; Roller Skates: It shall be unlawful for any person to ride on a
skateboard, which is a board held off the ground by a series of wheels, rollerblades or roller
skates, on any sidewalk in the "central business district", as defined in Section 8-1-1 of this Title;
and also the area bounded to the north by the alley between Fourth and Fifth Streets and Clay
Street and Spencer Street. It shall be unlawful for any person to ride a "skateboard", as defined,
rollerblades or roller skates, on any street or alley within the City limits. In all cases, and upon all
sidewalks and crosswalks within the City limits, the pedestrians shall have the right of way. A
violator of this Section shall be subject to a fine of five dollars ($5.00). (Ord. 4-91, 8-20-1991; amd.
Ord. 8-95, 6-20-1995; 1998 Code)
8-2-12: FINES NOT PAID:
All five dollar ($5.00) fines not paid within thirty (30) days of the date upon which the violation occurred
shall increase to ten dollars ($10.00). (Ord. 8-95, 6-20-1995)
Chapter 3
TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES
8-3-1: AUTHORITY TO INSTALL:
The City Manager, on motion of the City Council, shall place and maintain traffic-control signs, signals,
and devices when and as required under the traffic regulations of the City to make effective the
provisions of said regulations, and may place and maintain additional traffic-control devices as he may
deem necessary, on motion of the Council, to regulate traffic under the provisions of this Code or
under State law, or to guide or warn traffic. The Chief of Police shall, in case of emergency, have the
power to place traffic-control signs, signals and devices without motion of the Council, but must
remove same if ordered to do so by motion of the Council. (1975 Code § 8-3-1)
8-3-2: MANUAL AND SPECIFICATIONS:
All traffic-control signs, signals and devices shall conform to the manual and specifications approved
by the Highway Commission of the State. All signs and signals required hereunder for a particular
purpose shall so far as practicable be uniform as to type and location throughout the City. All trafficcontrol
devices so erected and not inconsistent with the provisions of State law or this Title shall be
official traffic-control devices. (1975 Code § 8-3-2)
8-3-3: OBEDIENCE TO OFFICIAL DEVICES:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 204/349
The driver of any vehicle shall obey the instructions of any official traffic-control device applicable
thereto placed in accordance with the traffic regulations of the City, unless otherwise directed by a
police officer, subject to the exceptions granted the driver of an authorized emergency vehicle in this
Title. (1975 Code § 8-3-3)
8-3-4: TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES REQUIRED:
No provision of this Title for which signs are required shall be enforced against an alleged violator if at
the time and place of the alleged violation an official sign is not in regular position and sufficiently
legible to be seen by an ordinarily observant person. (1975 Code § 8-3-4)
8-3-5: TRAFFIC-CONTROL SIGNAL LEGEND:
Whenever traffic is controlled by traffic-control signals exhibiting the word "Go", "Caution" or "Stop" or
exhibiting different colored lights successively one at a time, the following colors shall be used and
said terms and lights shall indicate as follows:
A. Green Alone Or "Go":
1. Vehicular traffic facing the signal may proceed straight through or turn right or left unless a sign
at such place prohibits either such turn. But vehicular traffic, including vehicles turning right or
left, shall yield the right of way to other vehicles and to pedestrians lawfully within the
intersection or an adjacent crosswalk at the time such signal is exhibited.
2. Pedestrians facing the signal may proceed across the roadway within any marked or unmarked
crosswalk.
B. Yellow Alone Or "Caution" When Shown Following Green Or "Go" Signal:
1. Vehicular traffic facing the signal is thereby warned that the red or "Stop" signal will be exhibited
immediately thereafter and such vehicular traffic shall not enter or be crossing the intersection
when the red or "Stop" signal is exhibited.
2. Pedestrians facing such signals are thereby advised that there is insufficient time to cross the
roadway, and any pedestrian then starting to cross shall yield the right of way to all vehicles.
C. Red Alone Or "Stop":
1. Vehicular traffic facing the signal shall stop before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the
intersection or, if none, then before entering the intersection and shall remain standing until
green or "Go" is shown alone.
2. No pedestrian facing such signal shall enter the roadway unless he can do so safely and without
interfering with any vehicular traffic. (1975 Code § 8-3-5)
8-3-6: FLASHING SIGNALS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 205/349
Whenever flashing red or yellow signals are used, they shall require obedience by vehicular traffic as
follows:
A. Flashing Red (Stop Signal): When a red lens is illuminated by rapid intermittent flashes, drivers of
vehicles shall stop before entering the nearest crosswalk at an intersection or at a limit line when
marked and the right to proceed shall be subject to the rules applicable after making a stop at a
stop sign.
B. Flashing Yellow (Caution Signal): When a yellow lens is illuminated with rapid intermittent flashes,
drivers of vehicles may proceed through the intersection or past such signal only with caution.
(1975 Code § 8-3-6)
8-3-7: DISPLAY OF UNAUTHORIZED SIGNS, SIGNALS AND MARKINGS:
A. Display Prohibited: No person shall place, maintain or display upon or in view of any highway
unauthorized signs, signals, markings or devices which purport to be or are an imitation of or
resemble official traffic-control devices, signs or signals, or which attempt to direct the movement
of traffic, or which hide from view or interfere with the effectiveness of any official traffic-control
devices, signs or signals, and no person shall place or maintain nor shall any public authority
permit upon any highway any traffic sign or signal bearing thereon any commercial advertising.
This shall not be deemed to prohibit the erection upon private property adjacent to highways signs
giving useful directional information and of a type that cannot be mistaken for official signs.
B. Nuisance Declared; Removal: Every such prohibited sign, signal or marking is hereby declared to
be a public nuisance and the authority having jurisdiction over the highway is hereby empowered
to remove the same or cause it to be removed without notice. (1975 Code § 8-3-7)
8-3-8: INTERFERENCE WITH DEVICES:
No person shall without lawful authority attempt to or in fact alter, deface, injure, knock down or
remove any official traffic-control device or any railroad sign or signal or any inscription, shield or
insignia thereon, or any part thereof. (1975 Code § 8-3-8)
Chapter 4
SPEED
8-4-1: SPEED RESTRICTIONS:
A. Reasonable And Prudent Speed: Any person driving a motor vehicle on a City street or highway
shall drive the same at a careful and prudent speed not greater than nor less than is reasonable
and proper, having due regard to the traffic, surface and width of the highway and of any other
conditions then existing, and no person shall drive any vehicle upon a highway at a speed greater
than will permit him to bring it to a stop within the assured clear distance ahead, such driver having
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 206/349
the right to assume, however, that all persons using said highway will observe the law. (1975 Code
§ 8-4-1)
B. Speed Limits Designated: The following shall be the lawful maximum speed, except as
hereinbefore or hereinafter modified, and any speed in excess thereof shall be unlawful:
1. Twenty (20) miles per hour in any business district or central business district.
2. Twenty five (25) miles per hour in any residence or school district.
3. Thirty (30) miles per hour on the following streets:
East A Street to Park Street.
North Columbus Street from Third Street to A Street.
4. Thirty five (35) miles per hour on the following streets:
North Columbus Street from Rainbow Drive to Third Street.
Third Street from North Columbus Street to Corn Street.
5. Forty (40) miles per hour on U.S. Highway 6 from a point one hundred fifty feet (150') west of
Elm Street to a point one hundred fifty feet (150') east of Elm Street. (Ord. 20150901-6, 9-15-
2015)
8-4-2: EXCEPTIONS TO MAXIMUM SPEED REGULATIONS:
Whenever the City Council shall determine, upon the basis of an engineering and traffic study, that the
maximum speed law as provided by section 8-4-1 of this chapter, and any amendments thereto, shall
not apply on any streets or parts of streets, the Council may, by motion, instruct the Chief of Police to
place appropriate signs on such streets or parts of streets, indicating a different speed, and it shall be
unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to exceed the maximum speed thus indicated by such signs.
(1975 Code § 8-4-2)
8-4-3: SCHOOL ZONES:
A. Designated Areas: The following parts of streets are hereby established as school zones. It shall be
unlawful for any driver of a vehicle to operate such vehicle at a speed in excess of twenty five (25)
miles per hour in such school zones:
Columbus Street from the north line of Eighth Street to the south line of Fifth Street.
Miller Street from the north line of Tenth Street to the south line of Eighth Street.
Seventh Street from Columbus Street to Park Street and all of Park Street.
B. Sixth And Columbus Streets: A school lane stop light shall be placed at the intersection of Sixth and
Columbus Streets. A school crossing lane shall be painted on the pavement at the intersection of
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 207/349
Eighth and Columbus Streets and "School Slow" signs shall be placed on Columbus Street
approximately three hundred feet (300') north and south of said intersections.
C. Eighth And Columbus Streets: All motor and self-propelled vehicles shall be required to come to a
full stop at the "School Lane" stop sign at the intersections of Eighth and Columbus Streets during
the hours the stop sign is displayed and proceed slowly only when the street is clear of school
children. (1975 Code § 8-4-3)
D. East Side Of Miller Street: The east side of Miller Street from 8th Street to 9th Street will be "no
parking" from seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. to four o'clock (4:00) P.M. school days only and would be
designated as a loading zone only.
E. West Side Of Miller Street: The west side of Miller Street will be "no parking" anytime and eliminate
the loading zone that is currently there.
F. North Side Of 7th Street: The north side of 7th Street from Calhoun Street to Park Street will be "no
parking" from seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. to four o'clock (4:00) P.M. during school hours and make
this area a loading zone only.
G. South Side Of 7th Street: The south side of 7th Street will continue to be "no parking" anytime.
(Ord. 06-05, 12-5-2006, eff. 12-13-2006)
H. Clark Street And Eighth Street: A temporary stop sign shall be established and erected on the
south portion of the intersection of Clark Street and Eighth Street in the City of West Liberty, Iowa.
The establishment of this particular stop sign shall establish a temporary three-way stop at the
intersection of Clark Street and Eighth Street to be enforced only during school hours in the City of
West Liberty, Iowa. (Ord. 2011-05, 10-18-2011)
I. Clark And Third Streets: A school lane and roll-out stop sign shall be placed at the intersection of
Clark Street and Third Street. A school crossing lane shall be painted on the pavement at the
intersection of Clark Street and Third Street and "School Slow" sign shall be placed in Third Street
approximately three hundred feet (300') east and west of said intersections. (Ord. 20150901-5, 9-
15-2015)
8-4-4: ERECTION OF SIGNS:
The Chief of Police, upon motion of the City Council, is hereby authorized to erect or place appropriate
signs bearing the word "School" to indicate a school zone, such signs not to be placed more than
three hundred feet (300') from the street intersection where such school or other institution of learning
is located, or not more than three hundred feet (300') from the nearest boundary of the property upon
which a school, including that used for playgrounds, is located. (1975 Code § 8-4-4)
8-4-5: ALLEYS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 208/349
It shall be unlawful for any driver of a vehicle to operate such vehicle at a speed in excess of fifteen
(15) miles per hour in any alley. (1975 Code § 8-4-5)
Chapter 5
RULES OF THE ROAD
8-5-1: TURNING AT INTERSECTIONS:
A. Duty Of Driver: The driver of a vehicle intending to turn at an intersection shall do so as follows:
1. Both the approach for a right turn and a right turn shall be made as close as practicable to the
right-hand curb or edge of the roadway.
2. Approach for a left turn shall be made in that portion of the right half of the roadway nearest the
center line thereof and after entering the intersection the left turn shall be made so as to leave
the intersection to the right of the center line of the roadway being entered.
3. Approach for a left turn from a two (2) way street into a one-way street shall be made in that
portion of the right half of the roadway nearest the center line thereof and by passing to the right
of such center line where it enters the intersection. A left turn from a one-way street into a two
(2) way street shall be made by passing to the right of the center line of the street being entered
upon leaving the intersection.
4. Where both streets or roadways are one-way, both the approach for a left turn and a left turn
shall be made as close as practicable to the left-hand curb or edge of the roadway. (1975 Code
§ 8-5-1)
B. Authority To Place And Obedience To Turning Markers:
1. On motion of the City Council, the Chief of Police is authorized to place markers, buttons or
signs within or adjacent to intersections indicating the course to be traveled by vehicles turning
at such intersections, and such course to be traveled as so indicated may conform to or be other
than as permitted or prescribed by law or ordinance.
2. When authorized markers, buttons or other indicators are placed within or adjacent to an
intersection, indicating the course to be traveled by vehicles turning thereat, no driver of a
vehicle shall disobey the directions of such indications. (1975 Code § 8-5-2)
C. Authority To Place Restricted Turning Signs: On motion of the City Council instructing him so to do,
the City Manager shall place proper signs at any intersection or intersections where the Council
shall determine that vehicles shall not make a right, left or U-turn. The making of such turns may
be prohibited between certain hours of any day and permitted at other hours, in which event the
same shall be plainly indicated on the signs or they may be removed when such turns are
permitted. (1975 Code § 8-5-3)
D. Obedience To No-Turn Signs: Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating that no right, left
or U-turn is permitted, no driver of a vehicle shall disobey the directions of any such sign. (1975
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 209/349
Code § 8-5-4)
E. U-Turns: No complete U-turn shall be made on any street within the corporate limits of the City.
(1975 Code § 8-5-5)
8-5-2: VEHICLES TO STOP AT STOP SIGNS:
When stop signs are erected as herein provided at or near the entrance of any intersection, every
driver of a vehicle shall stop such vehicle at such sign or at a clearly marked stop line before entering
the intersection except when directed to proceed by a police officer or traffic-control signal. (1975
Code § 8-5-6)
8-5-3: EMERGING FROM ALLEY OR DRIVEWAY:
The driver of a vehicle emerging from an alley, driveway or building shall stop such vehicle
immediately prior to driving onto a sidewalk or onto the sidewalk area extending across any alleyways,
yielding the right of way to any pedestrians as may be necessary to avoid collision, and upon entering
the roadway shall yield the right of way to all vehicles approaching on said roadway. (1975 Code § 8-
5-7)
8-5-4: STOP WHEN TRAFFIC OBSTRUCTED:
No driver shall enter an intersection or a marked crosswalk unless there is sufficient space on the
other side of the intersection or crosswalk to accommodate the vehicle he is operating without
obstructing the passage of other vehicles or pedestrians, notwithstanding any traffic-control signal
indicating to proceed. (1975 Code § 8-5-8)
8-5-5: ENTERING THROUGH HIGHWAY AT STOP INTERSECTION:
A. Through Highway: After the driver of a vehicle has stopped at the entrance to a through driveway,
such driver shall yield the right of way to other vehicles which have entered the intersection from
said through highway or which are approaching so closely on said through highway as to constitute
an immediate hazard, but said driver, having so yielded, may proceed and the drivers of all other
vehicles approaching the intersection on said through highway shall yield the right of way to the
vehicle so proceeding into or across the through highway.
B. Stop Intersection: After the driver of a vehicle has stopped in obedience to a stop sign at an
intersection where a stop sign is erected at one or more entrances thereto, although not a part of a
through highway, such driver shall proceed cautiously, yielding to vehicles not so obliged to stop
which are within the intersection or approaching so closely as to constitute an immediate hazard,
but may then proceed. (1975 Code § 8-5-9)
8-5-6: RAILROAD CROSSINGS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 210/349
A. Stopping At Crossing: Whenever any person driving a vehicle approaches a railroad grade crossing
under any of the circumstances stated below, the driver of such vehicle shall stop within fifty feet
(50') but not less than fifteen feet (15') from the nearest rail of such railroad, and shall not proceed
until he can do so safely. The foregoing requirements shall apply when:
1. A clearly visible electric or mechanical signal device gives warning of the immediate approach of
a railroad train.
2. A crossing gate is lowered or when a human flagman gives or continues to give a signal of the
approach or passage of a railroad train.
3. A railroad train approaching within approximately one thousand five hundred feet (1,500') of the
highway emits a signal audible from such distance and such railroad train, by reason of its speed
or nearness to such crossing, is an immediate hazard.
4. An approaching railroad train is plainly visible and is in hazardous proximity to such crossing.
5. A railroad employee by signal indicates the approach of a railroad train. During the nighttime
such signal shall include a lantern or other light.
No person shall drive any vehicle through, around or under any crossing gate or barrier at a
railroad grade crossing while such gate or barrier is closed or is being opened or closed.
B. Obstructing Crossings: It shall be further unlawful for the directing officer or the operator of any
railroad train to direct the operation of or to operate the same in such manner as to prevent the use
of any street for purposes of travel for a period of time longer than five (5) minutes, except that this
provision shall not apply to trains in motion other than those engaged in switching. (1975 Code § 8-
5-10)
8-5-7: STOP AT SCHOOL CROSSWALKS:
It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to fail to stop where there has been placed a movable
sign indicating a stop is required at any crosswalk adjacent to any school or institution of learning.
(1975 Code § 8-5-11)
8-5-8: MOVABLE STOP SIGNS:
Movable stop signs may, under supervision of the Chief of Police, be placed at any crosswalk adjacent
to a school or other institution of learning one-half (1/2) hour before said school opens in the morning,
five (5) minutes before school is dismissed at noon, one-half (1/2) hour before school opens in the
afternoon, and five (5) minutes before school is dismissed in the afternoon. The movable stop signs
shall be left standing in the streets until all of the children have entered the school or left the school.
Such movable stop signs shall have painted thereon the words "Stop School Crossing" or words of
similar import. (1975 Code § 8-5-12)
8-5-9: APPROACH OF AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLE:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 211/349
A. Duty Of Other Drivers: Upon the immediate approach of an authorized emergency vehicle equipped
with at least one lighted lamp exhibiting red light visible under normal atmospheric conditions from
a distance of five hundred feet (500') to the front of such vehicle and when the driver is giving
audible signal by siren, exhaust whistle or bell:
1. The driver of every other vehicle shall yield the right of way and shall immediately drive to a
position parallel to and as close as possible to the right-hand edge or curb of the roadway, clear
of any intersection, and shall stop and remain in such position until the authorized emergency
vehicle has passed, except when otherwise directed by a police officer.
2. Upon the approach of an emergency vehicle, as above stated, the driver of every bus shall
immediately stop such bus clear of any intersection and keep it in such position until the
authorized emergency vehicle has passed, except when otherwise directed by a police officer.
B. Duty Of Emergency Vehicle Driver: This Section shall not operate to relieve the driver of an
authorized emergency vehicle from the duty to drive with due regard, under the circumstances, for
the safety of all persons using the highway. (1975 Code § 8-5-13)
8-5-10: FIRES; TRAFFIC REGULATED:
A. Following Fire Apparatus: The driver of a vehicle, other than one on official business, shall not
follow any fire apparatus traveling in response to a fire alarm closer than five hundred feet (500') or
drive into or park such vehicle within the block where fire apparatus has stopped in answer to a fire
alarm. (1975 Code § 8-5-14)
B. Crossing Fire Hose: No vehicle shall be driven over any unprotected hose of the Fire Department
when laid down on any street or private driveway, to be used at any fire or alarm or fire, without the
consent of the Fire Department official in command. (1975 Code § 8-5-15)
8-5-11: FUNERAL OR OTHER PROCESSIONS:
A. Driving Through Funeral Or Other Procession: No driver of a vehicle shall drive between the
vehicles comprising a funeral or other authorized procession while vehicles are in motion and
when such vehicles are conspicuously designated as required by this Chapter. This provision shall
not apply at intersections where traffic is controlled by traffic-control signals or police officers.
(1975 Code § 8-5-16)
B. Drivers In Procession: Each driver in a funeral or other procession shall drive as near the right-hand
edge of the roadway as practicable and shall follow the vehicle ahead as close as is practical and
safe. (1975 Code § 8-5-17)
C. Funeral Processions Identified: A funeral composed of a procession of vehicles shall be identified
as such by the display upon the outside of each vehicle of a pennant or other identifying insignia or
by such other method as may be determined and designated by the Chief of Police. (1975 Code
§ 8-5-18)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 212/349
8-5-12: PARADES AND PROCESSIONS, PERMIT:
A. Permit Required: No funeral procession or parade containing two hundred (200) or more persons or
fifty (50) or more vehicles, excepting forces of the United States Army, Navy or Marine Corps, the
military force of this State and the forces of the Police and Fire Departments, shall occupy, march
or proceed along any street except in accordance with a permit issued by the Chief of Police and
such other regulations as are set forth herein which may apply. (1975 Code § 8-5-19)
B. Application For Permit: Application for permit shall be made not less than twenty one (21) days in
advance to the City Manager. (1998 Code)
8-5-13: DRIVING ON SIDEWALKS PROHIBITED:
The driver of a vehicle shall not drive within any sidewalk area except at a permanent or temporary
driveway. (1975 Code § 8-5-20)
8-5-14: LIMITATIONS ON BACKING:
The driver of a vehicle shall not back the same unless such movement can be made with reasonable
safety and without interfering with other traffic. (1975 Code § 8-5-21)
8-5-15: RIDING ON MOTORCYCLES:
A person operating a motorcycle shall not ride other than upon the permanent and regular seat
attached thereto or carry any other person, nor shall any other person ride upon such motorcycle
other than upon a firmly attached seat to the rear or side of the operator. (1975 Code § 8-5-22)
8-5-16: CLINGING TO MOVING VEHICLES:
Any person riding upon any bicycle, motorcycle, coaster, sled, roller skates or any toy vehicle shall not
attach the same or himself to any moving vehicle upon any roadway. (1975 Code § 8-5-23)
8-5-17: RECKLESS DRIVING:
Any person who drives any vehicle in such manner as to indicate a wilful or wanton disregard for the
safety of persons or property is guilty of reckless driving. (1975 Code § 8-5-24)
8-5-18: TRESPASSING ON GUARDED STREETS; OTHER PROHIBITED AREAS:
It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle or for any pedestrian, without authority, to trespass on
foot or with any vehicle or any conveyance, upon any street or alley, or any part thereof, which is
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 213/349
enclosed or guarded with safeguards or indicated by signs or signals placed or erected for the
purpose of guarding or protecting the repairing, constructing, reconstructing, grading, resurfacing or
paving of any street or alley, or any part thereof, or for the purpose of guarding or protecting the
constructing or reconstructing of any sewers, water, light, gas or other public works thereon. Violators
of this Section shall be subject to a fine of fifty dollars ($50.00) per violation. (1975 Code § 8-5-25;
amd. Ord. 3-92, 12-15-1992)
8-5-19: HAULING CERTAIN ARTICLES ON STREETS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to haul or convey upon streets, alleys or public places, within the
corporate limits of the City, in or upon any vehicle, building material, fixtures, tools, machines or other
inanimate chattels which shall extend more than six feet (6') beyond the rear of such vehicle, or more
than two feet (2') in front of such vehicle without displaying a red signal during the period from one-half
(1/2) hour before sunrise to one-half (1/2) hour after sunset, and a red light during the period from onehalf
(1/2) hour after sunset to one-half (1/2) hour before sunrise. (1975 Code § 8-5-26)
8-5-20: RIDING ON RUNNING BOARDS:
A. It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to permit any person to ride on the fenders, running
boards, front ends or rear ends of such vehicle.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to ride on the fenders, running boards, front ends or rear ends of
any vehicle. (1975 Code § 8-5-27)
8-5-21: OPERATOR'S AND CHAUFFEUR'S LICENSES:
A. No person except those hereinafter expressly exempted shall drive any motor vehicle within the
corporate limits of the City unless such person has a valid license as an operator or chauffeur
issued by the Iowa Department of Public Safety. No person shall operate a motor vehicle as a
chauffeur unless he holds a valid chauffeur's license.
B. No person holding a valid chauffeur's license need procure an operator's license.
C. This Section shall not apply to any person not required by the laws of the State of Iowa to hold an
operator's license or chauffeur's license. (1975 Code § 8-5-28)
8-5-22: SIZE AND WEIGHT LIMITATIONS:
A. Gross Weight Limits: The City Manager is hereby authorized, on the basis of an engineering and
traffic investigation, to erect and maintain official traffic-control devices on any streets or parts of
streets to impose gross weight limits.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 214/349
B. Signs Posted For Truck Weight Restrictions: The City Manager is hereby authorized, on the basis
of an engineering and traffic investigation, to erect and maintain official traffic-control devices on
any streets or parts of streets to prohibit the operation of trucks exceeding ten thousand (10,000)
pounds gross weight; provided, that, such devices shall not prohibit necessary local operation on
such streets for the purpose of making a pickup or delivery.
C. Size Restrictions: The City Manager is hereby authorized, on the basis of an engineering and traffic
investigation, to erect and maintain official traffic-control devices on any streets or parts of streets
to impose vehicle size restrictions.
D. Excluding Specified Traffic:
1. Authority To Determine Streets: The City Manager is hereby authorized, upon the basis of an
engineering and traffic investigation, to determine and designate those heavily traveled streets
upon which shall be prohibited any class or kind of traffic which is found to be incompatible with
the normal and safe movement of traffic and shall erect appropriate official traffic-control devices
giving notice thereof.
2. Exceptions: The following vehicles shall be exempted from this prohibition:
a. Commercial vehicles engaged in the making of deliveries or the furnishing of services at
premises fronting on the proscribed street or premises contiguous to the proscribed street
which have no other means of access.
b. School buses.
c. City emergency and service vehicles. (Ord. 9-88, 8-16-1988)
8-5-23: ZONE OF QUIET:
It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to sound the horn of the vehicle except for the
protection of life or property, and it shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to operate same
without muffling the exhaust of the vehicle, while driving in any area where signs indicating that the
area is a zone of quiet have been lawfully erected. (1975 Code § 8-5-30)
8-5-24: VIOLATION OF REGISTRATION PROVISIONS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to drive or move or any owner knowingly to permit to be driven or
moved upon any street or alley within the corporate limits of the City, any vehicle of a type required to
be registered by the laws of the State which is not so registered, or for which the appropriate fee has
not been paid when and as required by such State laws, or when proper plates or other insignia
furnished by the State are not properly displayed, as required by such State laws. (1975 Code § 8-5-
31)
8-5-25: INTENT TO INJURE:
It shall be unlawful for any person, with intent to commit any malicious mischief, injury or other crime,
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 215/349
to climb into or upon a vehicle whether it is in motion or at rest, or with like intent, to manipulate any of
the levers, starting mechanism or device on a vehicle while the same is at rest or unattended, or, with
like intent, to set in motion any vehicle while same is at rest or unattended. (1975 Code § 8-5-32)
8-5-26: OBSTRUCTION TO DRIVER'S VIEW:
No person shall drive a vehicle when it is so loaded, or when there are in the front seat such number
of persons, exceeding three (3), as to obstruct the view of the driver to the front or sides of the vehicle
or as to interfere with the driver's control over the driving mechanism of the vehicle. No person in such
vehicle shall ride in such position as to interfere with the driver's view ahead or to the sides, or to
interfere with his control over the driving mechanism of the vehicle. (1975 Code § 8-5-33)
8-5-27: BRAKES, HORNS AND LIGHTS:
Every motor vehicle while in use on any of the streets of the City shall be provided with brakes, horn
and lights as required by State law and lights shall be displayed not later than one hour after sunset
and one hour before sunrise. (1975 Code § 8-5-34)
8-5-28: STOPPING FOR STOPPED SCHOOL BUS:
A. Meeting School Bus: The driver of any vehicle when meeting a school bus within the City, on which
the amber warning lamps are flashing, shall reduce the speed of said vehicle to not more than
twenty (20) miles per hour, and shall bring said vehicle to a complete stop when school bus stops
and stop signal arm is extended and said vehicle shall remain stopped until stop arm is retracted
after which the driver may proceed with due caution.
B. Overtaking School Bus: The driver of any vehicle overtaking a school bus shall not pass a school
bus when red or amber warning signal lights are flashing and shall bring said vehicle to a complete
stop not closer than fifteen feet (15') from the school bus when it is stopped and stop arm
extended, and shall remain stopped until the stop arm is retracted and school bus resumes motion,
or until signaled by the driver of the school bus to proceed. (Ord. 12-76, 11-16-1976)
Chapter 6
PEDESTRIANS
8-6-1: SUBJECT TO TRAFFIC-CONTROL SIGNALS:
Pedestrians shall be subject to traffic-control signals as heretofore declared in Chapter 3 of this Title,
but at all other places pedestrians shall be granted those rights and be subject to the restrictions
stated in this Chapter. (1975 Code § 8-6-1)
8-6-2: RIGHT OF WAY IN CROSSWALK:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 216/349
A. Driver To Yield: When traffic-control signals are not in place or not in operation, the driver of a
vehicle shall yield the right of way, slowing down or stopping if need be to so yield to a pedestrian
crossing the roadway, within a crosswalk, when the pedestrian is upon the half of the roadway
upon which the vehicle is traveling or when the pedestrian is approaching so closely from the
opposite half of the roadway as to be in danger, but no pedestrian shall suddenly leave a curb or
other place of safety and walk or run into the path of a vehicle which is so close that it is impossible
for the driver to yield.
B. Other Approaching Vehicles: Whenever any vehicle is stopped at a marked crosswalk or at any
unmarked crosswalk at an intersection to permit a pedestrian to cross the roadway, the driver of
any other vehicle approaching from the rear shall not overtake and pass such stopped vehicle.
(1975 Code § 8-6-2)
8-6-3: USE RIGHT HALF OF CROSSWALK:
Pedestrians shall move, whenever possible, upon the right half of crosswalks. (1975 Code § 8-6-3)
8-6-4: CROSSING AT RIGHT ANGLES:
No pedestrian shall cross a roadway at any place other than by a route at right angle to the curb or by
the shortest route to the opposite curb, except in a crosswalk. (1975 Code § 8-6-4)
8-6-5: WHEN PEDESTRIAN TO YIELD:
A. Yield By Pedestrian: Every pedestrian crossing a roadway at any point other than within a marked
crosswalk, or within an unmarked crosswalk at an intersection, shall yield the right of way to all
vehicles upon the roadway.
B. Exception: The foregoing rule shall have no application under the conditions stated in Section 8-6-6
hereof when pedestrians are prohibited from crossing at certain designated places. (1975 Code
§ 8-6-5)
8-6-6: PROHIBITED CROSSING:
A. Adjacent Intersections: Between adjacent intersections at which traffic-control signals are in
operation, pedestrians shall not cross at any place except in a crosswalk.
B. Business District: No pedestrian shall cross a roadway other than in a crosswalk in the business
district of the districts defined in this Title.
C. Use Of Crosswalk: No pedestrian shall cross a roadway other than in a crosswalk upon any
designated through street. (1975 Code § 8-6-6)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 217/349
8-6-7: WALKING ALONG ROADWAY:
A. Use Of Sidewalks: Where sidewalks are provided, it shall be unlawful for any pedestrian to walk
along and upon an adjacent roadway.
B. Left Side: Where sidewalks are not provided, any pedestrian walking along and upon a highway
shall, when practicable, walk only on the left side of the roadway or its shoulder, facing traffic which
may approach from the opposite direction.
C. Soliciting Rides: No person shall stand in a roadway for the purpose of soliciting a ride from the
driver of any vehicle. (1975 Code § 8-6-7)
8-6-8: DRIVERS TO EXERCISE DUE CARE:
Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this Chapter, every driver of a vehicle shall exercise due
care to avoid colliding with any pedestrian upon any roadway and shall give warning by sounding the
horn when necessary, and shall exercise proper precautions upon observing any child or any
confused or incapacitated person, including those carrying white canes authorized by law to be carried
by blind or partially-blind persons upon a roadway. (1975 Code § 8-6-8)
Chapter 7
STOPPING, STANDING OR PARKING
8-7-1: STANDING OR PARKING CLOSE TO CURB:
No person shall stand or park a vehicle in a roadway other than parallel with the edge of the roadway,
headed in the direction of lawful traffic movement and with the right-hand wheels of the vehicle within
eighteen inches (18") of the curb or edge of the roadway, except as otherwise provided in this
Chapter. Violators of this Section shall be subject to a fine of five dollars ($5.00) per violation. (1975
Code § 8-7-1; amd. Ord. 3-92, 12-15-1992; Ord. 5-95, 5-2-1995)
8-7-2: SIGNS OR MARKINGS INDICATING ANGLE PARKING:
The City Council shall determine, from time to time, upon what streets angle parking shall be
permitted and, upon motion by said Council, the Chief of Police shall mark or sign such streets either
by appropriate official signs or by painting the curb and street in such a manner as clearly to indicate
the angle at which vehicles may be parked. (1975 Code § 8-7-2)
8-7-3: OBEDIENCE TO ANGLE PARKING SIGNS OR MARKINGS:
Upon those streets which have been signed or marked by the Chief of Police, upon motion of the City
Council, for angle parking, no person shall park or stand a vehicle other than at the angle to the curb
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 218/349
or edge of the roadway indicated by such signs or markings. Violators of this Section shall be subject
to a fine of five dollars ($5.00) per violation. (1975 Code § 8-7-3; amd. Ord. 3-92, 12-15-1992; Ord. 5-
95, 5-2-1995)
8-7-4: PARKING STALLS:
A. Marked Spaces: Where parking or parking spaces are marked on the pavement at an angle with
the curb, motor vehicles must be parked or ranked only within such marked spaces with the right
front wheel against the curb.
B. Vehicle Length Restriction: No motor vehicle with an overall length of more than nineteen feet (19')
shall be permitted to park in the parking stalls as set forth in this Chapter.
C. Penalty: Violators of this Section shall be subject to a fine of five dollars ($5.00) per violation. (1975
Code § 8-7-4; amd. Ord. 3-92, 12-15-1992; Ord. 5-95, 5-2-1995)
8-7-5: PARALLEL PARKING:
It shall be unlawful to stop and park a motor vehicle on the street in the City unless the right side of
said vehicle is next to and parallel with the curb and as near to the curb as the condition of the street
will permit, except as set forth in this Chapter. (1975 Code § 8-7-5)
8-7-6: DOUBLE PARKING:
No motor vehicle shall be permitted to stop and double park in the City. Parking parallel with and more
than eighteen inches (18") from the curb shall be considered as double parking. Violators of this
Section shall be subject to a fine of five dollars ($5.00) per violation. (1975 Code § 8-7-6; amd. Ord. 3-
92, 12-15-1992; Ord. 5-95, 5-2-1995)
8-7-7: IDENTIFICATION OF NO PARKING ZONES:
No parking zones, including, but not limited to, fire hydrants, fire stations, pedestrian street crossings,
public building entrances, and similar areas, shall be identified by "No Parking" signs and painted
curbs, sidewalks, and other designated no parking areas. No parking areas in public streets or ways
may not be established other than by the direction of the City Council. No parking areas shall include,
but not be limited to, areas including fifteen feet (15') from crosswalks, and twelve feet (12') either side
of fire hydrants. Violators of this Section shall be subject to a fine of five dollars ($5.00) per violation.
(Ord. 1-93, 1-5-1993; amd. Ord. 5-95, 5-2-1995)
8-7-8: LIMITED PARKING:
Parking shall be limited, in any parking stall or area bearing a sign, to the time limitations posted at
such location. Parking violations contrary to the posted signs shall be prohibited. Violators of this
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 219/349
Section shall be subject to a fine of five dollars ($5.00) per violation. (Ord. 3-85, 7-16-1985; amd. Ord.
3-92, 12-15-1992; Ord. 5-95, 5-2-1995)
8-7-9: PARKING FOR SNOW REMOVAL:
To facilitate snow removal, no motor vehicle shall be permitted to park in the business district and for a
distance of three hundred feet (300') from a public school ground, between the hours of twelve o'clock
(12:00) midnight and six o'clock (6:00) A.M. The City shall have authority to remove any vehicle
violating this regulation and to charge the cost of removal to the owner of the vehicle. Violators of this
Section shall be subject to a fine of twenty five dollars ($25.00) per violation. (1975 Code § 8-7-9;
amd. Ord. 3-92, 12-15-1992; Ord. 5-95, 5-2-1995)
8-7-10: TWENTY FOUR HOUR PARKING:
A. Parking Limited: No person shall park or allow to stand a vehicle on the roadway of any street
longer than twenty four (24) hours consecutively without having moved the same.
B. Violation; Towing Vehicle: Vehicles which are found parked or left standing on any roadway of any
street longer than twenty four (24) hours shall be ticketed and may be towed to a Municipal or
private parking lot and the costs of said towing and parking violation be assessed to the owner of
said vehicle. The fine for a twenty four (24) hour violation shall be five dollars ($5.00) per incident.
(Ord. 4-93, 2-16-1993; amd. Ord. 5-95, 5-2-1995)
8-7-11: STOPPING, STANDING OR PARKING PROHIBITED:
No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic
or in compliance with law or the directions of a police officer or traffic-control device in any of the
following places:
A. On a sidewalk.
B. In front of a public or private driveway.
C. Within an intersection.
D. Within five feet (5') of a fire hydrant.
E. On a crosswalk.
F. Within ten feet (10') upon the approach to any flashing beacon, stop sign or traffic-control signal
located at the side of a roadway.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 220/349
G. Within twenty feet (20') of the driveway entrance to any fire station and on the side of the street
opposite the entrance to any fire station, where the curb shall have been painted yellow or other
official markings or signs have been installed.
H. Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when such stopping, standing or parking
would obstruct traffic.
I. On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge or curb of a street.
J. On the normal traffic lane of any roadway whether or not a vehicle is parked between said normal
traffic lane and the curb or edge of the roadway.
K. On any bridge or other elevated structure upon a highway.
L. On any of the streets designated by the Council and having signs posted thereon to so prohibit.
Violators of this Section shall be subject to a fine of five dollars ($5.00) per violation. (1975 Code
§ 8-7-11; amd. Ord. 3-92, 12-15-1992; Ord. 5-95, 5-2-1995)
8-7-12: PARKING PROHIBITED FOR CERTAIN VEHICLES:
When signs are erected giving notice thereof, no person shall park a vehicle of the type designated at
any time upon any of the streets or parts of streets designated herein. Violators of this Section shall be
subject to a fine of five dollars ($5.00) per violation. (1975 Code § 8-7-12; amd. Ord. 3-92, 12-15-
1992; Ord. 5-95, 5-2-1995)
8-7-13: MOVING OTHER VEHICLES PROHIBITED:
No person shall move a vehicle not owned by such person or lawfully under his control into any such
prohibited area or away from a curb such a distance as is unlawful. (1975 Code § 8-7-13)
8-7-14: UNATTENDED MOTOR VEHICLE:
No motor vehicle shall be permitted to stand unattended without the engine first having been stopped
and the brakes effectively having been set. (1975 Code § 8-7-14)
8-7-15: PARKING IN ALLEYS:
A. Prohibition: No person shall park or allow to stand any vehicle in any alley where official signs
indicate that parking is prohibited.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 221/349
B. Blocking Alleys: In alleys where parking is not prohibited, no person shall park a vehicle or allow a
vehicle to stand in such a manner or under such conditions as to leave available less than ten feet
(10') of the width of the roadway for the free movement of vehicular traffic, and no person shall
stop, stand or park a vehicle within an alley in such a position as to block the driveway entrance to
any building or other abutting property. (1975 Code § 8-7-15)
8-7-16: ALL NIGHT PARKING PROHIBITED:
No person shall park a vehicle on any street between the hours of two o'clock (2:00) A.M. and six
o'clock (6:00) A.M. where official signs have been placed indicating the prohibition of such parking.
This provision shall not apply to physicians, operators of official police cars, ambulances or other
vehicles engaged in making emergency calls. (1975 Code § 8-7-16)
8-7-17: PARKING FOR CERTAIN PURPOSES PROHIBITED:
A. Definitions: For purposes of this Section, the following terms shall have the meanings set forth
herein:
FRONT YARD: That portion of the yard of any residential facility, excluding the legal driveway,
which lies between the street and that portion of the residential structure (excluding porch, patio,
stoop, and similar appendages) which is closest to the street. Residential structures located on
corner lots will have front yards facing both streets.
MOTOR VEHICLE: Any vehicle, whether powered or not powered, which is either actually licensed
or would ordinarily be licensed by the Iowa Department of Motor Vehicles.
B. Prohibited Parking: No motor vehicle shall be parked on any public right of way or in any front yard
in a residential zone other than a legal driveway, for the purpose of:
1. Display For Sale: The display of such motor vehicle for the purpose of selling it.
2. Washing Or Repairing: Washing, convenience parking, servicing or repairing the vehicle unless
the servicing and repairs are of an emergency nature required by the failure of the motor vehicle
in that area. Only such emergency repairs or service shall be conducted as is reasonably
required to allow the removal of the vehicle from its failure location.
C. Penalty: Violators of this Section shall be subject to a fine of thirty dollars ($30.00) per violation. If a
violation of this Section occurs for more than a twenty four (24) hour period, each subsequent
twenty four (24) hour period or part thereof shall be a separate violation. (Ord. 1-93, 1-5-1993)
8-7-18: PARKING ADJACENT TO SCHOOLS:
A. The city manager is hereby authorized to erect signs indicating no parking upon that side of any
street adjacent to any school property, when such parking would, in his considered judgment,
interfere with traffic or create a hazardous situation. Painting the curbing yellow will also be an
official sign within the meaning of this section.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 222/349
B. When official signs are erected or the curbing is painted yellow, indicating no parking upon that side
of a street adjacent to any school property, no person shall park a vehicle in any such designated
place. (1975 Code § 8-7-18)
8-7-19: PARKING PROHIBITED ON NARROW STREETS:
A. The city manager, upon motion of the city council, is hereby authorized to erect signs indicating no
parking upon any street when the width of the roadway does not exceed twenty feet (20') or upon
one side of a street, as indicated by such signs, when the width of the roadway does not exceed
thirty four feet (34').
B. When official signs prohibiting parking are erected upon narrow streets as authorized herein, and
as heretofore authorized, no person shall park a vehicle upon any such street in violation of any
such signs.
C. The repeal of any ordinance or ordinances heretofore passed and adopted by the city council
prohibiting parking on either or both sides of any narrow street shall not be construed to permit
parking where official signs have been placed in accordance with such ordinance or ordinances
and such signs are hereby declared to be official signs within the meaning hereof. (1975 Code § 8-
7-19)
8-7-20: STANDING OR PARKING ON ONE-WAY ROADWAYS:
In the event a highway includes two (2) or more roadways and traffic is restricted to one direction upon
any such roadway, no person shall stand or park a vehicle upon the left hand side of such one-way
roadway unless signs are erected to permit such standing or parking. The city manager, on motion of
the city council, is hereby authorized to determine when standing or parking may be permitted safely
upon the left hand side of any one-way roadway and to erect signs giving notice thereof. (1975 Code
§ 8-7-20)
8-7-21: STANDING OR PARKING NEAR HAZARDOUS OR CONGESTED PLACES:
A. The city manager is hereby authorized to determine, and, upon motion of the city council, to
designate by proper signs, including painting the curbing yellow, the length of loading and
unloading zones in which the stopping, standing or parking of vehicles would create an especially
hazardous condition or would cause unusual delay in traffic. (1975 Code § 8-7-21; amd. Ord. 06-
01, 3-21-2006)
B. When official signs are erected at hazardous or congested places, as authorized herein, no person
shall stop, stand or park a vehicle in any such designated place. (1975 Code § 8-7-21)
8-7-22: LOADING ZONES:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 223/349
A. Curb Loading Zones Designated: The city manager is hereby authorized to determine proper
location for passenger and freight curb loading zones and, upon motion of the city council, shall
place and maintain appropriate signs indicating the same and stating the hours during which the
provisions of this section shall be applicable. (1975 Code § 8-7-22)
B. Permits For Curb Loading Zones; Service Fee: The city manager shall not hereafter designate or
sign any curb loading zone upon special request of any person unless such person shall make
application for a permit for such zone and for two (2) signs to indicate the ends of such zone. Such
permits may be granted on motion of the city council. The city manager, upon the granting of such
permit, and issuing signs, shall collect from the applicant and deposit with the treasurer a service
fee of two dollars ($2.00) per front foot per year, or fraction thereof, and may by general regulations
impose conditions upon the use of such signs and for reimbursement of the city for the value
thereof in the event of their loss or damage and their return in the event of misuse or upon
expiration of the permit. Every such permit shall expire at the end of one year. (1975 Code § 8-7-
23)
C. Standing In Passenger Curb Loading Zone: No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle for any
purpose or period of time other than for the expeditious loading or unloading of passengers in any
place marked as a passenger curb loading zone, during hours when the regulations applicable to
such curb loading zone are effective and then only for a period not to exceed three (3) minutes.
(1975 Code § 8-7-24)
D. Standing In Freight Loading Zone: No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle for any purpose or
length of time other than the expeditious unloading and delivery or pickup and loading of materials
in any place marked as a freight curb loading zone, during the hours when the provisions
applicable to such zones are in effect. In no case shall the stop for loading or unloading of material
exceed thirty (30) minutes. (1975 Code § 8-7-25)
8-7-23: TRUCK LOADING AND UNLOADING HOURS:
No motor vehicle which cannot meet length or parking requirements as set forth in this chapter shall
be permitted to load or unload at the front entrance of a business house between the hours of ten
o'clock (10:00) A.M. and six o'clock (6:00) P.M. (1975 Code § 8-7-29)
8-7-24: PHYSICALLY HANDICAPPED PARKING:
A. Authority To Designate Parking Spaces: The Police Chief, or his or her designate, is hereby
authorized to establish special parking places for on-street parking areas or off-street parking
facilities for motor vehicles displaying special identification devices as specified by the Code of
Iowa. Such devices shall be those issued by the Department of Transportation of the State and
shall be displayed in a motor vehicle being used by an individual, either as operator or passenger,
who is confined, that he/she has significant difficulty or insecurity in walking. Such designated
parking place shall be no less than twelve feet (12') wide, except in the case of parallel parking
spaces on public streets.
B. Erection Of Signs: Any parking space located in on-street parking areas or off-street parking
facilities, either public or private, intended to be a handicapped parking space shall be so
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 224/349
designated by a separate sign showing the international symbol of accessibility for each parking
space erected in accordance with the Uniform Traffic Control Device Manual. (Ord. 4-84, 4-3-1984)
C. Violation; Penalty: The use of a space designated as a handicapped parking space by the display
of the international symbol of accessibility located in on-street parking areas or off-street parking
facilities, either public or private, by a motor vehicle not displaying a handicapped identification
device, or by motor vehicle displaying such a device but not being used by a handicapped person
as operator or passenger shall be subject to a fifty dollar ($50.00) fine imposed upon the owner,
operator or lessee of the motor vehicle. (Ord. 4-84, 4-3-1984; amd. Ord. 5-95, 5-2-1995)
8-7-25: FINES NOT PAID:
All parking fines not paid within thirty (30) days of the date upon which the violation occurred shall
double in amount due. (Ord. 20150217-1, 3-3-2015)
Chapter 8
ONE-WAY; THROUGH STREETS
8-8-1: ONE-WAY STREETS AND ALLEYS:
Whenever the City Council shall, by motion or otherwise, designate any one-way street or alley, the
City Manager shall place and maintain signs giving notice thereof, and no such regulation shall be
effective unless such signs are in place. Signs indicating the direction of lawful traffic movement shall
be placed at every intersection where movement of traffic in the opposite direction is prohibited,
including the entrance to alleys. (1975 Code § 8-8-1)
8-8-2: THROUGH STREETS DESIGNATED:
The following streets and parts of streets described below are hereby declared and designated to be
through streets for the purposes of this Section:
Street From To
A Street Columbus Street Park Avenue inclusive
Columbus Street Third Street North to the corporate
limits
Columbus Street Third Street South to the corporate
limits
Elm Street
Fourth Street North to the corporate
limits
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 225/349
Prairie Street
Second and Walnut
Streets
Southwest to the
corporate limits
Third Street Corn Calhoun Street,
inclusive
(1975 Code § 8-8-2; amd. 1998 Code)
8-8-3: AUTHORITY TO ERECT STOP SIGNS:
Whenever any ordinance of the City designates and describes a through street, it shall be the duty of
the City Manager to place and maintain a stop sign on each and every street intersecting such through
street or intersecting that portion thereof described and designated as such by the City. (1975 Code
§ 8-8-3)
8-8-4: INTERSECTIONS WHERE STOP REQUIRED:
The Chief of Police is hereby authorized to determine and designate intersections where particular
hazard exists upon other than through streets and to determine whether vehicles shall stop at one or
more entrances to any such stop intersection, and shall, on motion of the City Council, erect a stop
sign at every such place where a stop is required. (1975 Code § 8-8-4)
8-8-5: SIGNS TO BEAR WORD "STOP":
Every sign erected pursuant to this Chapter shall bear the word "Stop" in letters not less than six
inches (6") in height. Every stop sign shall be located as near as practicable at the nearest line of the
crosswalk on the near side of the intersection or, if none, at the nearest line of the roadway. (1975
Code § 8-8-5)
8-8-6: BOULEVARDS; ARTERIAL HIGHWAYS:
A. Designation: The following streets in the City are hereby designated as a single continuous
boulevards and arterial highways:
Street From To
Calhoun Street Intersection at Third and
Calhoun Streets
Intersection at Seventh and Calhoun
Streets
Columbus Street Northward from Third
Street
A point where said Columbus Street
intersects and connects with U.S.
Hwy. 6, thence northwest and west
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 226/349
along the line of U.S. Hwy. 6 to the
northwest limits of the City
Third Street East line of Corn Street
westward
To and including the intersection at
Columbus Street
Third Street Intersection of Third
Street And Columbus Street
To and including the intersection at
Third and Clay Streets
B. Duty Of Drivers To Stop: The drivers or operators of all vehicles shall bring the same to a full stop
before entering or crossing such boulevards or arterial highways from intersecting streets or alleys.
(1975 Code § 8-8-6)
8-8-7: CONTROLLED ACCESS FACILITIES:
A. Definition: For the purpose hereof, "controlled access facility" shall mean a highway or street
especially designed for through traffic, and over, from or to which owners or occupants of abutting
land or other persons have only a controlled right of easement of access, light, air or view by
reason of the fact that their property abuts upon such controlled access facility or for any other
reason.
B. Police Power: This Section shall be deemed an exercise of the police power of the City under
chapter 148, Acts of the Fifty-Sixth General Assembly of the State of Iowa, for the preservation of
the public peace, health, safety and the promotion of the general welfare.
C. Prohibited Acts: It shall be unlawful for any person to:
1. Drive a vehicle over, upon or across any curb, central dividing section or other separation or
dividing line on such controlled access facilities.
2. Make a left turn or a semi-circular or U-turn except through an opening provided for that purpose
in the dividing curb section, separation or line.
3. Drive any vehicle except in the proper lane provided for that purpose and in the proper direction
and to the right of the central dividing curb, separation section or line.
4. Drive any vehicle into the controlled access facility from a local service road except through an
opening provided for that purpose in the dividing curb or dividing section or dividing line which
separates such service road from the controlled access facility property.
D. Facilities Established: There are hereby fixed and established controlled access facilities on the
primary road system extension improvement, Project No. FM-76-2( )70-6 Primary Road No. Iowa
70 within the City described as follows:
From Station 4056+.03.0 (SCL) thence northwesterly to Station 4069 +16.4 (approx. west edge
Miller Street).
regulating access to and from said highway from south corporation line to just west of Miller Street
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 227/349
and to and from abutting properties along said highway all in accordance with the plans for such
improvement identified as Project No. FM-76-2( )70-6 on file in the office of the City Clerk.
E. Entrances: The compiled list furnished by the Iowa State Highway Commission of entrances
provided for access under the above improvement specified as Project FM-76-2( )70-6 are hereby
recorded as follows:
Station
Side Of
Street
Entrance
Width
Use Of
Entrance
4056+12 Left 19 feet Commercial
4058+26 Left 20 feet Residential
4059+04 Left 20 feet Residential
4063+78 Right 62 feet Street
4065+07 Right 23 feet Street
4068+79 Right 31 feet Street
F. Parking Prohibited: Parking of any nature is prohibited from Station 4056+03.2 (SCL) to Station
4069+16.4 (approx. west edge of Miller Street). Parking shall be prohibited on the minor street
approaches for a distance of thirty five feet (35') in advance of the stop signs and on the exit sides
of the minor streets for a distance of thirty five feet (35') beyond the far crosswalks. (1975 Code
§ 8-8-7)
Chapter 9
BICYCLES
8-9-1: LICENSE REQUIRED:
Each bicycle in the City shall display one City license on the rear thereof and said license shall be
issued for the period of bicycle ownership. Unlicensed bicycle owners are subject to a five dollar
($5.00) fine, with license fee waived if the fine is paid within forty eight (48) hours. (Ord. 7-95, 6-20-
1995)
8-9-2: LICENSE FEE:
The license fee shall be three dollars ($3.00). (Ord. 7-95, 6-20-1995)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 228/349
8-9-3: RIDING ON SIDEWALK:
It shall be unlawful for any person to ride or operate a bicycle on sidewalks in the central business
district, as defined in Section 8-1-1 of this Title. A violator of this Section shall be subject to a fine of
five dollars ($5.00). These provisions do not apply to wheelchairs or to other devices used by infirm or
handicapped persons. All wheeled toys and bicycles shall be removed from all sidewalks within the
City limits when not in use as allowed by City ordinances. In all cases, and upon all sidewalks and
crosswalks within the City limits, the pedestrian shall have the right of way. (Ord. 2-90, 5-1-1990; amd.
Ord. 7-95, 6-20-1995)
8-9-4: ATTACHMENT TO OTHER VEHICLES:
It shall be unlawful for any person riding or operating a bicycle to be attached, towed or in any way
propelled by or with any other vehicle. (1975 Code § 8-9-4)
8-9-5: ONLY ONE RIDER:
No more than one person shall ride upon any bicycle at any given time. (1975 Code § 8-9-5)
8-9-6: RIDING ABREAST:
Bicyclists riding upon any street or avenue shall not ride more than two (2) abreast, and shall ride
single file in the business districts. Bicycles shall be operated as near the right curb as possible at all
times. (1975 Code § 8-9-6)
8-9-7: OBSERVANCE OF TRAFFIC RULES:
All persons using or operating bicycles upon any streets within the City shall observe the laws and
regulations of the City and State insofar as the same may apply to the riding of bicycles and shall
observe all traffic rules as to traffic lights and stop signs, must signal any change of direction or course
of travel in the same manner as said signals are required under the law governing the use of motor
vehicles upon streets and highways, shall not turn left or right in traffic except at regular intersections
or streets or alleys and shall not weave in and out of traffic. (1975 Code § 8-9-7)
8-9-8: IMPROPER RIDING FORBIDDEN:
It shall be unlawful for any person riding a bicycle within the limits of the City to ride in an irregular,
negligent or reckless manner such as zigzagging, stunting, speeding or otherwise riding with disregard
for either the operator's safety or the safety of others. When riding within the City limits, a bicyclist
shall at all times keep at least one hand on the handlebars of the bicycle being operated and shall not
ride at such a rate of speed as might endanger the person or property of another. It shall also be
unlawful for any person riding a bicycle to follow a fire truck or other fire equipment at any time. (1975
Code § 8-9-8)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 229/349
8-9-9: LIGHTS REQUIRED:
Every bicycle operated within the City limits during the period from one-half (1/2) hour after sunset to
one-half (1/2) hour before sunrise shall be equipped with a lighted white lamp on the front thereof
visible under normal atmospheric conditions a distance of at least three hundred feet (300') and with a
reflector or lamp not smaller than one and one-half inches (11/2") in diameter on the rear thereof
visible under night conditions from a distance of at least two hundred feet (200'). (1975 Code § 8-9-9)
8-9-10: PARKING BICYCLES:
Bicycles shall be parked only at parking places designated by the Police Department or in racks
provided for bicycles located at suitable and safe places approved by the Police Department. (1975
Code § 8-9-11; amd. 1998 Code)
8-9-11: FINES NOT PAID:
All five dollar ($5.00) fines not paid within thirty (30) days of the date upon which the violation occurred
shall increase to ten dollars ($10.00). (Ord. 7-95, 6-20-1995; amd. 1998 Code)
Chapter 10
ARRESTS; VIOLATIONS
8-10-1: PROCEDURE UPON ARREST:
Except when authorized or directed under state law to immediately take a person arrested for a
violation of any of the traffic laws before a magistrate or as directed by this chapter, any police officer,
upon making an arrest for violation of the state traffic laws or traffic regulations of this title, shall take
the name, address and operator's license number of the alleged violator and the registered number of
the motor vehicle involved and shall issue to him in writing on a form provided by the city a notice to
answer to the charge against him at a place and at a time after such arrest to be specified in the
notice. The officer, upon receiving the written promise of the alleged violator to answer as specified in
the notice, shall release such person from custody. (Ord. 10-76)
8-10-2: FAILURE TO OBEY NOTICE OR SUMMONS:
Any person who violates his written promise to appear, given to an officer upon an arrest for any traffic
violation is guilty of a misdemeanor regardless of the disposition of the charge for which he was
originally arrested. (1975 Code § 8-10-2)
8-10-3: NOTICE ON ILLEGALLY PARKED VEHICLE:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 230/349
Whenever any motor vehicle without driver is found parked or stopped in violation of any of the
restrictions imposed by this title, or by state law, the officer finding such vehicle shall take its
registration number and may take any other information displayed on the vehicle which may identify its
user, and shall conspicuously affix to such vehicle a notice in writing, on a form provided by the city,
for the driver to answer to the charge against him at a place specified in the notice. The officer shall
send one copy of such notice to the court. (1975 Code § 8-10-3)
8-10-4: AUTHORITY TO IMPOUND VEHICLES:
A. Causes For Removal: Members of the police department are hereby authorized to remove a
vehicle from a street or highway to the nearest garage or other place of safety, or to a garage
designated or maintained by the police department, or otherwise maintained by the city under the
circumstances hereinafter enumerated:
1. When any vehicle upon a highway is so disabled as to constitute an obstruction to traffic and the
person or persons in charge of the vehicle are by reason of physical injury incapacitated to such
an extent as to be unable to provide for its custody or removal.
2. When any vehicle is left unattended upon a street and is so parked illegally as to constitute a
definite hazard or obstruction to the normal movement of traffic.
B. Compliance With Statute: Whenever an officer removes a vehicle from a street as authorized in this
section, he shall proceed according to Iowa Code chapter 321.89. (1975 Code § 8-10-4)
8-10-5: PAYMENT OF PARKING FINES:
A. Payment; Citation: Payment of all fines levied as a violation of chapter 7, "Stopping, Standing Or
Parking", of this title, shall be made to the city clerk at the city hall according to the schedule of
fines provided in subsection B of this section. If payment of said fine is not made to the city clerk
within five (5) days after the date in which the citation is issued, the city may transfer the citation to
magistrate's court for prosecution of said violation. (Ord. 10-76)
B. Fines Established: For violations of section 8-7-11 of this title, there shall be a fine of fifteen dollars
($15.00) payable to the city clerk. For all other violations of chapter 7 of this title, except section 8-
7-24 of this title, there shall be a fine of fifteen dollars ($15.00) payable to the city clerk. (Ord. 10-
76; amd. Ord. 06-02, 3-21-2006)
Chapter 11
SNOW EMERGENCY REGULATIONS
8-11-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms are defined:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 231/349
CITY MANAGER: The duly appointed city manager of the city of West Liberty, Iowa, or his designee.
ROADWAY: That portion of a street improved, designed, or ordinarily used for vehicular travel,
exclusive of the berm or shoulder.
SECONDARY STREETS: Any streets which are not marked snow emergency routes.
SNOW EMERGENCY ROUTES: Those streets set forth in this chapter and marked in accordance
with the provisions of this chapter.
STREET: The entire width of the boundary lines of every way publicly maintained, when any part
thereof is open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel. (Ord. 1-01, 7-3-2001)
8-11-2: SNOW EMERGENCY ROUTES:
The snow emergency routes consist of the following streets or parts thereof:
A. Third Street from Columbus Street to Prairie Street.
B. Spencer Street from 4th Street to Chesebro Road.
C. Calhoun Street from the railroad tracks to U.S. Highway 6.
D. Elm Street from 4th Street to Highway 6.
E. 7th Street from Columbus Street to Elm Street.
F. 4th Street from Columbus Street to Elm Street.
G. Maxson Street from Elm Street to the eastern corporate limits.
H. Miller Street from Highway 6 (3rd Street) to Maxson Street. (Ord. 1-01, 7-3-2001)
8-11-3: SIGNS:
The city manager shall cause to be placed permanent signs on the snow emergency routes at
intervals not exceeding three hundred feet (300') with the wording "Snow Emergency Route. No
Parking During Snow Removal". These signs shall be distinctive and uniform in appearance and shall
be plainly legible to persons traveling on the streets. (Ord. 1-01, 7-3-2001)
8-11-4: PARKING ON SNOW EMERGENCY ROUTES:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 232/349
Whenever the city manager determines, on the basis of falling snow, sleet, or freezing rain, that
weather conditions make it necessary to expedite motor vehicle traffic or to prohibit or restrict parking
on city streets for snow plowing or removal or for other purposes, the city manager shall declare a
snow emergency. While a snow emergency is in effect, no person shall park or allow to remain parked
any vehicle on any portion of a snow emergency route. Nothing in this section shall permit parking at
any time or place otherwise forbidden by the provisions of any other ordinance or law. (Ord. 1-01, 7-3-
2001)
8-11-5: DURATION OF SNOW EMERGENCY:
Once declared, the snow emergency shall remain in effect until terminated in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 1-01, 7-3-2001)
8-11-6: CONFLICTING ORDINANCES:
The provisions of this chapter which become effective during a snow emergency shall take
precedence over conflicting ordinances normally in effect, except those relating to traffic accidents,
emergency travel of authorized vehicles or emergency traffic directions by a police officer. (Ord. 1-01,
7-3-2001)
8-11-7: NOTICE OF CITYWIDE SNOW EMERGENCY:
The city manager shall cause each declaration of a snow emergency made by him under this chapter
to be publicly announced through radio stations serving the city. The snow emergency shall go into
effect not less than ten (10) hours after the announcements have commenced as provided in this
section. The city manager shall keep a record of the time and date when a snow emergency is first
announced to the public. (Ord. 1-01, 7-3-2001)
8-11-8: TERMINATION OF CITYWIDE SNOW EMERGENCY:
Whenever the manager determines that the need for a snow emergency no longer exists, the
manager shall terminate the same by the same manner of announcement. (Ord. 1-01, 7-3-2001)
8-11-9: PARKING ON SECONDARY STREETS:
The city manager shall have the authority to declare snow emergencies on a street-by-street basis for
all secondary streets. These may occur during a citywide snow emergency, before a citywide snow
emergency, or after the termination of a citywide snow emergency. Parking on secondary streets shall
be subject to all restrictions and removal provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 1-01, 7-3-2001)
8-11-10: NOTICE OF SECONDARY STREET SNOW EMERGENCY:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 233/349
The city manager shall cause declaration of a snow emergency for secondary streets to be publicly
announced by placing a sign at all intersections of streets where the snow emergency is being
declared. Such signs shall state the time when the snow emergency shall go into effect. Signs must
be posted by twelve o'clock (12:00) noon and the emergency shall not go into effect less than twenty
four (24) hours after the posting of the signs. (Ord. 1-01, 7-3-2001)
8-11-11: TERMINATION OF SECONDARY STREET SNOW EMERGENCY:
Snow emergencies on secondary streets shall terminate immediately upon the removal of the signs by
city personnel. (Ord. 1-01, 7-3-2001)
8-11-12: STALLED VEHICLES:
Whenever a vehicle becomes stalled or immobilized for any reason on any part of a snow emergency
route during a snow emergency, the person operating that vehicle shall take immediate action to have
the vehicle removed from the snow emergency route. No person shall abandon or leave any vehicle
upon any snow emergency route during any snow emergency except for a reasonable time necessary
to seek assistance, not to exceed two (2) hours. Any person required to leave a vehicle on any snow
emergency route must place a note with the vehicle explaining the reason the vehicle is on the route
and contain the time the vehicle was left. (Ord. 1-01, 7-3-2001)
8-11-13: REMOVAL AND IMPOUNDING OF VEHICLES:
Members of the police department are authorized to remove or have removed a vehicle or vehicles
from a street to a garage or other place of safety when:
A. The vehicle is parked on a part of a snow emergency route while a snow emergency is in effect; or
B. The vehicle is stalled or immobilized on a part of a snow emergency route while a snow emergency
is in effect, and the person who was operating such vehicle does not appear to be removing it in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter; or
C. The vehicle is parked in violation of any parking ordinance or provision of law and is interfering or
about to interfere with snow removal operations.
D. When an officer has removed a vehicle from a street as authorized in this chapter and the police
department knows or is able to ascertain from the registration records in the vehicle the name and
address of the owner thereof, the police department shall promptly give written notice to such
owner of the fact of the removal, the reasons therefor and the place to which the vehicle has been
removed. If the owner does not appear within ten (10) days to identify and claim the vehicle and
pay the removal and storage costs, such vehicle shall be considered to be abandoned and the
police department shall dispose of such vehicle in accordance with the provisions of section
321.89 of the code of Iowa. (Ord. 1-01, 7-3-2001)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 234/349
8-11-14: CITATION ON VEHICLE:
Whenever any motor vehicle without a driver is found parked or left in violation of any provision of this
chapter, the officer finding such vehicle may take its registration number and any other information
displayed on the vehicle which identifies its user and conspicuously affix to such vehicle a parking
citation for the driver to answer to the charge against him on the date, time and place specified in the
citation. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as prohibiting both the removal of a vehicle and the
prosecution of the driver for violation of the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 1-01, 7-3-2001)
8-11-15: EVIDENTIARY PRESUMPTION:
In any prosecution with regard to a vehicle parked, left in place, or in a condition in violation of a
provision of this chapter, proof that the particular vehicle described in the complaint was parked or left
in violation of a provision of this chapter, together with proof that the defendant named in the complaint
was at the time the registered owner of that vehicle, is presumptive evidence that the defendant was
the person who parked or left the vehicle in violation of this chapter. (Ord. 1-01, 7-3-2001)
Title 9
BUILDING REGULATIONS
Chapter 1
ADMINISTRATION
9-1-1: INTERPRETATION OF PROVISIONS:
In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this Title shall be held to be minimum
requirements, adopted for the promotion and protection of the public health, safety, morals and
general welfare. Wherever the requirements of this Title are at variance with the requirements of any
other lawfully adopted rules, regulations, ordinances, deed restrictions or covenants, the most
restrictive, or that imposing the higher standards shall govern. (1975 Code § 9-2-8)
9-1-2: ADMINISTRATION; CITY INSPECTOR:
A. Designation; Term; Duties: A City Inspector designated by the City Council shall administer and
enforce this Title and Title 10, Zoning. He shall serve at the pleasure of the Council and shall be
appointed for a two (2) year term. The City Manager may appoint or authorize assistants or agents
of the City Inspector as may be necessary. The City Inspector shall submit such reports, as
required by the Council and/or City Manager, as required to keep the City appraised of the
progress of building projects. (1975 Code § 9-2-1; amd. 1998 Code)
B. Qualifications: The following should be considered when appointing a City Inspector:
1. He should be of good moral character.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 235/349
2. He should have executive ability adequate for the performance of his duties.
3. He should have knowledge of the standard materials and methods used in building, plumbing
and electrical work.
4. He should know and understand the approved methods of construction for safety to persons and
property, the statutes of the State relating to building, plumbing and electrical work and any
orders, rules, and regulations issued by authority of the statutes and the State Plumbing Code,
the Uniform Building Code, and the National Electrical Code, as recommended by the National
Fire Protection Association.
5. The City Inspector shall not engage in the business of the sale, installation, or maintenance of
plumbing, and electrical, or building equipment, either directly or indirectly, and they shall have
no financial interest in any concern engaged in such business in the City at any time while
holding office. (1975 Code § 9-2-2)
C. Salary: The Inspector shall receive such salary as the City Council may by resolution or ordinance
fix as compensation in full for all services rendered. (1975 Code § 9-2-3)
D. Activities: During his tenure in office, the City Inspector shall hold membership in the Association of
Electrical Inspectors and the National Fire Protection Association and with the consent of the
Mayor, shall serve on any committee of these associations to which he may be appointed.
Membership dues, assessments, and necessary expenses in connection with such activities shall
be paid by the City. (1975 Code § 9-2-4)
9-1-3: BUILDING CODE APPEALS BOARD:
The City Council shall act as the Building Code Appeals Board, as set forth in the current edition of the
Code, to pass on any interpretation or appeal or issuance of a building, plumbing or electric permit as
provided for in Section 9-1-5 of this Chapter. (Ord. 5-81, 9-1-1981)
9-1-4: ENFORCEMENT; NOTICE OF VIOLATION:
If the City Inspector shall find that any of the provisions of this Title are being violated, he shall notify in
writing the person responsible for such violations, indicating the nature of the violation and ordering
the action necessary to correct it. He shall order discontinuance of any illegal work being done or shall
take any other action authorized by this Title to ensure compliance with or to prevent violation of its
provisions. (1975 Code § 9-2-6)
9-1-5: BUILDING CODE APPEALS:
A. Filing Of Notice: Any person aggrieved by any ruling, decision, interpretation or order of the City
Inspector shall have the right to appeal to the City Council by filing a written notice of such appeal
with the City Clerk within ten (10) days from the date of the ruling, decision, interpretation or order.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 236/349
B. Set Time And Place Of Hearing: If such notice is filed, the City Council shall set a time and place
for hearing, and notify the party that has filed the appeal. The date of the hearing shall be not more
than fifteen (15) days after the date the notice of appeal was filed. The notice of the hearing shall
be sent by certified mail. The hearing shall be open to the public. All interested persons shall be
given an opportunity to be heard.
C. Council Action: The City Council by majority vote shall affirm, nullify or reverse any appealed ruling,
decision, interpretation or order of the City Inspector. The City Council may permit variance from
the strict terms and provisions of the Building Code if such variance can be made without
increasing the hazards to health or safety of persons or property and when granting of such
variances will not violate the intent and purposes of the Building Code. Mere convenience to the
appellant shall not be grounds for the granting of such Building Code variance. (Ord. 5-81, 9-1-
1981)
9-1-6: INJUNCTION; MANDAMUS:
If any building or structure is erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, repaired or land is used in
violation of this Title, the City may, in addition to other remedies, institute injunction, mandamus, or
other appropriate lawful action necessary to prevent, correct or abate such violation. (1975 Code § 9-
2-9)
9-1-7: PERMIT REQUIRED:
No plumbing, building, or electrical work shall be done without a permit issued by the City Inspector
except as provided in Section 9-4-3 of this Title, Plumbing Code; section 9-3-4 of this Title, Electrical
Code; and Section 9-2-3 of this Title, Building Code. A permit shall be issued if the plumbing, building
and electrical work, as proposed in the application for a permit, meets all the requirements of the
Code. If plans and specifications of the proposed work are requested, they also must meet the
requirements of this Code. The City Inspector should request a recommendation from the City Council
if in his judgment the application for a permit is questionable as to whether it meets the requirements
of this Code. (1975 Code § 9-2-10)
9-1-8: APPLICATION FOR PERMIT:
Application for a permit shall be made to the City Inspector on forms provided by the City Clerk. The
application shall be accompanied by fees in accordance with the schedule of fees as shown in the
Plumbing, Electrical, and Building Codes. (1975 Code § 9-2-11)
9-1-9: ANNUAL PERMITS:
A. Application For Permit: In lieu of individual permits, an annual permit shall be issued, after
application, to any person regularly employing one or more in-plant personnel for the repair and
maintenance of electrical, building or plumbing in or on buildings or premises owned or occupied
by the applicant for the permit. An application for an annual permit must be submitted in writing to
the City Inspector.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 237/349
B. Permit And Inspection Fees: The permit and inspection fee required shall be as stated in the
Electrical, Building or Plumbing Codes. The annual permit fee must accompany each application
for a permit or renewal. All work done under such permits shall be maintained in conformance with
the provisions of this Code. (1975 Code § 9-2-12)
9-1-10: SPECIAL INSPECTION:
A homeowner may request a special inspection for work done on his property and said homeowner
shall assume the cost of such inspection as stated in the schedule of inspection fees. (1975 Code § 9-
2-13)
9-1-11: SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF PERMIT:
The City Inspector may, in writing, suspend or revoke a permit issued under the provisions of this
Code whenever the permit is issued in error, or on the basis of incorrect information supplied, or in
violation of any ordinance or regulation or any of the provisions of this Code. (1975 Code § 9-2-14)
9-1-12: SHUTTING OFF SUPPLY:
If the City Inspector finds that any plumbing or electrical equipment or installation is defective or that it
has been installed in conflict with the provisions of the code, he shall notify the person responsible for
the plumbing or electrical equipment or installation, by certified mail, of his findings and orders. If the
necessary changes or repairs are not completed within fifteen (15) days (or longer period as specified
in the notice) the City Inspector shall have the authority to disconnect or order the discontinuance of
water or electric service to the equipment or installation in question. No disconnection shall be made
during the pendency of an appeal to the City Council. The Inspector shall present written notification,
by certified mail, to any person owning abandoned, dead or dangerous wires, apparatus or fixtures
which are no longer used, requiring the removal of same within a reasonable time, to be set by the
Inspector, may report the same to the City Council, which may order the removal of same, and order
the cost of such removal to be assessed against the property from which removed. (1975 Code § 9-2-
15)
9-1-13: FEES:
All fees as are required shall be paid at City Hall, which shall keep a complete and accurate record of
fees received and shall forthwith deposit them to the credit of the General Revenue Fund. The City
Inspector shall file with the City Clerk a written report of the amounts and sources of the fees. The
resulting funds shall be used to pay the costs of issuing permits and the expense incurred by the City
in carrying out the inspection, regulation and supervision required by this Code. There shall be no fees
charged to the United States Government, the State, or any political subdivision thereof. (1975 Code
§ 9-2-16; amd. 1998 Code)
9-1-14: CITY LIABILITY CAUSED BY INSPECTION:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 238/349
The inspection and control of electrical, building, and plumbing systems or equipment or the issuance
of permits or approval by the City Inspector shall not make the City nor the Inspector liable on account
of such control of electrical, building, or plumbing systems or equipment, or such granting of approval,
or lessen the liability of a person owning or installing such systems or equipment, as would exist in the
absence of such inspection, control, or the granting of such approval. (1975 Code § 9-2-17)
9-1-15: BONDS:
A. Bond Required; Amounts: Before any permits to install electrical work or plumbing shall be issued
to a person doing electrical work or plumbing for hire in the City, they shall first execute and file
with the City Council an approved indemnity bond as follows:
Bond Amount
Electrical or plumbing on
new construction or repair
$5,000.00
Building construction 5,000.00
B. Conditions: All bonds shall be payable in favor, and shall be held as surety, that the person will fulfill
the following conditions:
1. All building, electrical and plumbing work performed under their supervision shall be performed
in accordance with the provisions of the City electrical, building or plumbing codes.
2. They will pay all fines and penalties properly imposed upon them for violation of the City
electrical, building or plumbing codes.
3. The City shall be held free from any liability sustained by reason of the negligence or
incompetence of such electrician, contractor, or plumber or other person working under his
supervision.
4. To indemnify City for any work done by the City to correct any condition covered by the permit,
including safety measures required therefor.
C. Multiple Types Of Work: A person doing more than one type of work shall file a five thousand dollar
($5,000.00) bond for each type of work. (1975 Code § 9-2-18; amd. 1998 Code)
9-1-16: RIGHT OF ENTRY:
The City Inspector and his authorized representative may enter any premises on proof of authority for
the purpose of inspecting any electrical, building, or plumbing systems at such times as may be
reasonably necessary to protect the public health, safety, and welfare. He shall have the authority to
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 239/349
remove or cause removal of the lath, plaster, boarding, paneling, insulation, concrete or other cover
which may prevent the proper inspection of any electrical, building or plumbing systems. (1975 Code
§ 9-2-19)
9-1-17: INSPECTION:
Upon completion of plumbing, building or electrical work that has been done under a permit other than
an annual permit, the person or firm doing the work shall notify the City Inspector. The City Inspector
shall inspect the work within twenty four (24) hours exclusive of Saturdays, Sundays and holidays, or
as soon thereafter as practical. If the City Inspector finds the work in conformity with this Code, he
shall issue to the person or firm that has done the work a certificate of approval. (1975 Code § 9-2-20)
9-1-18: PREFABRICATED ASSEMBLIES:
A. Inspections Outside City Limits: Where work required to be inspected will be wholly or partially
enclosed within a prefabricated building assembly, which is constructed in a plant more than fifteen
(15) miles outside the corporate limits of the City, and where the City Inspector determines that it is
impractical or uneconomical for him to travel to the plant to inspect the electrical, building, and
plumbing work in such assembly(s), the requirement of the City Electrical, Building, and Plumbing
Codes, pertaining to installation of the electrical, building, and plumbing work, requests for
inspection, inspections by the City Inspector, acceptance of the work and system, and the
concealment of the electrical, building, and plumbing work, shall be accomplished as follows:
(1975 Code § 9-2-21)
The fabricator shall arrange for the in-plant inspection(s) to be performed and certified by an
approved inspection agency as defined in the Uniform Building Code, and such inspection agency
shall provide the City Inspector with an approved certification, stating that the electrical, building,
and plumbing work, system and fixtures, which are wholly or partially enclosed within the
prefabricated assembly, have been inspected by the inspection agency and comply with the
requirements and standards of City Electrical, Building, and Plumbing Codes, and with any other
conditions which may be required by the City Inspector. (1975 Code § 9-2-21; amd. 1998 Code)
B. Approved Inspection Agency: Such approved inspection agency may be the Underwriter's
Laboratories, Inc., or any other independent inspection and certification agency which has been
approved by the Research Committee of the International Conference of Building Officials of
Whittier, California, by their listing on an official Research Committee Recommendation Report as
an approved quality control agency. (1975 Code § 9-2-21)
9-1-19: EMERGENCY WORK:
Building, plumbing or electrical work may be done to alleviate an emergency situation without first
obtaining a permit. However, a permit shall be obtained during the first working day following the
emergency and the passage of the critical period. All work shall be made to comply with the provisions
of this Code and shall be inspected by the City Inspector. (1975 Code § 9-2-22)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 240/349
Chapter 2
BUILDING CODE
9-2-1: CODE ADOPTED:
A. Adoption: The City hereby adopts the most recently published edition of the Uniform Building Code,
and all provisions of the Uniform Building Code Standards, most recently published edition,
referred to therein, published by the International Conference of Building Officials and commonly
known as the Uniform Building Code, and division VI, part 2 (Manufactured Home Construction) of
the Iowa State Building Code Administration section. They are adopted in full except portions as
may hereinafter be deleted, modified, or amended. (1975 Code § 9-3-1; amd. 1998 Code)
B. Codes On File: An official copy of the aforementioned Uniform Building Code and Standards, and
Standards for Mobile Homes and a certified copy of this Code are on file in the office of the City
Clerk. (1975 Code § 9-3-1)
9-2-2: CONSTRUCTION COMPLIANCE CERTIFICATE REQUIRED; FEES:
(Rep. by 1998 Code)
9-2-3: MINOR RECONSTRUCTION OR REPAIRS:
Repairs that involve only the minor reconstruction of parts of a building or structure may be made
without a permit, provided no major structural changes are incurred; and further provided that the cost
of such minor reconstruction does not exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00). (1975 Code § 9-3-11;
amd. 1998 Code)
9-2-4: INSPECTION FEES:
(Rep. by 1998 Code)
9-2-5: OCCUPANCY COMPLIANCE CERTIFICATE REQUIRED; FEE:
Any newly constructed building shall not be occupied until an occupancy compliance certificate has
been issued by the City Inspector. Every occupancy compliance certificate shall state that the new
occupancy complies with all the provisions of this Title, or any other applicable provisions of this Code,
and no subsequent modifications shall be made to the occupancy that would be in violation of this
Title. The City Inspector is directed to charge a fee of five dollars ($5.00) for each occupancy
certificate. (1975 Code § 9-3-5)
9-2-6: TIME LIMIT FOR CONSTRUCTION:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 241/349
Construction must be initiated within thirty (30) days of the issuance of a construction compliance
certificate. (1975 Code § 9-3-6)
9-2-7: DRIVEWAYS:
All driveways shall be constructed or repaired so as to be sufficient and safe for the purpose for which
they are intended. All driveways must slope one inch (1") or more above and towards the roadway.
The maximum driveway width shall be twenty feet (20') unless an application for a greater width is
approved by the City Council. Driveways adjoining onto streets not having curb and gutter shall be
constructed so as to provide for the passage of surface water under them. The grade of any sidewalk
should not be altered by the work done. The driveway shall be at the same level as the existing
sidewalk. (1975 Code § 9-3-7)
9-2-8: SIDEWALKS:
Sidewalk regulations are listed in Title 7, Chapter 4 of this Code. (1975 Code § 9-3-8)
9-2-9: MOBILE HOMES:
No mobile home, except those already located within the corporate limits, shall hereafter be used for
dwelling purposes within the City which does not meet the standards set out in the standards for
mobile homes adopted by this Chapter, and the Building Official shall require such certifications as
necessary to prove compliance therewith and such specification plaques attached to the mobile home
as required by said mobile home code. The permit fee for a mobile home shall be the same as that set
out in the amended Uniform Building Code. (1975 Code § 9-3-9)
9-2-10: MODULAR OR SECTIONAL HOMES:
Modular or sectional homes shall not be deemed mobile homes, but must comply with the Uniform
Building Code. (1975 Code § 9-3-10)
Chapter 3
ELECTRICAL CODE
9-3-1: CODE ADOPTED:
The City hereby adopts the most recently published edition of the National Electrical Code, as
recommended by the National Fire Protection Association. The code is adopted in full except for the
portions that are deleted, modified or amended. All electrical work as defined in this Chapter shall be
performed in accordance with the provisions of this Code. A copy of the National Electrical Code as
adopted and a certified copy of this Code shall be on file in the office of the City Clerk for public
inspection. (1975 Code § 9-4-1; amd. 1998 Code)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 242/349
9-3-2: PURPOSE AND SCOPE:
A. Purpose: It is the purpose of this Chapter to adopt a complete electrical code, including provisions
for the inspection and regulation of electrical installations, issuance of permits and collection for
fees and to provide penalties for violations of this Code in order to protect the public safety, health
and welfare.
B. Scope: The provisions of this Code shall apply to and govern the supply of electricity and all sales,
rentals, leases, uses, installations, alterations, repairs, removals, renewals, replacements,
disturbances, connections, disconnections and maintenance of all electrical equipment. For the
purposes of this Chapter, the term "electrical equipment" means all materials, wiring conductors,
fittings devices, appliances, fixtures, signs and apparatus or parts thereof.
C. Exempt Activities: The following activities are exempt from the provisions of this Chapter:
1. Any work associated with:
a. The repair of plug-connected electrical appliances or devices.
b. Permanently connected electrical appliances or devices that have been electrically and
mechanically disconnected and separated from all sources of electrical supply by a licensed
electrician.
c. The opening of switches or the blowing or removal of fuses shall not be considered an
electrical or mechanical disconnection or separation.
2. The installation or replacement of approved fuses.
3. The installation or replacement of pin-type lamps, screw base lamps or plug connected portable
appliances. (1975 Code § 9-4-2; amd. 1998 Code)
9-3-3: INSPECTION FEES:
A. Inspection fees shall be paid to the City for all new single-family, two-family, and multi-family
dwellings according to a schedule of fees based on dollar valuation of the work, as established by
resolution of the Council. In no case shall said fees be less than fifty dollars ($50.00). Inspection
fees for work covered by annual permits shall be established by resolution of the Council. (1998
Code)
B. Inspection fees shall be paid for all complete rewiring of old dwellings according to the above
schedule for new dwellings.
C. Inspection fees for electric heating systems shall be as follows: two dollars fifty cents ($2.50) per
room.
Exception: Full or half baths shall be excluded from this fee.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 243/349
D. Inspection fees shall be paid for all partial wiring or rewiring of old dwellings or dwelling additions,
and for all electrical work other than in new dwellings according to the schedule as follows:
Circuits:
First circuit $2.00
Each additional circuit 1.00
Services:
Pedestal service, temporary 1.50
Pole service, temporary 2.00
Any permanent service installations:
Up to 201 amperes capacity 2.00
From 201 to 401 amperes capacity 3.00
From 401 to 801 amperes capacity 4.00
801 amperes capacity and over 6.00
Garbage disposal or window air conditioner
1.50
Gasoline pump 2.00
Gasoline dispensing unit 1.00
Fixtures:
For first 10 fixtures 2.00
Each additional fixture over 10; up to 30
0.10
For first 30 fixtures 4.00
Each additional fixture over 30 0.05
Electric Signs:
Up to 20 square feet on one side 2.50
From 20 to 30 square feet on one side 3.00
From 30 to 50 square feet on one side 4.00
From 50 to 100 square feet on one side
6.00
100 square feet or more on one side 8.50
Electric Motors, Commercial And Industrial:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 244/349
Less than 1 hp 2.00
From 1 hp to 5 hp 2.50
From 5 hp to 10 hp 3.00
From 10 hp to 20 hp 3.50
From 20 hp to 30 hp 4.00
From 30 hp or more 6.00
(1975 Code § 9-4-3)
9-3-4: MINOR REPAIRS:
Repairs that involve only the replacement of defective electrical outlets, fixtures, appliances, switches,
etc., may be made without a permit, provided no changes or modifications are made in the basic
wiring system; and further provided that the cost for such repairs does not exceed five hundred dollars
($500.00). (1975 Code § 9-4-3A; amd. 1998 Code)
9-3-5: MOVED BUILDINGS:
A. Buildings Other Than Dwellings: The electrical system of moved buildings, other than dwellings,
shall be made to comply with the provisions of this Code, the same as for new construction.
B. Dwellings: The electrical system of each dwelling which is moved into or within the City shall be
made to comply with the provisions of this Code in each part of said system as follows:
1. Electrical service.
2. Basement wiring.
3. Appliance circuits in the kitchen and laundry.
4. Bathroom wiring.
5. Wiring for heating or air-conditioning systems.
6. Receptacle wiring and spacing.
7. Wiring or equipment which is considered unsafe by the Inspectors.
C. Approval By Inspector: The existing service on the moved building shall not be connected to the
electrical power source unless specifically approved by the Inspector as specified in Section 9-1-17
of this Title. (1975 Code § 9-4-4)
9-3-6: ELECTRIC POWER SUPPLY:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 245/349
Except where work is done under an annual permit, it shall be unlawful for any person to make
connection from a supply of electricity or to supply electricity to any electrical equipment for the
installation of which a permit is required unless such connection has been authorized by the City
Inspector. It shall be unlawful to make connections to equipment that has been disconnected or
ordered to be disconnected by the City Inspector. (1975 Code § 9-4-5)
9-3-7: EXCAVATIONS; BARRICADES AND LIGHTS:
All excavations made for the purpose of installing or repairing services shall be so made as to cause
the least possible interference with traffic upon the streets and alleys, and all such excavations left
open during the nighttime shall be protected with suitable barricades and lights, so as to make the
same safe for pedestrians and vehicles upon the streets and sidewalks; and any person failing to take
such precautions shall be liable to all damages which may be caused to any person by reason of such
failure. (1975 Code § 9-4-7)
9-3-8: FILLING EXCAVATIONS; RESTORATION OF STREET:
After services are laid in the street, the excavation shall be filled in layers of not more than twelve
inches (12") in depth and each layer thoroughly tamped or puddled so as to prevent further
settlement; and this work, together with the replacing of sidewalks and paving, shall be done so as to
put the street or alley in as good condition as it was before the work was done, to the satisfaction of
the City Manager and City Council and at the expense of the patron. (1975 Code § 9-4-8; amd. 1998
Code)
Chapter 4
PLUMBING CODE
9-4-1: CODE ADOPTED:
The City hereby adopts the most recently published edition of the State Plumbing Code, State of Iowa,
(including appendix C) as prepared by the State Department of Health and published by the State of
Iowa. The code is adopted in full, except for the portions that are deleted, modified or amended. All
plumbing work as defined in this Chapter shall be performed in accordance with this Chapter. A copy
of the State Code as adopted and a certified copy of this Code shall be on file in the office of the City
Clerk for public inspection. (1975 Code § 9-5-1; amd. 1998 Code)
9-4-2: PURPOSE:
The provisions of this Chapter shall apply to and govern plumbing, as defined in the State Plumbing
Code, including the practice, materials and fixtures used in the installation, maintenance, extension
and alteration of all piping, fixtures, appliances and appurtenances in connection with any of the
following: sanitary drainage or storm drainage facilities, the venting system, and the public or private
water supply systems within or adjacent to any building or other structure or conveyance; also the
practice and materials used in the installation, maintenance, extension or alteration of the storm water,
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 246/349
liquid wastes or sewerage systems, and water supply systems of any premises to their connection
with any point of public disposal or other acceptable terminal. (1975 Code § 9-5-3)
9-4-3: MINOR REPAIRS:
Repairs that involve only the working parts of a faucet or valve, the clearance of stoppage, repairing of
leaks, replacement of defective faucets or valves or the replacement of defective appliances or
fixtures may be made without a permit, provided no changes are made in the piping or plumbing
systems; and further provided that the cost of such repairs does not exceed five hundred dollars
($500.00). (1975 Code § 9-5-4; amd. 1998 Code)
9-4-4: SCHEDULE OF FEES:
Fees for inspection of all plumbing work shall be paid to the City according to a schedule of fees
based on dollar valuation of the work, as established by resolution of the Council. (1998 Code)
9-4-5: PROTECTION OF WATER SUPPLY SYSTEM:
The City Inspector shall make and enforce such regulations concerning the installation, repair or
alteration of air-conditioning systems, water treatment and water-operated devices as he believes are
necessary to protect the water supply system of the City from anything which might endanger the
public health, safety or welfare. These regulations are to implement the purposes of this Chapter and
must not be inconsistent with this Chapter, or with State laws or regulations. (1975 Code § 9-5-6)
9-4-6: PLUMBERS TO CLOSE CURB COCK:
Plumbers installing water service pipes shall close the curb cock. It shall remain closed until
completion of their work and an inspection made by the City Inspector who will authorize its return to
services. (1975 Code § 9-5-7)
9-4-7: TURNING ON WATER:
No plumber shall turn the water into any service pipe until authorized by the City Inspector; provided,
however, that the water may be admitted for the purpose of testing the pipes and for that purpose only.
(1975 Code § 9-5-8)
9-4-8: VAULTS AND CESSPOOLS; USE RESTRICTED:
A. Privy Vault Construction Restricted: No privy vault, sewer vault or cesspool shall be constructed
within two hundred feet (200') of a public sewer, nor shall any person connect a sewer to a privy
vault or sewer vault, or empty the contents of a privy vault or sewer vault into a sewer, nor shall
any house drain be connected with a privy vault or sewer vault. When sewer is not accessible, a
septic with drain field may be allowed by special permission of the City Council.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 247/349
B. Connection To Public Sewer When Available: The owners of all buildings, dwellings, residences
and business establishments intended or used for human habitation, occupancy or use that are
situated within two hundred feet (200') of the public sewers must connect their sewage facilities to
the public sewers.
C. Failure To Connect To Public Sewer; Service Of Notice: In the event of failure of such owner to so
connect said sewage facilities to the public sewers or in the event of failure to make a proper
connection as provided under the provisions of this Code then in effect, the City Council may serve
or cause to be served upon said owner, his agent or occupant of the property a notice in writing to
make such connection. Such notice shall be served at least ten (10) days before the time fixed in
said notice for completing such connection. Service of the notice shall be in the manner provided
by law for the service of original notices.
D. Connection Made By City; Costs Assessed: If such owner, his agent or occupant fails to make the
proper connection to the public sewers as directed in said notice on or before the date fixed herein,
the City Clerk shall cause the connection to the public sewers to be made keeping an accurate
account of the expenses incurred therein and filing a verified statement fully itemized, of the costs
and expenses. The City shall pay such bill and the amount of the same shall be presented to said
owner, his agent or occupant, and if the same is not paid within thirty (30) days after said
presentation thereof, the amount shall be certified to the County Auditor as a special tax against
said building, dwelling, residence or establishment, and the owner thereof, and the property upon
which it is situated, and shall be collected the same as other taxes. (1975 Code § 9-5-9)
9-4-9: PUBLIC SEWER CONNECTION REGULATIONS1:
A. Permit Required: No connection to a public sanitary sewer shall be made without making
application for and obtaining a permit from the City, the payment of the permit and inspection fee,
and the payment of connection charges if required hereunder. No unauthorized person shall
uncover, make any connections with, or opening into, use, alter, or disturb, any public sewer or
appurtenance thereof without first obtaining a written permit from the City. Fees for sewer permits
shall be set by resolution of the Council.
B. Application For Permit: No permit shall be issued unless a written application for the issuance of a
permit is submitted to the City Clerk on forms provided by the City. The application shall include
the name and address of the applicant, the nature, location and purpose of the connection, the full
legal description of the property to be served by the connection, and it shall contain an agreement
by the owner of the property binding upon him and his successors or assigns to comply with all
rules and regulations now or hereafter established, regulating the use of the sewer and agreeing to
hold the City harmless from any loss, liability or damage resulting from such connections or the
use thereof.
C. Inspection: No connection of a building or house sewer shall be made without an inspection thereof
by the authorized representative of the City. The holder of the permit or his agent shall, as a
condition of receiving such sewer permit, notify the City official charged with such inspections
sufficiently in advance to allow scheduling of the Inspector's visit, and no connection shall be
covered until the connection has been viewed and approved by the City Inspector.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 248/349
D. Connection And Installation Charges: When the application for connecting to the public sanitary
sewer facilities is filed with the City Clerk, the application shall be accompanied, where applicable,
by a sewer connection fee in accordance with the following schedule of charges, which shall in no
case exceed the equitable portion of the total original cost to the City for extending the sanitary
utilities to the near vicinity of the property to be served less any part of said cost which has been
previously assessed or paid to the City under Iowa Code chapters 391, 391A, or 417, as amended,
to or on behalf of the property to be served:
District No. 1: The Prairie Street 1974 assessment sewer project area: $300.00 tap-in permit and
inspection fee; plus assessment charges.
District No. 2: Areas of City where existing sewers are available but actual costs are not recorded:
$4.00 per lineal front foot, plus permit and inspection fee.
District No. 3: Areas where costs for extending sewer is on record or new installations: actual costs
per lineal foot, plus permit and inspection fee.
District No. 4: New subdivision where all costs have been paid by developer: permit and inspection
fees only.
E. Cross And Lateral Sewer Connection Charges: Before a permit for a new cross or lateral sewer
connection to a main sewer shall be granted, the applicant shall have complied with the terms and
conditions for such connection established by the City Council as authorized by Iowa Code section
391.17. Such terms and conditions may include, but not be limited to, engineering design,
construction standards, requirements for inspection of construction of the applicant's sewer, and
the setting of equitable fees to be paid for the right to connect to the City's main sewer and all
sewerage facilities to which the sewer will be contributory.
F. Use Of Sewer Connection Charges: Building sewer connection charges, cross, and lateral sewer
connection charges shall be deposited in the Sanitation Fund.
G. Connections Restricted: No building sewer connection shall be made to a public sanitary sewer
which is not in front of the property to be served unless the public sewer cannot feasibly be
extended and the building sewer can be connected without creating difficulties for the other utilities
in the street or unless any such difficulties are offset by a definite public advantage in having the
connection. No building sewer shall be connected directly into a manhole more than six inches (6")
above the flow line therein. Where a public sewer is extended by the applicant at his own expense,
it shall be constructed in accordance with the specifications of the City for public sewers, and
connection charges may be reduced by the cost thereof, in whole or in part. (1975 Code § 9-5-10;
amd. 1998 Code)
Chapter 5
BILLBOARDS
9-5-1: CERTIFICATE REQUIRED; FEE:
It shall be unlawful to construct or maintain or cause to be constructed or maintained, any billboard
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 249/349
without first securing a construction compliance certificate from the City Inspector. The fee for this
construction compliance certificate shall be fifteen dollars ($15.00) per billboard. (1975 Code § 9-6-1)
9-5-2: SURETY BOND REQUIRED:
Every person engaged in the business of constructing and maintaining billboards shall file with the
City Clerk a surety bond of some company duly licensed in the State, to be approved by the Mayor, in
the sum of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) conditioned that such person shall hold the City free
from all damages, loss, expense or decrees which may be secured against the City on account of the
construction or maintenance of any billboard. (1975 Code § 9-6-2)
9-5-3: RESTRICTIONS:
It shall be unlawful to construct or maintain or cause to be constructed or maintained any billboard in
such a manner as to:
A. Obstruct the free use of the streets, alleys or sidewalks;
B. Be dangerous to the public by falling or blowing down;
C. Be unable to stand a pressure of at least thirty (30) pounds per square foot of advertising space;
D. Obstruct the view of railroad crossings or street crossings;
E. Be other than of fireproof construction;
F. Increase the danger of loss by fire or to increase the rate for fire insurance;
G. Be less than three feet (3') above the level of the ground on which it is located (1975 Code § 9-6-3)
9-5-4: CONSENT OF RESIDENCE OWNERS:
It shall be unlawful to construct or maintain any billboard in any location in which one-half (1/2) of the
buildings on both sides of the street are used exclusively for residence purposes without first obtaining
the consent in writing of the owners, or duly authorized agents of said owners, owning a majority of
the frontage of said property. (1975 Code § 9-6-4)
9-5-5: NAME REQUIRED ON BILLBOARD:
The name of the person or corporation owning or controlling each billboard shall be placed and
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 250/349
maintained on such billboard or signboard so as to be easily read. (1975 Code § 9-6-5)
9-5-6: REPORT REQUIRED:
Every person maintaining a billboard for the purpose of displaying advertising shall file with the Mayor
a full and complete report of the location, size and construction of all existing billboards upon demand
of the City Council and notice given by the City Clerk. (1975 Code § 9-6-6)
9-5-7: REFUSE AND RUBBISH PROHIBITED:
Every person maintaining a billboard for the purpose of displaying advertising shall destroy, by
burning, all scrap and waste paper when said billboards are cleared. (1975 Code § 9-6-7)
9-5-8: EXISTING BILLBOARDS:
The provisions of this Chapter shall apply to billboards already existing and all such billboards must
conform to said provisions within sixty (60) days after its passage. (1975 Code § 9-6-8)
9-5-9: EXCEPTIONS:
A. This Chapter shall not apply to billboards or signboards attached to the surface of permanent
buildings and designed to give publicity to any business carried on in such buildings or to
billboards not exceeding six (6) square feet in area used to advertise the sale or lease of the
property upon which they shall be erected.
B. No part of this Chapter shall be construed to take precedence over any part of Title 10 of this Code,
Zoning. (1975 Code § 9-6-9)
Chapter 6
RENTAL HOUSING REGULATIONS
9-6-1: PURPOSE:
The City hereby adopts by reference the housing quality standards promulgated by the Unites States
Department of Housing and Urban Development, as set forth in the Federal Register, December 29,
1978, part VII, section 882.109, and as provided for by section one of House File 2536, enacted by
the 69th General Assembly of the State of Iowa. The purpose of this Chapter is to establish minimum
health and safety standards for rental housing in the City. These standards relate to the condition,
maintenance, and occupancy of rental dwellings, and are intended to ensure that rental housing is
safe, sanitary, and suitable. (1998 Code)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 251/349
9-6-2: SCOPE:
This Chapter applies to all rental dwelling units within the City. An owner-occupied, single-family
dwelling unit is specifically excluded unless there are one or more roomers. Also excluded are hotels,
motels, and State licensed health and custodial facilities. (1998 Code)
9-6-3: DEFINITIONS:
For purposes of this Chapter, the following terms and phrases are defined. Words used in the present
tense shall include the future; singular shall include the plural and vice versa; and "shall" is always
mandatory. The words "dwelling", "dwelling unit", "lodging house", "rooming unit", and "premises" shall
be construed as through there were followed by the words "or any part thereof".
ABATE: To end a nuisance, emergency, or nonconformance.
APARTMENT: A room or group of rooms intended to be occupied for living, sleeping, cooking, and
eating.
DWELLING: Any house, building, mobile home, or portion thereof intended to be occupied as the
place of habitation of human beings, either permanently or transiently.
DWELLING UNIT: One or more rooms intended to be occupied by one family for living purposes. If a
common area and facilities for cooking and eating are provided in a dwelling for the use of the
occupants of a rooming unit(s) therein, such common areas and facilities shall constitute a part of
each dwelling unit for the purpose of inspection and compliance with this Chapter.
EMERGENCY: A condition arising from actual or imminent failure and resulting in a substantial health
or safety hazard to occupants or in substantial hazard to a dwelling. Failures that can create an
emergency include, but are not limited to, the following: structural collapse or failure; flood; fire; inflows
of ground, drainage, or surface waters; failure of a supplied utility-electricity, gas, water, sewage, heat
(not cooling).
EXIT LADDER: A ladder may be defined as an exit ladder when it does not pass in front of any
building opening below the floor being served; it is so installed that it will not cause a person using it to
be within six feet (6') of exposed electrical wiring; the availability of activating the device for the ladder
is accessible only from the opening served; all load bearing surfaces and supporting hardware shall
be of noncombustible materials. Exit ladder devices shall have a minimum width of twelve inches (12")
when in the position intended for use. The design load shall not be less than four hundred (400)
pounds for sixteen feet (16') in length and six hundred (600) pounds for twenty five feet (25') in length;
and exit ladder devices shall be capable of withstanding an applied load of four (4) times the design
load when installed in the manner intended for use. Test loads shall be applied for a period of one
hour.
FAMILY: An individual, or two (2) or more persons related to each other by blood, marriage, or legal
adoption, including foster children, and not more than two (2) roomers; or in the alternative, not more
than three (3) unrelated persons.
HABITABLE SPACE: Space in a dwelling for living, sleeping, eating, or cooking. Bathrooms, toilet
compartments, closets, halls, storage or utility space and similar areas are not habitable space.
HOUSING INSPECTOR: The inspector designated by the City Manager to be responsible for the
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 252/349
enforcement of this Chapter and such other City employees, regardless of department, as have been
trained in conducting inspections or parts of inspections.
LETTER OF COMPLIANCE: A document issued by the City to show that the premises have been
inspected by the owner and certified to be in substantial compliance with this Chapter on the date of
inspection.
MULTIPLE DWELLING: Any dwelling containing more than two (2) dwelling units, except townhouses
and condominiums, including, but not limited to:
A. Boarding House: A lodging or rooming house where meals are regularly served for
compensation to more than three (3) persons not members of the family or families there
residing.
B. Lodging House: Also called rooming house; is a building or portion thereof, other than a hotel or
motel, and which provides rooms for sleeping, and is capable of accommodating more than
three (3) persons, for which rents or fees are charged.
OCCUPANT: Any person living, sleeping, cooking or eating in, or having actual possession of a
dwelling unit.
OPERATOR: One natural person, who may be the owner, living close enough to the City so as to
conveniently have charge, care, or control of a building including one or more rental units.
OWNER: Any person who alone, jointly, or as tenant in common with others, has legal or equitable
title to any dwelling unit with or without accompanying actual possession thereof. For the purposes of
this Chapter, "owner" includes an agent of the owner empowered by the owner to act on the
conditions or circumstances in question.
OWNER-OCCUPIED SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLING: Any townhouse, condominium, or detached
dwelling that is occupied as a dwelling by the owner or owner's relative within the first degree of
consanguinity, and may include a nanny, live-in nurse, or live-in exchange student. It is one dwelling
unit even if allowed roomers occupy part of the building.
PERSON: Any individual, association, partnership, corporation or officer thereof, and any and all
executors, administrators or assigns thereof.
PERSONS WITH A DEMONSTRABLE INTEREST: Owner, occupant, or other occupant in the same
dwelling; owner or occupant of another premises within two hundred feet (200') of the premises in
question.
PLUMBING: Includes the following supplied facilities and equipment: gas, water and waste pipes,
sumps, drains, vents, and all supplied facilities or equipment connected to them.
PREMISES: A lot and its buildings and other improvements.
RENT: Payment of money, goods, labor, service, or otherwise for the use of a dwelling.
ROOMING UNIT: A room or group of rooms intended to be occupied for living and sleeping but not for
cooking.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 253/349
STORY: That portion of a building included between the upper surface of any floor and the upper
surface of the floor above, except that the topmost story shall be that portion of a building included
between the upper surface of the topmost floor and the ceiling of the room above. If the finished floor
level directly above a basement or unused underfloor space is more than six feet (6') above grade, as
the term "grade" is defined in the Uniform Building Code, 1979 Edition, for more than fifty percent
(50%) of the total perimeter or is more than twelve feet (12') above grade as above defined at any
point, such unused underfloor space or basement shall be considered a story.
SUPPLIED: Paid for, furnished, provided by, or under the control of the owner or operator.
TENANT: An occupant of a rental dwelling unit who has signed a lease or made a verbal rental
contract. (1998 Code)
9-6-4: VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES:
A. No owner or operator shall rent or offer for rent any dwelling unit for use in whole or in part for
human habitation unless a valid letter of compliance has been issued, or an application for the
same is on file, for such dwelling unit. When a letter of compliance has been denied or revoked, it
shall be unlawful for an owner or operator to rent or offer for rent any dwelling unit for use in whole
or in part for human habitation unless a valid letter of compliance has been issued.
B. No person shall occupy, nor shall the owner or operator allow any person to occupy, any dwelling
unit more than thirty (30) days after the effective date of the denial or revocation of a letter of
compliance for that dwelling unit or after the housing inspector finds that the vacation of the
dwelling unit is necessary before abatement of a nonconformance can reasonably proceed. An
owner or operator has not unlawfully allowed occupancy of a dwelling unit where the owner or
operator has made a good faith effort to terminate the rental agreement and take possession of the
dwelling unit as provided by Iowa law, or where the owner or operator has no right to disallow the
occupancy under Iowa law.
C. No person shall occupy, nor shall the owner or operator allow any persons to occupy, any dwelling
unit in excess of the maximum occupancy permitted in subsection 9-6-14O of this Chapter.
D. No person shall permit a state of nonconformance to exist after the time set by the housing
inspector for abating the nonconformance.
E. No person shall fail to fulfill the specific obligations placed upon them by the provisions of this
Chapter relating to minimum property standards, whether they be the owner, operator, or occupant.
F. It shall be a Municipal infraction for any person, corporation, or legal entity to violate or resist
enforcement of the requirements of this Chapter. (1998 Code)
9-6-5: APPLICATION FOR A LETTER OF COMPLIANCE:
Application for a letter of compliance shall be submitted in writing, on forms provided, to the housing
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 254/349
inspector by the owner or operator who shall be required to provide all requested information,
including, but not limited to:
A. The address or addresses of the dwelling(s);
B. The number and type of dwelling units in the building;
C. The zoning district in which the dwelling is located;
D. The name, address, and telephone number of the owner and/or operator.
Failure of the applicant to provide any of the information required herein may prevent the
application from becoming effective for the purposes of this Chapter, notwithstanding the payment
of any fees. (1998 Code)
9-6-6: YEARLY REGISTRATION:
A. It shall be the responsibility of the owner and/or operator to complete and submit a yearly
registration form to the City. The registration form shall request an updating of the information as
required under Section 9-6-5 of this Chapter.
B. The owner and/or operator shall return the completed registration form to the City prior to January
31 of the calendar year. All required fees, as authorized in Section 9-6-7 of this Chapter, shall be
paid prior to January 31 of each calendar year. Failure to complete or return the registration form
and/or fee shall result in a revocation of the letter of compliance, or denial of the application for
same. (1998 Code)
9-6-7: FEES:
There shall be established, at the discretion of the Council, a reasonable schedule of fees for the
purposes of defraying the costs of inspection, enforcement and administration of the provisions of this
Chapter. Said fee schedule shall be established by resolution of the Council. Amounts due and
payable to the City under said schedule of fees shall constitute a debt owed to the City and may be
enforced and collected as such. Failure or refusal to pay fees required shall also constitute a violation
of this Chapter. Fees for inspections shall be set by the Council subject to the provisions of Section 9-
6-9 of this Chapter. (1998 Code)
9-6-8: LETTER OF COMPLIANCE; EFFECTIVENESS:
A letter of compliance issued for a dwelling unit shall be effective until thirty (30) days after a change
in ownership or operation, unless sooner revoked pursuant to Section 9-6-11 of this Chapter. (1998
Code)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 255/349
9-6-9: INSPECTIONS:
A. Application for a letter of compliance shall constitute certification on the part of the owner and/or
operator that the dwelling unit for which application is made is compliant with all parts of this
Chapter and any further applicable building standards as set forth by the State of Iowa and
Uniform Building Code.
B. Upon receipt of a compliant or notification of a violation of this Section, the City housing inspector
shall arrange for an inspection within a reasonable time. The housing inspector shall conduct an
inspection at the request of the owner, or upon receipt of a complaint from a person with a
demonstrable interest and evidence that the subject matter of the complaint has been reported to
the operator in writing. In addition, the housing inspector may, at the housing inspector's own
discretion, inspect any dwelling as frequently as necessary. The owner and/or operator shall allow
the inspection to be conducted within two (2) weeks of the date of the inspector's request to
inspect. Failure of the owner and/or operator to do so may result in denial or revocation of the letter
of compliance.
C. The operator or agent shall be present at the dwelling unit at the time set for any inspection and
shall accompany the inspector during such inspection.
D. The occupant shall have the opportunity to be present during any inspection. In all cases, if the
occupant or owner of a dwelling unit refuses entry to conduct such inspection, the housing
inspector shall not conduct such inspection without a search warrant.
E. The fact that a complaint of noncompliance with this Chapter has been made by the occupant shall
not be used as a ground, cause, or basis for termination of residency or reduction in services by
the owner.
F. The inspection of an owner-occupied single-family dwelling with roomers shall be limited to the
utilities and the areas occupied and used by the roomers and to the egress from those areas.
G. During the course of an inspection, if the observations of the housing inspector suggest that an
elevator is not in safe and operating condition, the housing inspector shall report such observations
to the Iowa Labor Commissioner so an inspection may be conducted pursuant to chapter 104,
Iowa Code.
H. Nothing contained in this Section shall be interpreted or deemed to be a repeal, amendment,
modification or dispensation of any housing standard or inspection requirement established by the
laws of the State.
I. Fees for inspections shall be on a per inspection basis and shall be paid by the owner, operator, or
agent thereof subject to the following provision: if, in the judgment of the housing inspector and
City Manager, it is found that an occupant requested inspection as a punitive measure against said
owner, operator, or agent thereof, that occupant shall be responsible for the costs of said
inspection.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 256/349
J. Inspection shall be required for all units after construction or after remodeling requiring a building
permit. (1998 Code)
9-6-10: GRANT OF LETTER OF COMPLIANCE:
A. Application for a letter of compliance construes certification by the applicant that the property meets
all requirements contained herein, and the applicant further agrees to indemnify and hold harmless
the City should any cause of action arise as a result of said certification.
B. A letter of compliance shall be issued upon notification of compliance by the housing inspector for
all units inspected pursuant to subsection 9-6-9J of this Chapter.
C. A copy of the letter of compliance shall be available for inspection at City Hall.
D. The letter of compliance shall include, at a minimum: the information contained in the application,
the date of any inspection(s), and the date of issue.
E. For multiple dwellings, a letter of compliance may be issued for the entire structure that includes all
the required information and that lists the address and maximum occupancy for each dwelling unit.
(1998 Code)
9-6-11: DENIAL OR REVOCATION OF LETTER OF COMPLIANCE:
A. Notice Of Nonconformance: If, upon inspection due to complaint or notification of noncompliance, a
dwelling unit is found to not conform with the requirements of this Chapter, the housing inspector
will notify the operator of the reasons for nonconformance and shall record the notice with the City,
along with a copy of the notification of same to the operator.
B. Abatement: Nonconformance shall be promptly abated.
C. Abatement Program: The operator may, within one week of the notification of nonconformance,
enter into an agreement with the City detailing a program to abate nonconformances requiring
fourteen (14) or more days, during which time Section 9-6-4 of this Chapter shall be stayed.
D. Noncompliance: If the operator does not enter into an agreement under subsection C of this
Section, and if the dwelling unit is presently occupied, the housing inspector shall within two (2)
weeks of the notification of nonconformance notify the occupants of each affected dwelling unit by
mail addressed to "occupant" of the reasons for nonconformance and that eviction may be
imminent. However, failure of such occupants to receive notice shall not bar proceedings to
enforce any denial or revocation of the letter of compliance against the owner/operator.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 257/349
E. Reinspection: The owner/operator shall be entitled to one free reinspection by the housing
inspector to determine whether the nonconformance has been abated.
F. Repair And Deduct: The tenant may, within two (2) weeks of being notified of the revocation or
denial a letter of compliance, enter into an agreement with the City to abate the nonconformance
by repair and deduct. The agreement shall be entered into if:
1. The nonconformance was not caused by an occupant or other person on the premises with the
consent of the occupant.
2. The reasonable costs of abatement are less than two hundred dollars ($200.00) or one month's
rent, whichever is greater. The agreement shall include two (2) written estimates from
appropriate firms of the cost to abate, and the City Manager shall decide which estimate shall be
accepted.
3. The operator has been notified in writing of the tenant's intention to appeal for repair and deduct.
The tenant shall submit an itemized paid statement, with lien waivers from suppliers of materials
and labor for the abatement, to the owner and deduct the total from the next rental payment, or
bill the owner for the actual costs of the repair work or the amount specified in subsection F2 of
this Section, whichever is less, and the filing fee for the appeal for permission to abate by repair
and deduct.
G. Rent Escrow:
1. Notwithstanding any other provision of law or any other agreement, whether oral or written, if an
owner of residential premises fails to abate a nonconformance within one week of the notice of
nonconformance, or in accordance with subsection 9-6-11C of this Chapter, the housing
inspector shall, within two (2) weeks of the notice of nonconformance, serve notice in writing that
the dwelling unit may be eligible for rent escrow. Said notice shall be sent by certified mail, return
receipt requested, to the owner and to each occupant affected by the notice.
2. The occupant may, within thirty (30) days of being notified of the nonconformance, enter into an
agreement with the City Manager for certification of rent escrow and give the owner or agent
thereof, pursuant to this Chapter, written notice of their intent to enter into the escrow
agreement. If certification of escrow is granted, the tenant may recover any filing fee from the
escrow account as a necessary expense of making the dwelling unit conform with the housing
code. The City Clerk shall develop appropriate forms for rent escrow agreements and make
such forms available to the public at request.
3. Certification of rent escrow shall be granted when:
a. The occupant produces the housing inspector's written notice that the occupant's dwelling unit
may be eligible for rent escrow issued within thirty (30) days of the filing for the certification; a
signed rent escrow agreement with a bank, trust company, or other lending institution
approved by the City bearing a certificate of the Muscatine County Recorder that the same
has been recorded; and the owner's signed acknowledgement of receipt of the notice of filing
for certification.
b. The owner does not produce a certificate of compliance issued by the housing inspector for
the occupant's dwelling unit after the notice of nonconformance; and
c. The occupant shows that the nonconformities found by the housing inspector were not caused
by an occupant, or another person on the premises with the consent of the occupant, beyond
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 258/349
ordinary wear and tear.
4. When the City grants certification of rent escrow for a dwelling unit, the duty of the occupant of
that dwelling unit to pay rent and the right of the owner to receive such rent shall be suspended
without affecting any other terms of the landlord/tenant relationship until the owner receives a
letter of compliance for the dwelling unit or until the tenancy is terminated for any reason other
than nonpayment of rent.
5. During the period when the duty to pay rent is suspended, and the occupant continues to
occupy, the rent withheld shall be deposited by the tenant into an escrow account, bank, or other
lending company as approved by the City. If the owner expresses a preference as to the bank or
financial institution for the escrow such preference shall be honored in the reasonable discretion
of the City. Said rent shall be paid to the owner when the dwelling unit is issued a letter of
compliance at any time within six (6) months from the date on which rent escrow was certified.
Any funds deposited in said escrow may be used by the owner for the purpose of making such
dwelling unit comply with the housing code pursuant to adopted escrow procedures. No
occupant shall be evicted for any reason relating to nonpayment of rent while the rent is being
deposited in escrow. However, an occupant may be evicted for holding over after the end of the
lease term in any written lease. After six (6) months from the date of certification, the owner may
evict the occupant for purposes of demolishing or vacating said premises if the owner deems it
to be economically infeasible to repair or renovate the premises. In that event, no letter of
compliance shall be issued and no person shall occupy said premises for a period of one year
following the occupants' eviction. If, at the end of six (6) months after the dwelling unit was
certified for rent escrow such dwelling unit has not been issued a letter of compliance, any
monies unencumbered or remaining in escrow shall be payable to the depositor.
6. The City Manager shall develop and establish written procedures for the deposit and
disbursement of all monies derived as a result of the rent escrow program. Such procedures
shall be adopted by resolution of the City Council.
H. Denial; Revocation: The letter of compliance shall be denied or revoked if:
1. The owner/operator does not enter into an agreement with the City to abate the
nonconformance, and, the nonconformance has not been promptly abated; or
2. The dwelling unit is not in conformance at the end of the period specified by the City in the
written agreement. However, the City may extend the time specified in the agreement if, through
no fault of the owner and despite good faith efforts to comply, the work has been delayed.
3. The housing inspector knows that the dwelling unit is in violation of the zoning provisions of this
Code. This provision shall not be construed to require the housing inspector to be
knowledgeable of City zoning ordinances.
I. Notification Of Denial; Revocation: Upon denial or revocation of the letter of compliance, the City
shall notify the operator and the occupants in writing. (1998 Code)
9-6-12: ABATEMENT OF OCCUPANT NONCOMPLIANCE:
A. If after inspection the occupant is found in noncompliance with the requirements of this Chapter, the
housing inspector shall promptly notify the occupant and the operator of the reasons for
nonconformance.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 259/349
B. If said occupant does not abate the noncompliance within a time set by the City, the inspector may
proceed against the occupant and, if the noncompliance is substantial, shall require abatement by
the operator within a reasonable time not to exceed thirty (30) days. The operator may assess the
reasonable cost thereof to the occupant plus the costs of additional inspection.
C. The dwelling unit shall be provided one free inspection by the housing inspector to determine
whether the noncompliance has been abated. (1998 Code)
9-6-13: EMERGENCY ABATEMENT:
A. If an emergency seems to exist and the occupant cannot obtain prompt relief from the operator, the
occupant or other person may ask the housing inspector to find that an emergency does exist that
constitutes a substantial hazard to the occupant's health and safety.
B. If the housing inspector finds that such an emergency exists, and that the owner or operator will not
or cannot within a reasonable time abate the emergency, and that the emergency can be readily
abated, the housing inspector shall cause such abatement and shall notify the owner by certified
mail of the actions taken and the costs to be assessed.
C. If the housing inspector finds that an emergency exists that cannot be readily and reasonably
abated, the letter of compliance shall be immediately revoked or the application immediately
denied.
D. If no emergency is found to exist, the housing inspector shall proceed under Section 9-6-11 of this
Chapter. (1998 Code)
9-6-14: MINIMUM CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS:
A. Construction:
1. Each dwelling unit shall be reasonably weathertight. All areas of the building shall be structurally
sound.
2. A dwelling unit which is a mobile home shall be secured to the mobile home stand with tiedowns
and ground anchors that conform to any of the authorized standards or methods promulgated by
authorized officials of the State in the Iowa Administrative Code for mobile home anchoring. The
frame, wheels, crawlspace, storage area, and utility connections of all mobile homes shall be
concealed from view by skirting which shall be of a durable all-weather construction which is
consistent with the exterior of the mobile home.
3. All building-related items that are repaired or replaced shall meet the current Municipal building
code standards.
B. Doors And Windows: Each entrance door to a dwelling shall be supplied with a lock and have a
reasonable fit. Glass doors and windows shall be unbroken. Storm doors and windows shall be
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 260/349
supplied and installed for exterior doors and windows from fall until spring, except with respect to
thermal-pane and insulated exterior doors. Screens shall be kept in good repair.
C. Wall And Floor Penetrations: Wall and floor penetrations, such as for utility lines, shall be enclosed
or sealed with a fire-retardant material to reduce spread and passage of vermin.
D. Roof Drainage: Roof drainage shall be provided to avoid discharge on steps, walkways, or
entrances where possible.
E. Handrails And Guardrails:
1. Handrails or guardrails in new rental properties shall meet the standards of the Municipal
building code. New rental properties are new construction or those existing structures which are
being converted to rental properties.
2. Existing properties shall have one safe handrail per stairway, provided that the handrail meets
the standards of the building code in effect at the time the structure was built.
F. Upkeep: Dwelling units and premises shall be free of garbage and rubbish. Rodent and pest
harborages shall be eliminated.
G. Plumbing And Heating:
1. Water supply and sanitary sewer systems shall be approved public or private systems, and shall
not leak and must provide adequate flow. Sewage systems shall be maintained so as to
minimize backup. Walls, ceilings, and floors shall be essentially free from evidence of surface,
ground, roof, or drainage water.
2. Exhaust gases from fuel-burning water and space-heating units shall be adequately vented to
not less than two feet (2') above the roof of the building; such units shall be provided with
adequate air supply.
3. Gas fired appliances shall not be in or open directly into a bedroom or bathroom, unless the
appliance complies with an exception found in the current mechanical section of the current
edition of the Uniform Building Code.
4. Every heating unit shall be protected against malfunction with adequate safety devices.
5. Every gas pipe shall be sound, free of leaks or obstructions, and sized to provide an adequate
flow of gas.
6. Appliances shall be connected to gas piping with rigid metal or acceptable flexible piping. Where
a flexible connector is used, a shut-off valve shall be installed in the rigid pipe near the
connection.
7. Gang water meters in multiple dwelling units shall be clearly labeled.
8. All clothes dryers shall be vented directly to the outside.
9. Plumbing and mechanical items repaired or replaced shall follow current plumbing and
mechanical codes.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 261/349
H. Electrical:
1. The electrical system of every dwelling shall be installed and maintained so as to be reasonably
safe to the occupants and the structure.
2. Temporary wiring (extension cords) shall not lie beneath floor coverings, extend through walls,
doorways, transoms, or similar apertures; or do other than connect a convenience outlet to
portable electrical appliances. Extension cords shall not be overloaded.
3. No operator or tenant shall install or use electrical space cooling or heating equipment unless
the owner has installed the equipment or given permission to use it.
4. Fuses, or equivalents, shall not exceed the size recommended by the current National Electric
Code.
5. Each habitable space room shall have at least two (2) duplex electrical outlets where an
electrical cord may be easily and directly plugged in with a minimum of inconvenience.
Additional outlets may be required in those conditions where overuse creates a hazard.
6. Each bathroom shall have at least one duplex electrical outlet where an electrical cord may be
easily and directly plugged in with a minimum of inconvenience. Any outlet installed or replaced
in a bathroom shall have ground fault circuit interrupter (GFCI or GFI) protection.
7. Gang electrical meters in multiple dwelling units shall be clearly labeled.
8. Emergency lighting shall be provided in all common hallways and stairways in multiple dwelling
units with more than two (2) units, having an intensity of not less than one foot-candle at floor
level.
9. All electrical items shall comply with the current code when repaired or replaced.
I. Window Space:
1. Each habitable room shall be provided with natural light by means of one or more exterior
glazed openings. Such window openings shall have a total minimum area of at least ten (10)
square feet per apartment.
2. All habitable rooms and bathrooms shall have natural ventilation provided by an easily operable
exterior opening. Such openings shall be equal to at least fifty percent (50%) of the minimum
window area as required in subsection I1 of this Section.
3. In lieu of openable windows for natural ventilation in bathrooms and kitchens, adequate
ventilation may be a system of mechanical ventilation. The system shall exhaust and discharge
directly to the outside air.
4. For the purpose of determining light and ventilation requirements:
a. Any room may be considered a portion of an adjoining room when the common wall has an
unobstructed opening of at least twenty five (25) square feet.
b. Openings of less than 1.5 square feet shall not be included in computation.
J. Light:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 262/349
1. The owner shall provide, near the entrance to each room, a switched convenience outlet or a
light fixture capable of providing sufficient light for each square foot in each habitable room,
bathroom, water closet compartment, and hallway within the dwelling unit.
2. The owner shall provide light and supply light bulbs for all public halls and stairways at all times.
K. Paint:
1. No paint containing lead shall be applied in or on any rental dwelling.
2. In dwelling units peeling, blistered, or flaking paint shall be removed or effectively covered in a
workmanlike manner so as to provide a smooth, easily cleaned finish.
L. Smoke Detectors, UL Approved Type:
1. The owner shall provide each level of each dwelling unit, including basements, with at least one
functioning UL-approved smoke detector, and
2. The owner shall provide each of the common halls of each multiple dwelling with at least one
functioning UL-approved smoke detector.
M. Fire Extinguishers, Approved Type: All dwelling units shall have one charged and operable 2.5
pound type ABC fire extinguisher; or, there shall be one charged and operable five (5) pound ABC
fire extinguisher supplied and kept on every floor of a dwelling within seventy five feet (75') of
every unit entrance; or there shall be charged and operable fire extinguishers which meet the
requirements of applicable fire safety regulations promulgated by authorized officials of the State in
the Iowa Administrative Code.
N. Minimum Requirements, Fire Safety: The following are the requirements of this Chapter for fire
safety in rental dwelling units:
1. Every dwelling unit shall have at least one exit directly to the outside, or two (2) direct routes of
exit to the outside reached by travel in different directions. Routes of exit shall be corridors in
common areas kept continually open and accessible, leading directly to exits, one of which may
be a window, located remote to one another, that open directly to the outside.
a. Dead-end corridors shall not exceed the first twenty feet (20') of route to any exit traveled from
any dwelling unit door.
b. A window may be deemed a second means of exit if:
(1) It is easily opened and opens directly to the outside of the dwelling; and
(2) The window space serving as such exit shall have an unobstructed height of at least
twenty four inches (24"), width of at least twenty inches (20"), finished sill height of forty four
inches (44") or less; and have openable area of at least 5.7 square feet; and
(3) If the second window exit is above the second floor, it shall also have an approved exit
ladder which allows access to within eight feet (8') of grade.
(4) Egress windows below grade shall have a window well as wide as the window and with at
least thirty six inches (36") from the glass to the face of the opposite side of the well. If it is
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 263/349
deeper than forty four inches (44"), it shall have a permanent affixed ladder or steps.
2. Area used for sleeping purposes in basements or above the second floor shall have constant
and unobstructed access to two (2) exits from that floor, one of which may be a window meeting
the requirements of subsection N1b of this Section.
3. Interior walls and ceiling finishes or decoration shall not consist of hazardous material, including,
but not limited to, styrofoam, burlap, nylon, or parachutes.
4. Buildings shall display a clearly visible, marked street address and dwelling units shall be
individually identified by a clearly visible number or letter.
5. Combustible liquid fuels or equipment powered by combustible liquid fuels shall not be stored in
dwellings.
6. Exits, routes of exits and corridors shall be kept clear of trash, debris, and personal property. A
three foot (3') area clear of all trash, debris, and personal property shall be maintained around
meters, electrical panels, hot water heaters and electrical appliances.
7. Areas which contain furnaces and water heaters shall be clearly labeled with permanent signs
stating that no items shall be stored closer than three feet (3') from appliances.
8. All basements, storage areas, and other nonhabitable areas shall be posted with permanently
affixed signs stating "No sleeping unless all applicable codes, including egress, ceiling height,
and distance to furnace room, are met".
O. Maximum Occupancy:
1. In all cases, each dwelling unit shall provide habitable floor space totaling at least eighty (80)
square feet for the first occupant and sixty (60) square feet for each additional occupant.
2. Notwithstanding the excess of floor space over that required by subsection O1 of this Section,
the maximum occupancy of a rooming unit shall be one family.
3. Notwithstanding the excess of floor space over that required by subsection O1 of this Section,
the maximum occupancy of a dwelling unit other than a rooming unit shall be one family, except:
a. One family plus one additional roomer in Zoning District R-2.
b. One family plus two (2) additional roomers in Zoning Districts A1, R-3 and commercial or
industrial districts.
P. Plumbing Facilities:
1. Each apartment shall have:
a. Two (2) permanent and functioning sinks with plumbing for hot and cold water, one sink
located to afford privacy and another sink located in the kitchen area.
b. A room which affords privacy and which is equipped with a flush water closet.
c. A bathtub or shower with plumbing for hot and cold water, and located to afford privacy.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 264/349
d. Functioning water heating facilities capable of heating two (2) gallons of water per hour
through one hundred degrees Fahrenheit (100°F) for each occupant, and supplying water at
not less than one hundred twenty degrees Fahrenheit (120°F) at every kitchen sink, lavatory,
bathtub, and shower.
e. Safe heating facilities capable of heating all habitable rooms, bathrooms, and water closet
compartments to at least sixty eight degrees Fahrenheit (68°F) (20°C) at a distance of three
feet (3') above the floor and five feet (5') away from any exterior wall at all times.
2. In lodging or boarding houses, the maximum number of persons per the same bathroom facility
shall be eight (8). Such facilities shall be located to afford privacy and to be accessible from a
common hall or passageway to all persons sharing the facilities.
Q. Owner's And Occupant's Responsibilities:
1. Owners or operators shall be responsible for:
a. Displaying the letter of compliance to each new tenant, unless there is an application for the
letter of compliance on file, and maintaining the letter of compliance where accessible for
inspection by the occupants or the housing inspector and shall provide a copy to the tenant on
request.
b. Informing the occupants of who to notify in case of an emergency. This information shall be
available in each dwelling unit.
c. Informing tenants of requirements relating to parking spaces.
d. Maintaining public areas of the premises in a clean and sanitary condition; keeping floors,
floor coverings, walls, and ceilings clean and free of rubbish and garbage; and ensuring that
stagnant water is not allowed to accumulate or stand anywhere on the premises.
e. Exterminating rodents, insects, and other pests when more than one unit or common area is
affected.
f. Providing required fire extinguishers and smoke detectors in good working condition at the
beginning of each tenancy.
g. Supplying properly sized fuses or equivalent, at the beginning of each tenant's occupancy.
h. Supplying each outside door and window intended for ventilation of a habitable room with a
screen adequate to prevent entry of insects and installing such screens each spring and
removing them each fall.
i. Supplying and installing storm doors and storm windows, for all exterior doors and windows,
except with respect to thermal-pane windows and insulated exterior doors, at the beginning of
the cold weather season and removing them in the spring.
j. Supplying heat to dwelling units from September 15 to June 1 of each year, when the owner is
responsible for paying for heat in the rental agreement.
k. Removing snow and ice from walks and drives.
l. Mowing lawns, trimming shrubs and trees, and controlling weeds to maintain the premises in a
neat condition, comparable to other premises in the neighborhood.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 265/349
m. Providing for garbage and rubbish removal and supplying such facilities or containers as are
necessary to the sanitary disposal of all garbage and rubbish.
n. Providing each dwelling or apartment with a refrigerator and stove, unless the occupant has
agreed in writing to provide a refrigerator or stove or both.
o. Paying the costs of the minimum sewer user fee and other such minimum user fees, as
established by the City Council, while the dwelling unit is vacant or not otherwise rented.
2. The owner/operator may enter into a written agreement with some other person(s) who will
maintain public areas, remove and install supplied screens and storm windows, remove snow
and ice, mow lawns, trim shrubs, control weeds, or remove garbage and rubbish. Such written
agreements do not diminish the responsibility of the owner/operator to see that these
requirements are fulfilled.
3. Unless the owner has specifically agreed in writing to render such service or to otherwise accept
such responsibility, the occupant of a rental unit shall be responsible for:
a. Notifying the operator, in writing, of maintenance needed on the dwelling or supplied
equipment and of unsafe or unsanitary conditions.
b. Keeping all equipment and fixtures in the occupant's dwelling clean and in sanitary condition
and exercising reasonable care in the use and operation thereof.
c. Occupants shall not store or house hazardous combustible materials in any rental dwelling,
including gasoline mowers, vehicles, or other containers.
d. Exterminating rodents, insects, and other pests when only the occupant's dwelling unit is
affected.
e. Safe disposal of hazardous chemicals and materials, such as hot coals from furnace or grill,
paints and other combustibles, and pesticides or other hazardous chemicals.
f. Maintaining fire extinguishers and smoke detectors.
g. Using light bulbs that do not exceed the size recommended by the fixture manufacturer.
h. Supplying properly sized fuses, or their equivalent as needed during occupancy for those
circuits serving only the occupant's dwelling unit.
i. Disposing of rubbish, garbage, and other organic waste in a clean and sanitary manner, by
placing it in disposal facilities or storage containers, and by reclosing or replacing container
lids.
j. Maintaining that part of the dwelling and the premises which occupant occupies in a clean,
safe, and sanitary condition.
k. Supplying every window of each dwelling unit with shades, draw drapes, or other devices or
material which, when properly used, afford privacy to the occupant of each dwelling unit.
l. Occupants shall not permit any upholstered furniture or other furniture intended for indoor use
to remain outside of the dwelling for use as lawn furniture.
4. Existing items grandfathered by the retroactive conversion permit will be allowed to continue and
will be exempt from the new code changes unless those specific areas are repaired or
remodeled for any reason. If they are repaired or remodeled, they shall be brought into
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 266/349
compliance with current codes. Those structures with retroactive conversion permits found to
have situations which are extreme hazards shall have their status reevaluated. (1998 Code)
9-6-15: RETROACTIVE CONVERSION PERMITS:
A. A letter of compliance under this Chapter shall be denied or revoked with respect to any dwelling
unit found to have been constructed, established, remodeled or converted without a City permit
required at the time of such occurrence. However, a letter of compliance shall be issued for such
dwelling unit if its operator applies for and is granted a "retroactive conversion permit" as
hereinafter provided.
B. A "retroactive conversion permit" shall be issued for those dwellings or dwelling units which meet
the housing quality standards of Section 9-6-1 of this Chapter, the minimum property standards of
Section 9-6-14 of this Chapter, and all codes in effect at the time of the establishment except for
requirements pertaining to:
1. Ceiling height in habitable rooms if the minimum ceiling height is seven feet (7'). Obstructions in
ceiling space by items such as water and gas pipes, duct work, etc., shall be permitted when
such obstruction does not occupy more than twenty percent (20%) of the square footage of the
ceiling area of the room and that obstruction shall not be located at a height of less than six feet
eight inches (6'8") from the floor when it is located over any door opening. This standard shall be
applicable to all properties for which a retroactive conversion permit has been filed.
2. Minimum room size, if at least seventy five percent (75%) of required;
3. Lot area;
4. Building setbacks;
5. Lot frontage;
6. Building height.
C. All applications for retroactive conversion permits shall be filed on or before January 1, 2000. (1998
Code)
Chapter 7
ABATEMENT OF DANGEROUS BUILDINGS
9-7-1: SHORT TITLE:
The ordinance codified in this chapter shall be known as the WEST LIBERTY CODE FOR THE
ABATEMENT OF DANGEROUS BUILDINGS and may be so cited and will be referred to as such
herein in this chapter. (Ord. 2-00, 8-1-2000)
9-7-2: PURPOSE:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 267/349
The purpose of this chapter is to adopt regulations to provide for the protection of the health, welfare
and safety of the citizens of West Liberty relating to dangerous buildings and to provide for the
enforcement thereof. (Ord. 2-00, 8-1-2000)
9-7-3: UNIFORM CODE; ADOPTED; COPIES ON FILE:
A. The 1997 edition of the uniform code for the abatement of dangerous buildings, published by the
international conference of building officials, is adopted in full as though fully set forth herein,
except for such portions as may be deleted, modified or amended by this chapter. The provisions
of the uniform code for the abatement of dangerous buildings shall be controlling within the
corporate city limits of the city of West Liberty, Iowa. Interpretations of the uniform code for the
abatement of dangerous buildings shall be guided by the UCADB application/interpretation
manual.
B. An official copy of the 1997 edition of the uniform code for the abatement of dangerous buildings
and the UCADB application/interpretation manual shall be on file in the office of the city clerk and
available for public inspection. (Ord. 2-00, 8-1-2000)
9-7-4: UNIFORM CODE; AMENDMENTS:
The uniform code for the abatement of dangerous buildings is amended and changed in the following
respects:
None. (Ord. 2-00, 8-1-2000)
9-7-5: BUILDING OFFICIAL; RIGHT OF ENTRY:
The building official or designee or anyone designated by the city council may enter any premises
upon proof of authority for the purpose of inspecting any building, at such reasonable times as may be
deemed necessary to protect the public health, safety and welfare. (Ord. 2-00, 8-1-2000)
9-7-6: ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT:
It shall be the duty of the building official to administer and enforce the provisions of this chapter and
make any required or necessary inspections.
Nothing in this chapter or in the uniform code for the abatement of dangerous buildings, as adopted,
shall be construed to be in conflict with the code of Iowa. In the event of such conflict, state law shall
prevail. The provisions of this code shall be held to be the minimum requirements adopted for the
protection of the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of West Liberty. Any higher standards
imposed by state statute, regulation or city ordinance shall prevail and be applied. (Ord. 2-00, 8-1-
2000)
9-7-7: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 268/349
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to the general penalty
provisions of title 1, chapter 4 of this code. (Ord. 2-00, 8-1-2000)
Chapter 8
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE
9-8-1: CODE ADOPTED:
The 2012 edition of the International Property Maintenance Code is adopted to regulate and govern
the conditions and maintenance of all property, buildings, and structures in the City of West Liberty.
(Ord. 2012-04, 11-20-2012)
Title 10
ZONING REGULATIONS
Chapter 1
ZONING DEFINITIONS
10-1-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this Title, certain terms and words are hereby defined. Words used in the present
tense shall include the future; the singular number shall include the plural and the plural the singular;
and the word "shall" is mandatory and not directory.
ACCESSORY USE OR BUILDING: A use or structure subordinate to the principal use of a building or
land on the same lot or parcel of ground and serving a purpose customarily incidental to the use of the
principal building or use of land.
ALTERATIONS, STRUCTURAL: Any change in the supporting members of a building such as bearing
walls, columns, beams or girders.
APARTMENT: A room or suite of rooms used as the dwelling of a family, including bath and culinary
accommodations, located in a building in which there are three (3) or more such rooms or suites.
APARTMENT HOUSE: A building arranged, intended or designed to be occupied by three (3) or more
families living independently of each other.
BASEMENT: A story having part but not more than one-half (1/2) its height below grade. A basement
is counted as a story for the purpose of height regulation.
BOARDING HOUSE: A building other than a hotel where, for compensation and by arrangement,
meals or lodging and meals are provided for three (3) of more persons.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 269/349
BUILDING, HEIGHT OF: The vertical distance from the grade to the highest point of the coping of a
flat roof or to the deck line of a mansard roof, or the mean height level between eaves and ridge for
gable, hip and gambrel roofs.
BUILDING (STRUCTURE): Anything constructed, erected or built, the use of which requires more or
less permanent location on the ground and designed for the support, enclosure, shelter or protection
of persons, animals, chattels or property of any kind, including but without limiting the generality of the
foregoing, installations such as signs, billboards, radio towers, and other facilities not designed for
storage of property or occupancy by persons.
CELLAR: A story having more than one-half (1/2) of its height below grade. A cellar is not included in
computing the number of stories for the purpose of height measurement.
COMMISSION: The Planning and Zoning Commission of the City of West Liberty.
DWELLING: Any building or portion thereof which is designed for the use exclusively for residential
purposes.
DWELLING, MULTIPLE: A building designed for or occupied exclusively by more than two (2)
families.
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY: A building designed for or occupied by one family.
DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY: A building designed for or occupied exclusively by two (2) families.
FAMILY: One or more persons occupying a premises and living as a single housekeeping unit,
whether or not related to each other by birth or marriage, as distinguished from a group occupying a
boarding house, lodging house or hotel.
FARM: An area which is used for the growing of the usual farm products such as vegetables, fruits
and grains, and their storage on the area, as well as for the raising thereon of the usual farm poultry
and farm animals. The term "farming" includes the operating of such area for one or more of the
above uses with the necessary accessory uses for treating or storing the produce; provided, however,
that the operation of any such accessory uses shall be secondary to that of the normal farming
activities and such accessory uses do not include the feeding of garbage or offal to swine or other
animals, or commercial feeding of animals or poultry in confined lots or buildings.
FRONTAGE: All the property on one side of a street between two (2) intersecting streets (crossing or
terminating), measured along the line of the street, or if the street is dead ended, then all of the
property abutting on one side between an intersecting street and the dead end of the street.
GARAGE, PRIVATE: An accessory building designed or used for the storage of not more than four (4)
motor-driven vehicles owned and used by the occupants of the building to which it is accessory. Not
more than one of the vehicles may be a commercial vehicle of not more than two (2) tons' capacity.
GARAGE, PUBLIC: A building or portion thereof, other than a private or storage garage, designed or
used for equipping, servicing, repairing, hiring, selling or storing motor-driven vehicles.
GRADE: The average level of the finished surface of the ground adjacent to the exterior walls of the
building except when any wall approximately parallels and is not more than five feet (5') from a street
line, then the elevation of the street at the center of the wall adjoining the street shall be grade.
HOME OCCUPATION: An occupation or a profession which:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 270/349
A. Is customarily carried on in a dwelling unit; and
B. Is carried on by a member of the family residing in the dwelling unit; and
C. Is clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the dwelling unit for residential purposes; and
D. Does not employ more than one person outside the immediate family; and
E. Has no exterior display, no exterior storage of materials and no other exterior indication of the
home occupation or variation from the residential character of the principal building; and
F. Does not occupy more than thirty percent (30%) of the area of one floor of the dwelling unit; and
G. Has not more than one exterior sign mounted flush with the face of the building, which sign shall
not exceed three (3) square feet in area; and
H. Produces no offensive noise, vibration, smoke, dust, odors, heat or glare rendering such
building or premises objectionable or detrimental to the residential character of the
neighborhood.
INSTITUTION: A building occupied by a nonprofit corporation or a nonprofit establishment for public
use.
JUNKYARD: Any area where waste, discarded, or salvaged materials are bought, sold, exchanged,
baled or packed, disassembled, stored, abandoned, or handled, including the dismantling or
"wrecking" of automobiles or other vehicles or machinery, house wrecking yards, used lumber yards
and places or yards for storage of salvage house wrecking and structural steel materials and
equipment, but not including areas where such uses are conducted entirely within a completely
enclosed building.
KENNEL: An establishment where dogs are boarded for compensation or where dogs are bred or
raised for commercial purposes or sale.
LOADING SPACE: A space within the main building or on the same lot providing for the standing,
loading, or unloading of trucks, having minimum dimensions of twelve feet by thirty five feet (12' x 35')
and vertical clearance of at least fourteen feet (14').
LOT: A parcel of land occupied or intended for occupancy by one main building together with its
accessory buildings officially approved and having its principal frontage upon a dedicated street. The
boundaries of the lots shall be determined by its lot lines.
LOT, CORNER: A lot abutting upon two (2) or more streets at their intersections.
LOT, DEPTH OF: The mean horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines.
LOT, DOUBLE FRONTAGE: A lot having a frontage on two (2) nonintersecting streets, as
distinguished from a corner lot.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 271/349
LOT, INTERIOR: A lot other than a corner lot.
LOT OF RECORD: A lot which is a part of a subdivision, the plat of which has been recorded in the
office of the County Recorder of Muscatine County, Iowa.
LOT, REVERSED CORNER: A corner lot, the side street line of which is substantially a continuation of
the front line of the first lot to its rear.
LOT WIDTH: The width of a lot measured at the building line and at right angles to its depth.
MOBILE HOME: A vehicle used, or so originally constructed as to permit being used, as conveyance
upon the public streets or highways and duly licensed as such, and constructed in such a manner as
will permit occupancy thereof for human habitation, dwellings, or sleeping places for one or more
persons; provided further, that this definition shall refer to and include all portable contrivances used or
intended to be used generally for living and sleeping quarters and which is capable of being moved by
its own power, towed or transported by another vehicle. This definition shall also include and apply to
such vehicles or structures that are located on a permanent or temporary foundation but shall not
include "mobile homes converted to real estate" as defined herein.
MOBILE HOME PARK: Any site, lot, field or tract of land upon which two (2) or more occupied mobile
homes are harbored either free of charge or for revenue purposes and shall include any building,
structure, vehicle or enclosure intended for use as part of the equipment of such mobile home park.
MOBILE HOME SUBDIVISION: A subdivision created for the purpose of, and restricted to the sale or
lease of individual lots for occupancy by independent mobile homes, or mobile homes converted to
real estate and having public streets, utilities, and other public facilities installation approved by the
City Council in accordance with Title 11, Subdivisions, of this Code.
MOBILE HOMES CONVERTED TO REAL ESTATE: An unencumbered mobile home which has been
attached to a permanent foundation on real estate owned by the mobile home owner, which has had
the vehicular frame modified or destroyed, rendering it impossible to be reconverted to a mobile home
and which has been inspected by the Assessor, the mobile home title, registration and license plates
collected from the owner and the property entered on the tax rolls of Muscatine County.
NURSING HOME: A home for the aged, chronically ill or incurable persons in which three (3) or more
persons not of the immediate family are received, kept and provided with food, or shelter and care, for
compensation; but not including hospitals, clinics or similar institutions devoted primarily to the
diagnosis, treatment or care of the sick or injured.
PARKING SPACE: A surfaced area, enclosed in the main building or in an accessory building, or
unenclosed, having an area of not less than one hundred eighty (180) square feet, exclusive of
driveways, permanently reserved for the temporary storage of one automobile and connected with a
street or alley by a surfaced driveway which affords satisfactory ingress for automobiles.
PLACE: An open, unoccupied space or a public or private thoroughfare other than a street or alley
permanently reserved as the principal means of access to abutting property.
SATELLITE ANTENNA: Any apparatus greater than thirty six inches (36") in diameter capable of
receiving television or radio signals from orbiting satellites.
SIGN: Any structure or part thereof or device attached thereto or painted, or represented thereon,
which shall display or include any letter, word, model, banner, flag, pennant, insignia, device or
representation used as, or which is in the nature of an announcement, direction or advertisement. The
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 272/349
word "sign" includes the word "billboard" or other political unit, or of any political, educational,
charitable, philanthropic, civic, professional, religious or like campaign, drive, movement or event.
STORY: That portion of a building, other than a cellar, included between the surface of any floor and
the surface of the floor next above it, or if there be no floor above it, then the space between the floor
and the ceiling next above it.
STORY, HALF: A partial story under a gable, hip or gambrel roof, the wall plates of which on at least
two (2) opposite exterior walls are not more than three feet (3') above the floor of such story, except
that any partial story used for residence purposes, other than for a janitor or caretaker or his family, or
by a family occupying the floor immediately below it, shall be deemed a full story.
STREET: A public or private thoroughfare which affords the principal means of access to abutting
property.
STRUCTURE (BUILDING): Anything constructed, erected or built, the use of which requires more or
less permanent location on the ground and designed for the support, enclosure, shelter or protection
of persons, animals, chattels or property of any kind, including, but without limiting the generality of the
foregoing, installations such as signs, billboards, radio towers, and other facilities not designed for
storage of property or occupancy by persons.
TRAILER CAMP OR TOURIST CAMP: An area providing spaces for two (2) or more travel trailers,
camping trailers or tent sites for temporary occupancy, with necessary incidental services, sanitation
and recreation facilities to serve the traveling public.
TRAVEL TRAILER OR CAMPING TRAILER: A vehicle without motive power used or so manufactured
or constructed as to permit its being used as a conveyance upon the public streets and highways and
so designed to permit the vehicle to be used as a place of human habitation by one or more persons.
Such vehicle shall be customarily or ordinarily used for vacation or recreation purposes; if used as a
place of human habitation for more than ninety (90) days in any twelve (12) month period, it shall be
classed as a mobile home, regardless of the size. This definition shall also include house cars and
camp cars having motive power and designed for temporary occupancy as defined herein.
YARD: An open space between a building and the adjoining lot lines unoccupied and unobstructed by
any portion of a structure from thirty inches (30") above the ground upward, except as otherwise
provided herein. In measuring a yard for the purpose of determining the width of a side yard, the depth
of a front yard, or the depth of the rear yard, the minimum horizontal distance between the lot lines
and the main building shall be used.
YARD, FRONT: A yard extending across the front of a lot and being the minimum horizontal distance
between the street or place line and the main building or any projections thereof other than the
projections of the usual uncovered steps, uncovered balconies, or uncovered porch. On corner lots
the front yard shall be considered as parallel to the street upon which the lot has its least dimension,
except where the owner shall elect to front his building on the street parallel to the lot line having the
greater dimension.
YARD, REAR: A yard extending across the rear of a lot and being the required minimum horizontal
distance between the rear lot line and the rear of the main building or any projections thereof other
than the projections of uncovered steps, unenclosed balconies or unenclosed porches. On all lots the
rear yard shall be in the rear of the front yard.
YARD, SIDE: A yard between the main building and the side line of the lot and extending from the
required front yard to the required rear yard, and being the minimum horizontal distance between a
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 273/349
side lot line and the side of the main building or any projection thereto. (Ord. 94-69, 11-18-1969; amd.
Ord. 6-85, 9-17-1985; Ord. 1-96, 1-16-1996; 1998 Code)
Chapter 2
ZONING ADMINISTRATION; ENFORCEMENT
10-2-1: ADMINISTRATION:
A. City Manager Designated As Zoning Administrator: The City Manager shall act as Zoning
Administrator and enforce this Title. He may be provided with the assistance of such persons as
the City Manager may direct.
B. Notification Of Violation: If the City Manager shall find that any of the provisions of this Title are
being violated, he shall notify in writing the person responsible for such violations, indicating the
nature of the violation and ordering the action necessary to correct it. He shall order
discontinuance of any illegal buildings or structures or of additions, alterations or structural
changes thereto; discontinuance of any illegal work being done or shall take any other action
authorized by this Title to ensure compliance with or to prevent violation of its provisions. (1975
Code § 10-1-1; amd. 1998 Code)
10-2-2: APPEAL FROM DECISION OF CITY MANAGER:
Appeals from any decision of the City Manager may be taken to the Zoning Board of Adjustment as
provided in Section 10-3-4 of this Title and Iowa Code section 414. (Ord. 5-81, 9-1-1981; amd. 1998
Code)
10-2-3: INTERPRETATION OF PROVISIONS:
In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this Title shall be held to be minimum
requirements, adopted for the promotion and protection of the public health, safety, morals and
general welfare. Wherever the requirements of this Title are at variance with the requirements of any
other lawfully adopted rules, regulations, ordinances, deed restrictions or covenants, the most
restrictive, or that impose the higher standards shall govern. (1975 Code § 10-1-3)
10-2-4: SEPARATE OFFENSES MAY BE CHARGED:
The owner or tenant of any building, structure, land or part thereof, and any architect, builder,
contractor, agent or other person who commits, participates in, assists in or maintains a violation may
each be charged with a separate offense and, upon conviction, suffer the penalties as prescribed in
this Code. (1975 Code § 10-1-4)
10-2-5: INJUNCTION, MANDAMUS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 274/349
If any building or structure is erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, repaired or land is used in
violation of this Title, the City may, in addition to other remedies, institute injunction, mandamus or
other appropriate lawful action necessary to prevent, correct or abate such violation. (1975 Code § 10-
1-5)
Chapter 3
ZONING BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT
10-3-1: BOARD CREATED; MEMBERS; TERMS:
A. Creation; Terms: A Board of Adjustment is hereby established. The Board shall consist of five (5)
members to be appointed by the City Council for a term of five (5) years, except that when the
Board shall first be created, one member shall be appointed for a term of five (5) years, one for a
term of four (4) years, one for a term of three (3) years, one for a term of two (2) years and one for
a term of one year.
B. Public Representation: A majority of the members of the Board of Adjustment shall be persons
representing the public at large and shall not be involved in the business of purchasing or selling
real estate.
C. Removal From Office; Hearing: Members of the Board of Adjustment may be removed from office
by the City Council for cause upon written charges and after public hearing.
D. Filling Vacancies: Vacancies shall be filled by the City Council for the unexpired term of the
member. (Ord. 5-81, 9-1-1981)
10-3-2: COMPLIANCE WITH ADMINISTRATIVE RULES:
The Board shall follow rules in accordance with the provisions of Section 10-3-5 of this Chapter and
the Iowa Code. The Board shall elect its own chairman at the first meeting of the calendar year, who
shall serve for one year. Meetings will be established by the rules and shall be open to the public. The
chairman, or in his absence, the acting chairman, may administer oaths and compel the attendance of
witnesses. Three (3) members present shall constitute a quorum. The Board shall keep minutes of the
proceedings showing the vote of each member upon each question, and all such materials and related
documents shall be immediately filed in the City Clerk's office and shall be a public record. (Ord. 5-81,
9-1-1981)
10-3-3: POWERS; DUTIES; CONSIDERATIONS:
The Board shall have the following powers and it shall be its duty:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 275/349
A. Hear And Decide Appeals: To hear and decide appeals of interpretation where it is alleged there is
an error in any order, requirement, decision, or determination made by the Zoning Administrator in
the enforcement of this Title or of any supplement or amendment. (Ord. 5-81, 9-1-1981)
1. Appeals of interpretation may be taken by any person, or by any officer, department, board or
commission of the City aggrieved by such interpretation. Once notified in writing of the decision
and its justification, the aggrieved party has thirty (30) days to appeal to the Board by filling out
the appeal form in the Department of Zoning and Building. Said appeal shall specify the grounds
for appeal. The Zoning Administrator shall forward the appeal and all related papers which
constitute the record upon which the appeal was taken to the Board of Adjustment. (Ord. 5-81,
9-1-1981; amd. 1998 Code)
2. Appeals to interpretation may relate to zoning district boundary line location, the use of the
building or premises, the applicability of zoning standards to the specific site, and other similar
matters.
B. Application For Special Exception; Hearing: To hear and decide on applications for special
exceptions as provided for the zoning districts in this Title.
1. Applications for special exceptions shall be to the Board through the Department of Zoning and
Building on the application form provided. Additionally, the applicant will provide a site plan and a
written explanation of the proposed special use which describes when it will be started and
completed, how it will operate, how it will satisfy a need for such a use in that particular location.
The Zoning Administrator shall forward the application and all related papers to the Board for
their review decision.
2. Before the issuance of a special exception permit, the Board will hold a public hearing and shall
determine that the granting of a special exception will not adversely affect the public interest.
3. The Board may place reasonable conditions on the special exception as necessary to protect
the character of the neighborhood, to maintain the spirit and intent of this Title.
C. Authorize Variances: To authorize, upon appeal, such variances from the terms of this Title where
because of unusual circumstances, a literal enforcement of the provisions of this Title will result in
unnecessary hardship, and so that the spirit of this Title be observed and substantial justice done.
1. Appeals for a variance may be made by the landowner, potential buyer or developer or
operator/manager of land, who has applied for a building permit and been denied because the
proposed development does not comply with the specific regulations of this Title. The same
appeals process is required for previously constructed structures which were built in violation of
this Title. The applicant has fifteen (15) days from building permit denial to appeal to the Board
by completing the appeal form in the Department of Zoning and Building. Said appeal should
state the specific variance requested and the reasons for which the appeal should be granted.
The Zoning Administrator shall forward the appeal and all related papers, which constitute the
records upon which this appeal was taken, to the Board of Adjustment.
2. Before deciding on the variance appeal, the Board will hold a public hearing and shall determine
if one of the three (3) following instances has occurred: (Ord. 5-81, 9-1-1981)
a. When a building being occupied by a nonconforming use has been destroyed or damaged to
more than sixty five percent (65%) of its current market value by fire, act of God, explosion, or
riot, the Board may permit the reconstruction of such a building, when it is conclusively shown
that the public needs require a continuation of the nonconforming uses, and that such
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 276/349
continuation would not primarily permit a continuation of a monopoly. (Ord. 5-81, 9-1-1981;
amd. 1998 Code)
b. When because of an exceptional situation, topographical condition, surroundings, size, shape
or other condition of a specific piece of property of record, the strict application of any
provision of this Title would result in peculiar and exceptional practical difficulties or particular
hardship upon the owner of such property and amount to a practical confiscation, the Board
may vary the application of the regulations imposed by this Title subject to the restrictions in
the following paragraphs.
c. When the applicant for a variance can show that the hardship is a compelling force and not a
perceived one, the hardship was created by the provisions of this Title and not the applicant,
and the strict application of the provisions of this Title precludes its use for any purpose to
which the land is reasonably adapted.
3. No variation in the application of the provisions of this Title shall be made in the instances
specified above unless and until the Board shall be satisfied that granting the variance will not:
a. Merely serve as a convenience to the applicant and is not necessary to alleviate
demonstrable hardship or difficulty so great as to warrant the variance.
b. Impair the general purpose and intent of the Development Plan as established by the
regulations and provisions contained in this Title.
c. Impair an adequate supply of light and air to adjacent property.
d. Increase the hazard from fire and other danger to said property. (Ord. 5-81, 9-1-1981)
e. Diminish the value of land and buildings elsewhere in the City.
f. Increase the congestion and traffic hazards on public roads.
g. Otherwise impair the public health, safety, and general welfare of the inhabitants of the City.
(Ord. 5-81, 9-1-1981; amd. 1998 Code)
h. Result in increased flood heights, cause extraordinary public expense, or create nuisances, as
determined by the Iowa Natural Resources Council.
i. Exceed the minimum variance necessary to afford relief considering the flood hazard, as
determined by the Iowa Natural Resources Council. (Ord. 5-81, 9-1-1981)
10-3-4: GENERAL PROCEDURES:
Upon receipt of an appeals application form, the Zoning Administrator will schedule the case for the
next regular Board meeting. Cases filed less than ten (10) days from the regular meeting will
automatically be set for hearing on the subsequent regular meeting.
A. Notice Of Public Hearing: The Zoning Administrator will publicize the public hearing stating the
location of the property and a brief description of the nature of the application, and the time and
place of the public hearing in the following manner:
1. Notify all owners of property located within two hundred feet (200') in all directions from the
property in question by common mail at least five (5) days prior to the Board meeting.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 277/349
2. Prominently display an informational sign on the applicant's site.
3. Notify the County Engineer and County Health Officer and allow them time to reply, if applicable.
B. Testimony: At the public hearing, any person may appear and testify either in person or by duly
authorized person or attorney, or in writing received by noon of the meeting day. For all appeals
and applications, the burden of proof rests with the applicant.
C. Voting: In exercising the powers of Section 10-3-3 above, the concurring vote of three (3) members
of the Board of Adjustment shall be necessary to reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or modify or
amend any appeal, or to impose such conditions for a special exception as are deemed necessary
to protect the public good. Every decision of a Board case will result in a written decision which
specifies the reasons for granting or denying an appeal or the list of conditions upon which the
special exception is approved (if necessary), which decision shall be filed with the City Clerk.
D. Notification Of Board's Decision: The Administrative Officer shall notify the applicant by written
letter of the official decision of the Board within fifteen (15) days of the decision. (Ord. 5-81, 9-1-
1981)
E. Right To Appeal Decision: Any person or persons jointly or separately aggrieved by any decision of
the Board under the provisions of this Title, or any taxpayer, or any officer, department, board, or
commission of the City may present to District Court a petition, duly verified, setting forth that such
decision is illegal, in whole or in part, specifying the grounds of illegality. Such petition shall be
presented to the Court within thirty (30) days after the filing of the decision with the City Clerk.
(Ord. 5-81, 9-1-1981; amd. 1998 Code)
F. Filing Fee: The filing fee for all appeals and applications to the Board of Adjustment is twenty five
dollars ($25.00). (Ord. 5-81, 9-1-1981)
10-3-5: OFFICERS; MEETINGS; ADMINISTRATIVE RULES:
A. Officers: The Board of Adjustment shall select from its membership a chairman and vice chairman
who shall perform the usual duties pertaining to such offices.
1. Selection: At the first regular meeting in January of each year, the Board will pick its officers
from its membership. All officers are eligible for reelection.
2. Tenure: The chairman and vice chairman shall take office immediately following their selection
and shall hold office for a term of one year or until their successors are selected and assume
office.
3. Duties: The chairman shall preside at all meetings and hearings of the Board, shall decide all
points of order or procedure, and shall appoint any committees that may be found necessary.
The vice chairman shall assume the duties of the chairman in the absence of the chairman.
4. Secretary: The secretary will be appointed by the Board and may be a member of the Board, an
employee of the Board, or a regular employee of the City. The secretary shall conduct all official
correspondence subject to these rules at the direction of the Board, shall send out all notices
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 278/349
required by these rules of procedure, keep the minutes of the Board's proceedings, and keep a
file on each case which comes before the Board. For all appeals and applications, the secretary
shall issue the proper forms; see that information, maps, and plats are compiled and ready for
Board's review; notify any property owner interested parties by mail of the time and place of the
hearing; and any other duties as determined by the Board.
B. Meetings: The annual meeting of the Board will take place at the first regular meeting in January of
each year. Regular meetings of the Board of Adjustment shall be held at seven o'clock (7:00) P.M.
The secretary shall give each member of the Board seventy two (72) hours' notice of such
meeting.
1. Special Meetings: Special meetings may be called by the chairman, or at the request of the
three (3) members of the Board of Adjustment. Notice of the special meeting shall be given by
the secretary to the members of the Board at least forty eight (48) hours prior to such meeting
and shall state the purpose and time of meeting.
2. Quorum: A quorum of the Board shall consist of three (3) members.
3. Public: All regular, special, and subcommittee meetings, public hearings, records and accounts
shall be open to the public.
4. Order Of Business: The secretary shall prepare an agenda for each meeting and send it to each
Boardmember as a part of the notification process (72 hours prior). The order of business shall
be as follows:
a. Roll call.
b. Reading the minutes of the previous meeting.
c. Communications.
d. Report of committees.
e. Unfinished business.
f. New business.
g. Adjournment.
5. Voting:
a. The concurring vote of three (3) members of the Board is required to reach a decision (no
matter how many Board members are present). Voting will be by roll call and will be recorded
by yeas and nays.
b. All members of the Board, including the chairman, are required to cast a vote for each motion.
Minutes will show members absent for each vote. A member may abstain if he/she feels there
is a conflict of interest, particularly if the conflict is of a financial nature. If a member elects to
abstain from voting, he/she is required to state the reason for his/her abstention at the time of
voting.
6. Unfinished Business: Where all appeals or applications cannot be disposed of on the day set
(due to length of meeting or extenuating circumstances), the Board may adjourn from day-to-day
or until the next regular meeting, as the Board may decide.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 279/349
7. Board Action: The Board may not vote on an appeal or application until all required information
has been set forth on the forms and until the hearing has been conducted.
8. Parliamentary Procedure: "Robert's Rule of Order Revised" will govern the Board meetings.
C. Cases Decided By Board: The following cases shall be made before the Board of Adjustment on
forms provided by the Board secretary:
1. Appeals where it is alleged there is error in any order, requirement, decision or determination
made by the Zoning Administrator in the enforcement of this Zoning Title.
2. Special exceptions to the terms of this Zoning Title upon which the Board is required to act
under this Title.
3. Variances to a zoning district requirement where there are unusual conditions or circumstances
which cause a hardship when the provisions of zoning are strictly applied.
D. Procedure For Hearing Cases: The following rules will apply to all appeals or applications before
the Board:
1. Appeals to the Board may be taken by any person, group, or by any officer or department of the
City affected by any decision of the Zoning Administrator and by applicants for a special
exception or variance.
2. The Zoning Administrator shall tell the applicant or interested party why the zoning or building
permit was denied or why the application is necessary. He/she shall inform the applicant or
interested party of the right to apply or appeal to the Board of Adjustment. The Zoning
Administrator will transmit the completed appeal form along with all papers constituting the
record upon which the Board shall act.
3. The applicant shall complete the required forms, providing all information requested by the form
and any additional information as requested by the Zoning Administrator.
4. The secretary of the Board shall reject any such application or appeal which is not filed within
thirty (30) days of the Zoning Administrator's decision. Also, the secretary shall reject any such
application or appeal unless same are made on prescribed forms properly filled out with all
required data attached.
5. An application or appeal filed to the above procedure shall be given a case number within five
(5) working days from the date filed. Applications or appeals will be assigned in the order in
which they are received. Cases assigned to the Board less than ten (10) days prior to the regular
meeting will automatically be set for hearing on the subsequent regular meeting day.
6. The secretary of the Board shall notify the parties of interest (property owners of record within
200 feet of the applicant's lot lines) by mail of the time, place, and purpose of the public hearing
and give (4 but not more than 20 days') public notice in a newspaper of general circulation.
7. Hearings shall be held by the Board of Adjustment at the City Hall and shall be open to the
public.
8. At the time of the public hearing, the applicant may appear on his/her own behalf or be
represented by agent or counsel. In the absence of any personal appearance on behalf of the
applicant, the Board will proceed to dispose of the matter on the forms and information provided
before.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 280/349
9. The order of the hearing shall be as follows:
a. The applicant's or appellant's side of the case,
b. The Zoning Administrator's side of the case,
c. The interested property owners' opinions,
d. The applicant's rebuttal.
10. After the hearing, the Board shall deliberate the case. The Board may ask the Board's attorney
for comments.
11. The applicant or appellant may withdraw his/her application or appeal at any time prior to the
decision by the Board of Adjustment.
12. Final decision of any application or appeal shall be made in the form of a resolution by anyone
on the Board of Adjustment. The resolution may modify, or reverse the refusal of a permit by the
decision of the Zoning Administrator. In the case of an application for variance or special
exception, the resolution shall set forth that the application is granted or denied and said
resolution shall specifically set forth what variances or special uses are permitted and what
conditions, if any, shall be complied with.
13. Within fifteen (15) days after the hearing, the Board shall notify the parties of interest and the
Zoning Administrator of its decision.
14. A rehearing of any decision of the Board of Adjustment may be made if the following occur: the
motion to reconsider is made by a member of the Board and carried by not less than four (4)
affirmative votes; new evidence is submitted which could not reasonably have been presented at
the original meeting, at least ninety (90) days have elapsed since the resolution was defeated;
and the case is put on the agenda for a rehearing.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 281/349
E. Records: The secretary shall keep books showing the status of all cases and minutes as part of the
records of the Board of Adjustment. In addition, the secretary shall keep a file of all cases including
forms and additional information as a part of the legal records.
1. All records of the Board shall be a public record.
2. The secretary shall publish the minutes of all meetings in a newspaper of general circulation
within fifteen (15) days of the meeting.
F. Amendments: A majority vote of all the members of the Board shall be necessary to amend these
procedural rules. Such proposed amendments shall be presented in writing at any regular meeting
of the Board of Adjustment.
G. Informal Advice: The Board will not consider a request (informal or not) for advice on theoretical or
actual situations which potentially may later come before the Board as an appeal or application.
(Ord. 5-81, 9-1-1981)
Chapter 4
DISTRICTS; MAP
10-4-1: ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS:
A. Districts Established: The City is hereby divided into districts which shall be designated as follows:
A-1 Agricultural
R-1 Single-Family Residential
R-2 Mixed Residential
R-3 Mixed Residential
C-1 Highway Commercial
C-2 General Retail
M-1 Light Industrial
M-2 Heavy Industrial
B. Boundaries: The locations and boundaries of these districts are shown on the Official Zoning Map.
(1975 Code § 10-2-1)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 282/349
10-4-2: ADOPTION OF OFFICIAL ZONING MAP:
The Official Zoning Map, and the explanatory material thereon, is hereby adopted by reference and
declared to be a part of this Title. (1975 Code § 10-2-2)
10-4-3: IDENTIFICATION OF OFFICIAL ZONING MAP:
A. Certification: The Official Zoning Map shall be identified by the signature of the Mayor and attested
to by the City Clerk under the following statement:
This is to certify that this is the Official Zoning Map referred to in Section 10-4-2 of the West
Liberty City Code, as adopted on June 17, 1975, and as amended from time to time by the City
Council.
(1975 Code § 10-2-3; amd. 1998 Code)
B. Map On File: The Official Zoning Map shall be on file in the office of the Clerk and shall be the final
authority as to the current zoning status of land, buildings and other structures in the City. (1975
Code § 10-2-3)
10-4-4: CHANGES IN OFFICIAL ZONING MAP:
A. Changes By Amendment: No changes in the Official Zoning Map shall be made except as may be
required by amendments to this Title under Section 10-10-1 of this Title. If required, such changes
shall be promptly made and the ordinance number, nature of change and date of change shall be
noted on the Map, approving such change in the Official Zoning Map.
B. Unauthorized Changes: Any unauthorized change of any kind whatsoever in the Official Zoning
Map by any person shall constitute a violation of this Title. (1975 Code § 10-2-4)
10-4-5: INTERPRETATION OF DISTRICT BOUNDARIES:
Where uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of the districts as shown on the Official Zoning Map, the
following rules shall apply:
A. Boundaries indicated as approximately following the center line of streets, highways or alleys shall
be construed to follow such center lines.
B. Boundaries indicated as approximately following platted lot lines shall be construed as following
such lot lines.
C. Boundaries indicated as approximately following township lines or section lines shall be construed
as following township lines or section lines. (1975 Code § 10-2-5)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 283/349
D. Boundaries indicated as following railroad lines shall be construed to be midway between the main
tracks; provided, however, that a zoning district is not divided by said boundary if such is the case,
the district boundary shall extend to the railroad right of way as recorded with the County Recorder.
(Ord. 5-81, 9-1-1981)
E. Boundaries indicated as following shore lines shall be construed to follow such shore lines, and in
the event of change in the shore line, shall be construed as moving with the actual shore line.
Boundaries indicated as approximately following the center lines of streams or other bodies of
water shall be construed to follow such center lines.
F. Boundaries indicated as parallel to or extensions of features indicated in subsections A through E
above shall be so construed. Distances not specifically indicated on the Official Zoning Map shall
be determined by the scale of the Map.
G. Where physical or cultural features existing on the ground are at variance with those shown on the
Official Zoning Map, or in other circumstances not covered by subsections A through F above, the
Board of Adjustment shall interpret the district boundaries. (1975 Code § 10-2-5)
10-4-6: SUPPLEMENTARY DISTRICT REGULATIONS:
Subject to the provisions of this Title, the following provisions, regulations or exceptions shall apply
equally to all districts except as hereinafter provided:
A. Visibility At Intersection: On a corner lot in any district except the C-2 General Retail District, no
fence, wall, hedge or other planting or structure that will obstruct vision between a height of two
feet (2') and ten feet (10') above the center line grades of the intersecting streets shall be erected,
placed or maintained within the triangular area formed by connecting the right-of-way lines at
points which are twenty five feet (25') distant from the intersection of the right-of-way lines and
measured along the right-of-way lines. (1975 Code § 10-2-6)
B. Accessory Buildings:
1. No accessory buildings, including garages, shall be erected in any required front, side or rear
yard and no separate accessory building or garage shall be erected or reconstructed within five
feet (5') of any main building (dwelling unit or commercial structures). The five foot (5')
dimension shall be measured from the eaves or overhang of each structure.
2. The Board of Adjustment may consider the granting of a variance to reconstruct a garage in its
original location when the provisions of Section 10-3-3 of this Title are followed. Distance
separations shall be found in the Building Code (Title 9, Chapter 2 of this Code) under
requirements for group occupancies. (Ord. 5-90, 11-20-1990)
C. More Than One Principal Structure On A Lot: In any district, more than one principal structure
housing a permitted principal use may be erected on a single lot; provided, that the area, yard and
other requirements of this Title shall be met for each structure as though it were on an individual
lot.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 284/349
D. Height Regulation Exception: The height limitations contained in this Title for the various districts do
not apply to grain storage bins, grain elevators, feed mills or to spires, belfries, cupolas, chimneys,
antennas, water tanks, ventilators, elevator housing or other structures placed above the roof level
and not intended for human occupancy.
E. Use Of Public Right Of Way: No portion of the public road, street or alley right of way shall be used
or occupied by an abutting use of land or structures for storage or display purposes, or to provide
any parking or loading space required by this Title, or for any other purpose that would obstruct the
use or maintenance of the public right of way.
F. Proposed Use Not Covered In Title: Any proposed use not covered in this Title as a permitted use
or special exception shall be referred to the Planning and Zoning Commission for
recommendations to the proper district in which such use should be permitted and this Title
amended, as provided in Section 10-10-1 of this Title, before a permit is issued for such proposed
use. (1975 Code § 10-2-6)
G. Access To Buildings: Every building hereafter erected or structurally altered shall be on a lot or
parcel having a frontage on a public street or road. A public street or road shall mean a dedicated
and accepted street or road.
H. Mobile Homes Or Trailers:
1. Mobile homes occupied as a permanent or temporary place of residence shall be located only in
an approved mobile home park or mobile home subdivision unless otherwise provided in this title
and occupied travel trailers and camping trailers shall be located only in an approved tourist or
trailer camp.
2. Travel trailers and camping trailers may be stored on the owner's property, provided the zoning
district yard requirements are followed. (Ord 5-81, 9-1-1981)
I. Hedges And Fences: Fences or hedges shall not exceed four feet (4') in height in any required front
yard and shall not exceed six feet (6') in height in any required side or rear yard, subject to the
further restriction of subsection A of this section. (1975 Code § 10-2-6)
J. Floodplain: The City Manager, Planning and Zoning Commission and the City Council shall use as
reference Iowa Code chapter 455A and the Flood Boundary and Floodway Map dated July 18,
2011, provided by the Federal Emergency Management Agency. The Flood Boundary and
Floodway Map delineates the floodplain encroachment limits by both topographic maps and water
surface elevations for the 100-year flood. The land use and control measures adopted for the
floodplain areas shall be as follows:
The Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) for Muscatine County and Incorporated Areas, City of West
Liberty, Panels 19139C0009C, 017C, and 028C, dated July 18, 2011, which were prepared as part
of the Flood Insurance Study for Muscatine County, is (are) hereby adopted by reference and
declared to be the Official Floodplain Zoning Map. The flood profiles and all explanatory material
contained with the Flood Insurance Study are also declared to be a part of this subsection J. (Ord.
2011-01, 7-19-2011)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 285/349
1. All new construction or substantial improvements of residential structures within the area of
special floodplain shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to or above the level
of the 100-year flood, with all attendant utility and sanitary facilities to be floodproofed up to the
level of the 100-year flood.
2. All new construction or substantial improvements of nonresidential structures within the area of
special floodplain shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to or above the level
of the 100-year flood, with all attendant utility and sanitary facilities to be floodproofed up to the
level of the 100-year flood.
3. Existing nonconforming uses in the floodway shall not be expanded but may be modified,
altered or repaired to incorporate floodproofing measures, provided such measures do not raise
the level of the 100-year flood.
4. Prohibits fill or encroachments within the designated floodway that would impair its ability to
carry and discharge the waters resulting from the 100-year flood, except where the effect on
flood heights is fully offset by stream improvements. (1975 Code § 10-2-6)
5. All building permit applications for proposed building construction or improvements in the
floodplain area shall be reviewed by the Planning and Zoning Commission, the City Manager
and the City Council to ensure that said buildings are designed (or modified) and anchored to
prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the structure; and construction materials and
utility equipment used shall be resistant to flood damage, and that construction methods and
practices will minimize flood damage. (1975 Code § 10-2-6; amd. 1998 Code)
6. All subdivision proposals and other proposed new developments shall be reviewed to assure
that all such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize flood damage. All public utilities
and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems shall be located, elevated and
constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage and adequate drainage shall be provided so
as to reduce exposure to flood hazard.
7. New or replacement water supply systems and/or sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems and discharge from the systems
into flood waters, and require on-site waste disposal systems to be located so as to avoid
impairment of them or contamination from them during flooding. (1975 Code § 10-2-6)
K. Agricultural Uses: Any vacant parcel of land regardless of size in any zoning district may be used
for agricultural purposes, the raising of feed and grain crops, fruit, vegetables; provided, however,
that no livestock, poultry or other animals other than customary household pets shall be kept on
land or in confinement within three hundred feet (300') of any dwelling unit other than that of the
owner. Property rezoned to residential or commercial use shall not be required to comply with this
section if the Board of Adjustment grants a use variance which will permit the variance from the
three hundred foot (300') requirement.
L. Fire Limits:
1. Limits Designated: The fire limits of the City are herewith established to include the general
business district bounded by 2nd Street on the south, 4th Street on the north, Spencer Street on
the east and Clay Street on the west.
2. Plan Of Proposed Work: It shall be unlawful to build, enlarge or alter any wall, structure, building
or part thereof, within the fire limits until a plan of the proposed work, together with a statement
of materials to be used, shall have been submitted to the City Council, who shall, if in
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 286/349
accordance with the provisions of this Code, issue a permit for the proposed work. (Ord. 5-81, 9-
1-1981)
3. Removal Of Buildings: The removal of any building not constructed as provided in this
subsection from without to within the fire limits or from any part of the fire limits to any other
place therein is prohibited.
4. Damage And Repair Or Rebuilding: Any building within the fire limits not constructed in
accordance with the provisions of this subsection, which may hereafter be damaged by fire,
decay or otherwise to the extent of fifty percent (50%) of its current market value, shall not be
repaired or rebuilt but shall be torn down or removed. When the damages are less than fifty
percent (50%) of its current market value, the building shall not be repaired so as to be higher in
value than it was before the damages were sustained, except upon approval of four-fifths (4/5) of
the City Council of the plans and specifications of such repairs and rebuilding. (1975 Code § 10-
2-6; amd. 1998 Code)
5. Arbitration Of Damages: In case a question arises as to the amount or extent of damage by fire
or otherwise to any building, the damage shall be determined by three (3) disinterested parties,
owners of real estate within the fire limits, one of whom shall be appointed by the owner or agent
of the building, the second by the Mayor and the persons thus chosen shall elect a third person,
all of whom shall subscribe to an oath to ascertain the damage to the best of their ability and
according to the provisions of this subsection, and their decision shall be in writing, shall be final
and conclusive, and shall be filed with the City Clerk. No building in regard to which there is a
question shall be repaired or rebuilt within the fire limits until such finding has been filed with the
Clerk.
6. Order To Remove Or Demolish: Any person who shall erect, alter or move any building contrary
to the provisions of this subsection shall be given ten (10) days' written notice by the Mayor to
remove or tear down the same, and if such removal or taking down is not completed within ten
(10) days from the time of service of such notice, the Mayor shall cause the same to be removed
or taken down. The Mayor shall report the expense to the City Clerk and the same shall be
charged to the person owning such building and collected by the Clerk, or in case the Clerk is
unable to collect such cost, the same shall be certified to the County Auditor as a special tax
against the property and collected the same as other taxes. (1975 Code § 10-2-6)
M. Satellite Antennas:
1. Satellite antennas shall be erected or maintained only in the rear yard or mounted on any
principal building in any zoning district and the center of the mounting base shall be set back
from the rear property line and side property line a minimum distance of ten feet (10').
2. No more than one satellite shall be allowed on any lot that is used as a residence. More than
one antenna shall be allowed for an industrial or commercial use that is properly zoned for that
use.
3. A satellite antenna shall not exceed fifteen feet (15') in diameter for any residential use. Satellite
antennas may exceed fifteen feet (15') in diameter for commercial or industrial uses that are
properly zoned for that use.
4. In any residential use, ground mounted satellite antennas shall not exceed fifteen feet (15') in
height above the ground; roof mounted satellite antennas shall not exceed ten feet (10') above
the roof line.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 287/349
5. All satellite dishes shall meet the following requirements:
a. Built and installed in conformance with all applicable City codes;
b. Proper permits secured;
c. Be a noncombustible and corrosive resistant material; and
d. Comply with the manufacturer's specifications unless they are in conflict with City codes, in
which case City Code controls. (Ord. 6-85, 9-17-1985)
10-4-7: APPLICATION OF DISTRICT REGULATIONS:
Subject to the provisions of this Title, the regulations and restrictions of this Title shall apply as follows:
A. Regulations Uniformly Applied: The regulations set by this Title shall apply uniformly to each class
or kind of structure or land, and particularly within each district, except as hereinafter provided.
B. All Uses And Structures To Conform: No building, structure or land shall hereafter be used or
occupied and no building or structure or part thereof shall hereafter be erected, constructed,
reconstructed, moved, or structurally altered unless in conformity with all of the regulations herein
specified for the district in which it is located.
C. Height; Density; Yards: No building or other structure shall hereafter be erected or altered to
exceed the height, to accommodate or house a greater number of families, or to have narrower or
smaller rear yards, front yards, side yards or other open spaces than herein required or in any
other manner contrary to the provisions of this Title.
D. Separate Yards, Open Space And Off-Street Parking Required: No part of a yard, or other open
space, or off-street parking or loading space required about or in connection with any building for
the purpose of complying with this Title shall be included as part of a yard, open space or off-street
parking or loading space similarly required for any other building.
E. Reducing Minimum Yards And Lot Areas Prohibited: No yard or lot existing at the time of passage
of this Title shall be reduced in dimension or area below the minimum requirements set forth
herein. Yards or lots created after the effective date hereof shall meet at least the minimum
requirements established by this Title.
F. New Areas: All territory which may hereafter become a part of the incorporated area of West Liberty
through annexation shall be classified in the A-1 Agricultural District until otherwise classified;
provided, however, that the City Planning and Zoning Commission may recommend the
appropriate district classification prior to such territory becoming a part of the City and upon the
holding of a public hearing and approval by the City Council, the territory, upon becoming a part of
the City, may be immediately so classified. (1975 Code § 10-2-7)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 288/349
Chapter 5
A-1 AGRICULTURAL DISTRICT
10-5-1: PERMITTED PRINCIPAL USES AND STRUCTURES:
Agriculture - crop farming and horticulture.
Cemetery or mausoleum.
Churches and temples.
Community meeting or recreation building.
Elementary or secondary school.
Fairgrounds.
Golf courses and country clubs, except miniature courses or driving ranges operated for a profit.
Nursery, greenhouse or flower shop for wholesale and retail sales.
Parks, playgrounds or playfields.
Railroads and public utilities.
Single-family dwellings. (Ord. 11052013-03, 12-3-2013)
10-5-2: PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES:
Farm buildings incidental to agricultural uses.
Private garages.
Private greenhouses not operated for commercial purposes.
Private swimming pools.
Satellite antennas.
Temporary buildings used in conjunction with construction work; provided, that such buildings are
removed promptly upon completion of the construction work.
Uses and structures clearly incidental and necessary to the permitted principal uses or structures of
this district, not involving the conduct of business on the premises, except home occupations, and
located on the same lot or a contiguous lot under the same ownership. (1975 Code § 10-3-2; amd.
Ord. 6-85, 9-17-1985)
10-5-3: SPECIAL EXCEPTION USES AND STRUCTURES:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 289/349
Subject to section 10-3-3 of this title and the other requirements contained in this title, the Board of
Adjustment may permit the following:
Gun club park, subject to special exception conditions the Planning and Zoning Commission may
prescribe, subject to existing gun club uses being permitted as exempt from any future prescribed
conditions.
Quarry, sand or gravel pit.
Sanitary landfill or waste disposal area, provided it is not used for disposal of dead animals, that
refuse shall be covered with dirt daily if it contains raw garbage, that a nuisance due to smoke, odor or
blowing of trash and debris shall not be created, and that the site shall be restored to a condition
compatible with the adjacent area upon conclusion of the dump operation. An access road having at
least a graveled surface and five (5) parking spaces shall be provided. No landfill or waste disposal
area shall be located closer than one-fourth (1/4) mile to any dwelling, park, school or place of public
assembly. (1975 Code § 10-3-3; amd. Ord. 5-88, 4-19-1988)
10-5-4: MINIMUM REQUIRED OFF-STREET PARKING:
Use Number Of Spaces
Agriculture - crop farming and
horticulture
None
Cemetery or mausoleum 10 spaces plus 1/acre
Churches and temples 1 space/4 seats in the main auditorium
Community meeting or
recreation building
1 space/150 square feet of floor area
Elementary or secondary school
1 space/classroom and office plus 1/each 6 seats in an
auditorium or stadium
Fairgrounds 10 spaces/acre developed for active use
Golf course and country clubs 3 spaces/green or 1 space/100 square feet of floor area
Parks, playgrounds or playfields
5 spaces/acre developed for active usage
Railroads and public utilities 1 space/employee plus 1/vehicle
Single-family dwellings 2 spaces/unit
(Ord. 11052013-03, 12-3-2013)
10-5-5: LOT AREA, WIDTH, DEPTH:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 290/349
A. Area: Twenty thousand (20,000) square feet.
B. Width: One hundred twenty five feet (125'). (1975 Code § 10-3-5)
10-5-6: MINIMUM REQUIRED YARDS:
A. Dwellings and other noninstitutional uses:
Front 40 feet
Rear 30 feet
Side 10 feet
Side street, corner lot 30 feet
B. Schools, churches and other public or institutional buildings:
Front 50 feet
Rear 40 feet
Side 40 feet
Side street, corner lot 40 feet
(1975 Code § 10-3-6)
10-5-7: MAXIMUM HEIGHT:
The maximum height of buildings and structures located in this district shall be two and one-half (21/2)
stories or thirty five feet (35'). (1975 Code § 10-3-7)
10-5-8: MINIMUM FLOOR AREA:
The minimum floor area for dwellings in this district shall be:
1 story 720 square feet
11/2 story 840 square feet
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 291/349
2 story 960 square feet
(1975 Code § 10-3-8)
10-5-9: PERMITTED SIGNS:
A. Nameplates attached flat against the wall of the main building shall not exceed one square foot in
area.
B. Church or public bulletin boards shall not exceed twelve (12) square feet in area.
C. Temporary signs advertising the lease or sale of the premises shall not exceed six (6) square feet
in area.
D. Billboards or advertising signs, provided:
1. They are not within three hundred feet (300') of an intersection, highway, structure or residence
or another billboard.
2. They are not within one hundred feet (100') of a park, school or cemetery, public or semi-public
building.
3. They are not within seventy five feet (75') of the center line of a City or County road, one
hundred feet (100') of a State or Federal highway.
E. All signs and billboards shall be maintained in a neat and presentable condition and in the event
their use shall cease, the area shall be restored to a condition free from refuse and rubbish.
F. Any sign not conforming to the provisions of this title shall be made to conform or be removed.
(1975 Code § 10-3-9)
10-5-10: SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS:
A building permit shall be issued for a dwelling unit in the Agricultural District for any parcel of land
that is designated for commercial or industrial uses on the future Land Use Plan of the City. (Ord.
11052013-03, 12-3-2013)
Chapter 6
RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
ARTICLE A. R-1 SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL
DISTRICT
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 292/349
10-6A-1: PERMITTED PRINCIPAL USES AND STRUCTURES:
Churches and temples.
Community meeting or recreation building.
Elementary or secondary school.
Park, playground or playfield.
Single-family dwellings. (1975 Code § 10-4-1)
10-6A-2: PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES:
Private garages.
Private greenhouses not operated for commercial purposes.
Private swimming pools.
Satellite antennas.
Temporary buildings used in conjunction with construction work; provided, that such buildings are
removed promptly upon completion of the construction work.
Uses and structures clearly incidental and necessary to the permitted principal uses or structures of
this District not involving the conduct of business on the premises, except home occupations not
employing any person outside the immediate family, and located on the same or a contiguous lot
under the same ownership. (1975 Code § 10-4-2; amd. Ord. 6-85, 9-17-1985)
10-6A-3: SPECIAL EXCEPTION USES AND STRUCTURES:
Subject to Section 10-3-3 of this Code and the other requirements contained in this Title, the Board of
Adjustment may permit the following:
Hospitals, sanitariums, rest, nursing and convalescent homes, homes for orphans and aged on sites
of one acre or more; off-street parking and yards comparable for other institutional uses of this Title to
be provided.
Public housing developments.
Railroads and public utilities but not including equipment storage or maintenance yards and buildings
or general administrative and sales offices; provided, that any substation or building shall meet the
front and rear yard requirements for dwellings and shall provide side yards of not less than twenty five
feet (25') and that two (2) parking spaces per substation or one per employee on the site shall be
provided.
Swimming pools, golf course and country clubs, except miniature courses or driving ranges operated
for a profit. (1975 Code § 10-4-3)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 293/349
10-6A-4: MINIMUM REQUIRED OFF-STREET PARKING:
Use Number Of Spaces
Churches and temples 1 space/4 seats in the main
auditorium
Community meeting or recreation
building
1 space/150 sq. ft. of floor area
Elementary or secondary school 1 space/classroom and office
plus 1/each 6 seats in an
auditorium or stadium
Park, playground or playfield 5 spaces/acre developed for
active usage
Single-family dwellings 2 spaces/unit
(1975 Code § 10-4-4)
10-6A-5: MINIMUM LOT AREA, WIDTH, DEPTH:
A. Area: Nine thousand six hundred (9,600) square feet.
B. Width: Eighty feet (80').
C. Lot Not Served By Water and Sewer Service: Where a lot is not served by a public water and/or
sanitary sewer system, the minimum lot area shall not be less than twenty thousand (20,000)
square feet and the width not less than one hundred twenty five feet (125'). (1975 Code § 10-4-5)
10-6A-6: MINIMUM REQUIRED YARDS:
A. Dwellings and other noninstitutional uses:
Front 30 feet
Rear 30 feet
Side
1 story 8 feet
2 stories or more 10 feet
Street side, corner lot 25 feet
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 294/349
Rear, accessory use only 10 feet
(1975 Code § 10-4-6; amd. Ord. 5-87, 6-16-1987)
B.Schools, churches or other public institutional buildings:
Front 40 feet
Rear 40 feet
Side 20 feet
Street side, corner lot 25 feet
(1975 Code § 10-4-6)
10-6A-7: MAXIMUM HEIGHT:
The maximum height of buildings and structures in this District shall be two and one-half (21/2) stories
or thirty five feet (35'). (1975 Code § 10-4-7)
10-6A-8: MINIMUM FLOOR AREA:
The minimum floor area in this District shall be:
1 story 720 square feet
11/2 story 840 square feet
2 story 960 square feet
(1975 Code § 10-4-8)
10-6A-9: PERMITTED SIGNS:
A. Nameplates attached flat against the wall of the main building not to exceed one square foot in
area.
B. Church or public bulletin boards not to exceed twelve (12) square feet in area.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 295/349
C. Temporary signs advertising the lease or sale of the premises not to exceed six (6) square feet in
area.
D. Illumination of signs, bulletin boards and nameplates shall not exceed sixty (60) watts and shall be
lighted only with indirect, nonintermittent lighting.
E. Signs and bulletin boards shall be at least twenty feet (20') from the front lot line or not more than
five feet (5') in front of the main building.
F. All signs shall be maintained in a neat and presentable condition and in the event their use shall
cease, they shall be promptly removed and the surrounding area restored to a condition free from
refuse and rubbish.
G. Any sign not conforming to the provisions of this Title shall be made to conform or be removed.
(1975 Code § 10-4-9)
ARTICLE B. R-2 MIXED RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
10-6B-1: PERMITTED PRINCIPAL USES AND STRUCTURES:
Churches and temples.
Community meeting or recreation building.
Elementary or secondary school.
Medical offices or clinics of physicians, surgeons, osteopathic physicians, chiropractors, psychiatrists,
psychologists, optometrists, dentists and dental hygienists.
Multiple-family dwellings.
Park, playground or playfield.
Private kindergartens and day nurseries.
Public housing developments.
Single-family dwellings.
Two-family dwelling. (1975 Code § 10-5-1; amd. Ord. 8-76, 8-17-1976)
10-6B-2: PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES:
Private garages.
Private greenhouses not operated for commercial purposes.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 296/349
Private swimming pools.
Satellite antennas.
Temporary buildings used in conjunction with construction work; provided, that such buildings are
removed promptly upon completion of the construction work.
Uses and structures clearly incidental and accessory to the permitted principal uses or structures of
this District not involving the conduct of business on the premises, except home occupations, and
located on the same contiguous lot under the same ownership. (1975 Code § 10-5-2; amd. Ord. 6-85,
9-17-1985)
10-6B-3: SPECIAL EXCEPTION USES AND STRUCTURES:
Subject to Section 10-3-3 of this Code and the other requirements contained in this Title, the Board of
Adjustment may permit the following:
Hospitals, sanitariums, rest, nursing and convalescent homes, homes for orphan and aged on sites of
one acre or more; off-street parking and yards comparable for other institutional uses of this Title may
be provided.
Mobile home park; provided, that the installation complies with Iowa Code chapter 135D, as amended;
has a water supply and sanitary sewage collection and treatment system approved by the State Board
of Health; has a minimum area of three thousand five hundred (3,500) square feet for each mobile
home space; has a maximum density of ten (10) units per acre; provides at least ten (10) parking
spaces plus one parking space on each mobile home site, and that no mobile home shall be closer
than twenty five feet (25') to any property line of the mobile home park.
Railroads and public utilities but not including equipment storage or maintenance yards and buildings
or general administrative and sales offices; provided, that any substation or building shall meet the
front and rear yard requirements for dwellings and shall provide side yards of not less than twenty five
feet (25') and that two (2) parking spaces per substation or one per employee on the site be provided.
(1975 Code § 10-5-3)
10-6B-4: MINIMUM REQUIRED OFF-STREET PARKING:
Use Number Of Spaces
Churches and temples 1 space/4 seats in the main
auditorium
Community meeting or recreation 1 space/150 sq. ft. of floor area building
Elementary or secondary school 1 space/classroom and office
plus 1/each 6 seats in an
auditorium or stadium
Park, playground or playfield 5 spaces/acre developed for
active usage
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 297/349
Private kindergartens and day nurseries 1 space plus 1/employee
Public housing developments 1 space/unit
Single-family, two-family and multiple-family
dwellings
2 spaces/unit
(1975 Code § 10-5-4)
10-6B-5: MINIMUM LOT AREA, WIDTH, DEPTH:
A. Single-Family Dwelling:
1. Area: Eight thousand four hundred (8,400) square feet.
2. Width: Seventy feet (70').
B. Two-Family Dwelling:
1. Area: Nine thousand six hundred (9,600) square feet.
2. Width: Eighty feet (80').
C. Multi-Family Dwelling:
1. Area: Seven thousand two hundred (7,200) square feet for the first unit plus one thousand five
hundred (1,500) square feet for each additional unit up to twelve (12) and seven hundred fifty
(750) square feet for each additional unit over twelve (12).
2. Width: Eighty feet (80'). (1975 Code § 10-5-5; amd. 1977)
10-6B-6: MINIMUM REQUIRED YARDS:
A. Dwellings and other noninstitutional uses:
Front 30 feet
Rear 30 feet
Side
1 story 7 feet
2 stories or more 8 feet
Street, corner lot 20 feet
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 298/349
Rear, accessory use only 10 feet
(1975 Code § 10-5-6; amd. Ord. 5-87, 6-16-87)
B.Schools, churches or other public institutional buildings:
Front 35 feet
Rear 35 feet
Side 15 feet
Street side, corner lot 20 feet
(1975 Code § 10-5-6)
10-6B-7: MAXIMUM HEIGHT:
The maximum height of buildings and structures in this District shall be two and one-half (21/2) stories
or thirty five feet (35'). (1975 Code § 10-5-7)
10-6B-8: MINIMUM FLOOR AREA:
The minimum floor area of this District shall be as follows:
1 story 660 square feet
11/2 story 780 square feet
2 story 900 square feet
2-family 600 square feet/unit
Multi-family 450 square feet/unit
(1975 Code § 10-5-8)
10-6B-9: PERMITTED SIGNS:
A. Nameplates attached flat against the wall of the main building not to exceed three (3) square feet in
area.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 299/349
B. Church or public bulletin board not to exceed twelve (12) square feet in area.
C. Temporary signs advertising the lease or sale of the premises not to exceed six (6) square feet in
area.
D. Illumination of signs, bulletin boards and nameplates shall not exceed sixty (60) watts and shall be
lighted only with indirect, nonintermittent lighting.
E. Signs and bulletin boards shall be at least twenty feet (20') from the front lot line or not more than
five feet (5') in front of the main building.
F. All signs shall be maintained in a neat and presentable condition and in the event their use shall
cease, they shall be promptly removed and the surrounding area restored to a condition free from
refuse and rubbish.
G. Any sign not conforming to the provisions of this Title shall be made to conform or be removed.
(1975 Code § 10-5-9)
ARTICLE C. R-3 MIXED RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
10-6C-1: PERMITTED PRINCIPAL USES AND STRUCTURES:
Churches and temples.
Community meeting or recreation building.
Elementary or secondary school.
Funeral parlors.
Hospitals and sanitariums, homes for orphans and aged on sites of one acre or more.
Medical offices or clinics of physicians, surgeons, osteopathic physicians, chiropractors, psychiatrists,
psychologists, optometrists, dentists and dental hygienists.
Multiple-family dwellings.
Nursing, rest and convalescent homes.
Parks, playgrounds or playfields.
Private kindergarten or day nurseries.
Public housing developments.
Public library.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 300/349
Public utilities operations and administrative buildings, provided said building is designed to be
compatible with adjacent residential structures.
Rooming and boarding houses.
Single-family dwellings.
Two-family dwellings. (1975 Code § 10-6-1; amd. Ord. 8-76, 8-17-1976; Ord. 2-82, 4-1982)
10-6C-2: PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES:
Private garages.
Private greenhouses not operated for commercial purposes.
Private swimming pools.
Satellite antennas.
Temporary buildings used in conjunction with construction work; provided, that such buildings are
removed promptly upon completion of the construction work.
Uses and structures clearly incidental and necessary to the permitted principal uses or structures of
this District not involving the conduct of business on the premises, except home occupations, and
located on the same lot or a contiguous lot under the same ownership. (1975 Code § 10-6-2; amd.
Ord. 6-85, 9-17-1985)
10-6C-3: SPECIAL EXCEPTION USES AND STRUCTURES:
Subject to the provisions of Section 10-3-3 of this Title and the other requirements contained in this
Title, the Board of Adjustment may permit the following:
Mobile home park; provided, that the installation complies with Iowa Code chapter 135D, as amended;
has a water supply and sanitary sewage collection and treatment system approved by the State Board
of Health; has a minimum area of three thousand five hundred (3,500) square feet for each mobile
home space; has a maximum density of ten (10) units per acre; provides at least ten (10) parking
spaces plus one parking space on each mobile home site, and that no mobile home shall be closer
than twenty five feet (25') to any property line of the mobile home park.
Public utilities, but not including equipment storage or maintenance yards and buildings or general
administrative and sales offices; provided, that any substation or building shall meet the front and rear
yard requirements for dwellings and shall provide side yards of not less than twenty five feet (25') and
that two (2) parking spaces per substation or one employee on the site be provided.
Railroads. (1975 Code § 10-6-3)
10-6C-4: MINIMUM OFF-STREET PARKING REQUIREMENTS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 301/349
A. The following minimum off-street parking requirements shall be met by any new structure or by any
new use of an existing structure which commences after the enactment of this Section.
B. For purposes of this Section, uses within this District which do not comply with the minimum offstreet
parking requirements as of the date of the adoption of this Section shall be allowed to
continue; provided, that after the adoption of these minimum off-street parking requirements, those
existing uses which do not comply will be nonconforming as to the total use of the structure, not
just as to the parking requirement. The continued nonconforming uses of the premises and the
structures thereon shall be subject to all of the restrictions set forth in Chapter 9 of this Title,
"Nonconforming Uses and Structures". Otherwise all nonconformities shall become conforming
within two (2) years of notice of violation.
Use
Required Off-Street
Parking Spaces
Community meeting or recreation facility 1 parking space for each 150 sq. ft. of floor area
Elementary or secondary school 1 parking space for each class- room; 1 parking
space for each office, and 1 parking space for
each 6 seats in the auditorium, the gymnasium,
and the stadium
Funeral parlors, churches and temples 1 parking space for every 4 seats in the main
auditorium
Medical offices and clinics 1 parking space for each 150 sq. ft. of office space
or clinic floor area within the facility
Nursing, rest, and convalescent homes,
hospitals and sanitariums, homes for
orphans and the aged
3 parking spaces for every 6 beds within the unit
Park, playground, or playfield 5 parking spaces for each acre developed for
active usage
Private kindergarten or day nurseries 1 parking space for the facility plus 1 parking
space for each employee of the facility
Public housing developments 2 parking spaces for each dwelling unit within the
development
Public library 1 parking space for each 425 sq. ft. of floor area
within the facility
Rooming and boarding houses 1 parking space for every bed within the unit
Single-family dwellings, two-family
dwellings, multiple-family dwellings, and
mobile homes which have been
converted to real estate
2 parking spaces per dwelling unit
(Ord. 1-93, 1-5-1993; amd. Ord. 1-95, 3-21-1995)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 302/349
10-6C-5: MINIMUM LOT AREA, WIDTH, DEPTH:
A. Single-Family Dwelling:
1. Area: Seven thousand two hundred (7,200) square feet.
2. Width: Sixty feet (60').
B. Two-Family Dwelling:
1. Area: Eight thousand four hundred (8,400) square feet.
2. Width: Seventy feet (70').
C. Multi-Family Dwelling:
1. Area: Six thousand (6,000) square feet for the first unit plus one thousand five hundred (1,500)
square feet for each additional unit up to twelve (12) and seven hundred fifty (750) square feet
for each additional unit over twelve (12).
2. Width: Eighty feet (80'). (1975 Code § 10-6-5)
10-6C-6: MINIMUM REQUIRED YARDS:
A. Dwellings and other noninstitutional buildings:
Front 25 feet
Rear 25 feet
Side
1 story 6 feet
2 stories or more 8 feet
Side street, corner lot 20 feet
Rear, accessory use only 10 feet
(1975 Code § 10-6-6; amd. Ord. 5-87, 6-16-1987)
B.Schools, churches or other public or institutional buildings:
Front 35 feet
Rear 35 feet
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 303/349
Side 15 feet
Side street, corner lot 20 feet
(1975 Code § 10-6-6)
10-6C-7: MAXIMUM HEIGHT:
The maximum height of buildings and structures in this District shall be four (4) stories or fifty feet
(50'). (1975 Code § 10-6-7)
10-6C-8: MINIMUM FLOOR AREA:
The minimum floor area shall be as follows:
1 story 600 square feet
11/2 story 720 square feet
2 story 840 square feet
2-family 520 square feet/unit
Multi-family 380 square feet/unit
(1975 Code § 10-6-8)
10-6C-9: PERMITTED SIGNS:
A. Nameplates attached flat against the wall of the main building not to exceed three (3) square feet in
area.
B. Church or public bulletin board not to exceed twelve (12) square feet in area.
C. Temporary signs advertising the lease or sale of the premises not to exceed six (6) square feet in
area.
D. Illumination of signs, bulletin boards and nameplates shall not exceed sixty (60) watts and shall be
lighted only with indirect, nonintermittent lighting.
E. Signs and bulletin boards shall be at least twenty feet (20') from the front lot line or not more than
five feet (5') in front of the main building.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 304/349
F. All signs shall be maintained in a neat and presentable condition and in the event their use shall
cease, they shall be promptly removed and the surrounding area restored to a condition free from
refuse and rubbish.
G. Any sign not conforming to the provisions of this Title shall be made to conform or be removed.
(1975 Code § 10-6-9)
ARTICLE D. R-L LARGE SCALE RESIDENTIAL
DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT
10-6D-1: PURPOSE:
The R-L District is intended to provide the developer of land in the City the opportunity to creatively,
economically, and aesthetically develop the property based upon a comprehensive plan for its
development. It is the purpose of this Chapter to encourage flexibility in the design and development
of land in order to promote its most appropriate use, to facilitate the adequate and economic provision
of streets and utilities, and to preserve the natural and scenic qualities of open areas. (Ord. 3-97, 11-3-
1997; amd. 1998 Code)
10-6D-2: LOCATION:
A. The R-L District may be applied anywhere in the City; provided, that the objectives and provisions
of this Chapter are satisfied and that the planned development is consistent with the spirit and
intent of the City's Comprehensive Plan.
B. Any planned development in which apartments, condominiums, or townhouses are proposed, or in
which a mixture of apartment, condominium townhouse, single- and/or two-family housing types
are proposed, and for which development of at least five (5) acres is proposed, shall conform to
the requirements set forth herein. (Ord. 3-97, 11-3-1997; amd. 1998 Code)
10-6D-3: INTENSITY OF LAND USE:
The following chart shall be used to determine the residential density range to be permitted within the
R-L District:
Type Of Development
Minimum Density
Per Acre
Maximum Density
Per Acre
Garden apartments 8 units or 15 units or
(2 _ 3 stories) 17 bedrooms 38 bedrooms
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 305/349
Townhouse 7 units or 10 units or
19 bedrooms 25 bedrooms
A. Combination Of Residential Types: Where a proposed R-L development is a combination of
different residential types, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall evaluate the planned
development's density range based upon the relative proportion of residential types proposed. If
single- or two-family houses are proposed, each house must have a minimum lot area of seven
thousand (7,000) square feet; this may consist of direct ownership and/or common interest in real
estate within the development.
B. Single And Multi-Stories:
1. Single story one thousand two hundred (1,200) square foot artificially climatically controlled,
excluding garages.
2. Multi-story one thousand two hundred (1,200) square foot main level artificially climatically
controlled, excluding garages. (Ord. 3-97, 11-3-1997; amd. 1998 Code)
10-6D-4: PERMISSIVE USES:
Customary accessory or associated uses, such as private garages, storage spaces, recreational, and
community facilities.
Parks or playgrounds.
Single-family, two-family, townhouse, condominiums, and multiple-family residential.
Additional uses shall be allowed only to the extent that the Planning and Zoning Commission find
them to be:
A. Designed to serve primarily the residents of the R-L District.
B. Compatibly and harmoniously incorporated into the unitary design of the development.
C. Compatibly and harmoniously related to adjacent neighborhood uses. Such additional uses may
include:
Daycare center.
Golf course, tennis courts, swimming pool, or other sports facilities.
Institution.
Nursery, rest, or convalescent home.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 306/349
Place of worship.
Public or private school.
Public or semipublic facility. (Ord. 3-97, 11-3-1997; amd. 1998 Code)
10-6D-5: PARKING REQUIREMENTS:
The minimum parking spaces are as follows:
Use Minimum Parking Spaces
Community center, library, museum
or similar public or semipublic
building
1 per every 300 square feet
High schools and colleges 10 per classroom
Multiple-family 11/2 per dwelling unit
Place of worship 1 per 4 seats in a main room
Sanitarium or nursing home 2 for each bed
Single- and two-family residential 1 per full bath
All other nonresidential buildings 1 per every 300 square feet
(Ord. 3-97, 11-3-1997; amd. 1998 Code)
10-6D-6: OPEN SPACE:
A minimum of twenty five percent (25%) of the R-L site area shall be developed as open space,
including walkways, plazas, landscaped areas, pools, fountains, and playgrounds. Parking areas and
vehicle access facilities shall not be considered in calculating open space. (Ord. 3-97, 11-3-1997;
amd. 1998 Code)
10-6D-7: CONDITIONS:
A. Recommendations; Deed Restrictions: The Planning and Zoning Commission may recommend,
and the City Council may impose, conditions regarding the layout, circulation, performance,
preservation, care, and maintenance of the proposed development and may require that
appropriate deed restrictions be filed, enforceable by the City for a period of twenty (20) years from
the date of filing.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 307/349
B. Required Improvements; Bond Or Security: Upon recommendation of the Planning and Zoning
Commission, the City Council may require the developer to file a bond or security to secure the
City for the actual construction and installation to specifications determined by, or in accordance
with, the regulation of the City Council.
1. Street Improvements: Streets shall be filled or excavated to the grade approved by the City and
set by the City Engineer. All streets shall be graded the full platted width, and pavement shall be
constructed of seven inch (7") Portland cement concrete pavement.
2. Sewers:
a. The developer shall make adequate provision for disposal of sanitary sewage from the
proposed development. He shall, at his expense, construct a sanitary sewer system, including
all necessary pumping stations, manholes, and other necessary appurtenances, to provide for
the discharge of sanitary sewage from all lots or parcels of land within the proposed
development with an existing City sanitary sewer, such sewage system to be designed and
constructed in accordance with the standards and specifications of the City. Design and
construction of the sewage system and sewer grades must be approved by, and shall be
under the supervision and inspection of, the City Engineer and the Superintendent of Water
Pollution Control. The developer may be required to pay a reasonable charge for such
engineering and inspection service.
b. Storm Sewers: Storm drainage structures shall be constructed where needed as determined
by the City Engineer and the Superintendent of Water Pollution Control. Minimum size of all
storm sewers shall be twelve inch (12") Class III or equivalent reinforced concrete pipe.
c. When it is impractical to connect such sewage system with an existing City sewer, and it is
necessary to dispose of such sanitary sewage by a septic system, such system, and the
installation thereof, shall meet the standards and specifications set by the Board of Health of
the State.
3. Water And Gas Service: The developer shall install, or cause to be installed, all necessary water
mains, fire hydrants, and gas mains as approved by local utilities and the City Engineer.
4. Electric Service: The developer shall install, or cause to be installed, all necessary electric
transmission lines underground.
5. Sidewalks: Sidewalks shall be installed, or cause to be installed, by the developer according to
specifications prescribed by the City and located and set at the grade established by the
Engineer.
6. Other Cable Services: Other cable services shall be underground phone, cables, etc. (Ord. 3-97,
11-3-1997; amd. 1998 Code)
10-6D-8: FILING PROCEDURES:
The procedure for obtaining a change of zoning district to R-L shall be as follows:
A. Submission Of Petition: A petition for a zoning change to R-L shall be submitted to the City
Manager/Clerk. Such petition shall comply with all applicable provisions of the Zoning Ordinance1
and rules of procedure of the Planning and Zoning Commission.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 308/349
B. Outline Development Plan: The applicant shall accompany the request for a zoning change with
four (4) copies of an outline development plan. The outline development plan shall include both
maps and written statement and must show enough of the area surrounding the proposed planned
development to demonstrate the relationship of the development to adjoining uses, both existing
and proposed.
C. Required Information: The outline development plan must contain the following information:
1. Maps And Diagrams: Maps and diagrams may be in general schematic form but must include:
a. The title by which the development is to be known and recorded.
b. The existing topographic character of the site and adjacent land.
c. Existing and proposed land uses and the approximate locations of buildings and other
structures and their exterior facades.
d. The character and approximate density of dwellings.
e. The approximate locations, width, and dimensions of all existing and proposed streets, alleys,
walkways, and thoroughfares.
f. The locations and approximate dimensions of all areas to be reserved for future use as parks,
playgrounds, or similar features in developments of fifteen (15) acres or greater.
g. The locations, approximate dimensions, and character of all areas, sites, grounds, streets, or
similar features which are to be dedicated for public use.
h. General landscaping and tree planting plan.
i. The location and approximate dimensions of parking lots and areas.
j. The locations and size of existing storm and/or sanitary sewers, water mains, or field drains
within or readily accessible to the tract.
k. The location and character of all existing easements.
l. The bearing and distance from monumented block or lot corner within the tract to some corner
of a congressional division within the City.
m. A plat giving the names, as shown on the last deed of record, of all property owners within
two hundred feet (200') of the perimeter of the tract.
n. A legal description of the tract.
o. The name and seal of the registered engineer or surveyor who prepared the documents.
2. Written Statement: The written statement must contain the following information:
a. A statement of the character of the planned development, to include:
(1) Its relationship to the Comprehensive Plan of the City.
(2) Its relationship to adjoining uses, both existing and proposed.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 309/349
(3) Its relationship to topographic features of the site and adjacent land.
(4) Limiting conditions such as soils, excessive grade or slope, unstable ground, high water
table, etc.
b. A general indication of the expected schedule of development.
c. A statement of the present ownership of all land included within the planned development.
d. A list of the current addresses of all property owners within two hundred feet (200') of the
perimeter of the tract. (Ord. 3-97, 11-3-1997; amd. 1998 Code)
10-6D-9: APPROVAL OF OUTLINE DEVELOPMENT PLAN:
A. Recommendations; Hearing: Within ninety (90) days after the filing of the outline development plan,
the Planning and Zoning Commission shall forward the outline development plan to the City
Council with a written report recommending that the plan be approved, approved with
modifications, or disapproved and giving the reasons for these recommendations.
1. Recommendations from City department heads and utility companies are required in conjunction
with the Planning and Zoning Commission review.
2. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall hold a public hearing prior to making
recommendation on the proposal. The public hearing shall be held in accordance with State and
Municipal codes and Planning and Zoning Commission rules of procedure. The outline
development plan shall be made publicly available at least fourteen (14) days before the public
hearings, and the notices of public hearing shall so inform the public.
B. Consideration Of Certain Factors: The Planning and Zoning Commission shall consider the
following factors in making its recommendation to the City Council:
1. That the proposal substantially conforms to the Comprehensive Plan for the City.
2. That the existing character of the neighborhood will not be adversely affected, and that
adequate safeguards are provided to minimize possible detrimental effects on adjacent
properties and the neighborhood.
3. That there is ample provision for water supply, sanitary sewage disposal, storm and surface
water drainage, and other utilities.
4. That soil conditions, natural characteristics, topography, and geography do not present a
substantial hazard to development.
5. That there is adequate availability to police and fire protection, parks and recreational facilities,
schools, and other community facilities and public services.
6. That the location, height, and bulk of buildings and structures on the site are in proportion to
each other and relate well to other structures and visual perspective in the vicinity.
7. That patterns of pedestrian circulation and the effective use and design of open spaces,
landscaping, exterior facade, and amenities are considered.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 310/349
8. That vehicular access is adequate to and within the site, that parking and loading spaces are
adequate and well located, and that there are no conflicts between vehicular traffic and other
uses and activities proposed.
9. That the proposed installation of driveways, landscaping, and other site details are generally in
harmony with the proposed structures, adjacent properties, and with the rights and interests of
the general public.
C. Public Hearing: After receiving the Planning and Zoning Commission's recommendations, the City
Council shall hold a public hearing as provided in Iowa Code section 414.4. Subsequent to holding
said public hearing, the City Council shall approve, approve with modifications, or disapprove the
outline development plan.
1. If the outline development plan is approved, the City Council shall amend the Zoning Map to
show the R-L District.
2. If the outline development plan is approved with modifications, the City Council shall not amend
the Zoning Map until the applicant has filed with the City Council written consent to the plan as
modified.
3. No building permits may be issued on land within the R-L District until the final development plan
has been approved under the procedures provided in the following sections. (Ord. 3-97, 11-3-
1997; amd. 1998 Code)
10-6D-10: PRELIMINARY DEVELOPMENT PLAN:
A. Filing Of Plan: Within six (6) months after an outline development plan has been approved, an
applicant shall file a preliminary development plan with the City Manager/Clerk. Upon the filing of a
preliminary development plan, three (3) full size sets of plans twenty four inches by thirty six inches
(24" x 36") and fourteen (14) half size sets of plans eighteen inches by twenty four inches
(18" x 24") will be provided, the City Manager/Clerk shall immediately refer one copy of such plan
to the City Engineer and one copy to the Building and Zoning Administrator. This preliminary plan
shall then be presented at the next regular Planning and Zoning Commission meeting.
B. Submission In Stages: The Planning and Zoning Commission may authorize the submission of
preliminary development plans in stages, if so requested by the applicant.
C. Withdrawal Of City Approval: If a preliminary development plan covering at least twenty percent
(20%) of the area of the outline development plan has not been submitted within six (6) months
following the approval of the outline development plan, the City Council may withdraw its approval
of the outline development plan. In its discretion and for good cause, the City Council may extend
for three (3) months the period for filing the preliminary development plan.
D. Required Information: The preliminary development plan shall include all of the following
information:
1. The location, width, and dimensions of all existing and proposed thoroughfares, streets, alleys,
sidewalks, and walkways.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 311/349
2. All plot lines and plot designs (if applicable).
3. Areas proposed to be conveyed, dedicated, or reserved for parks, parkways, playgrounds,
school sites, public buildings, and similar public or semipublic uses.
4. The location and dimensions of each building site, common open area, improvement, and
indication of open spaces around buildings and structures.
5. Elevation and perspective drawings of proposed structures and improvements, except singlefamily
residences and single-family residence accessory buildings. These drawings need not be
of final architectural decisions and need not be in detail.
6. A development schedule indicating approximate dates for start and completion of the project, if
such schedule varies considerably from the schedule submitted with the outline development
plan.
7. All agreements, provisions, or covenants which will govern the use, maintenance, protection,
performance, and/or design of the development and any of its common open areas.
8. Off-street parking plan.
9. A circulation diagram indicating proposed movement of vehicles and pedestrians within the
development and to and from existing features and location and type of traffic regulations
devices needed to facilitate or ensure the safety of this circulation pattern.
10. A landscaping and tree planting plan.
11. The location and size of all existing storm or sanitary sewers, water mains, or field drains within
or readily accessible to the development.
12. The location and character of all existing easements and those proposed to be provided by the
owner.
13. The location of all proposed sewers.
14. The location of all proposed water and gas mains.
15. Grading plan, to include the location of waterways on the site or on adjacent land, and
drainage plan with sufficient control grades to indicate the intent of the developer.
16. The scale used on the drawings.
17. Any other plans, diagrams, or information, as requested by the Planning and Zoning
Commission or the City Council.
E. Preparation By Engineer: The preliminary development plan shall be prepared by, and have the
seal of, an engineer duly registered to practice in the State.
F. Approval Of Preliminary Development Plan:
1. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall review the preliminary development plan to
determine if it is in substantial compliance with the outline development plan and recognized
principles of civic design, land use, and landscape architecture. A recommendation of the City
staff is required prior to Planning and Zoning Commission review. The Commission shall then
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 312/349
recommend to the City Council, within forty five (45) days after the filing of the preliminary
development plan, that the plan be approved, approved with modifications, or disapproved.
2. After receiving the Planning and Zoning Commission's recommendations, the City Council shall
approve, approve with modifications, or disapprove the preliminary development plan.
3. If the City Council disapproves a preliminary development plan, the applicant shall file with the
City Manager/Clerk a revised preliminary development plan within forty five (45) days of the date
of disapproval, or the City Council may withdraw its approval of the outline development plan.
(Ord. 3-97, 11-3-1997; amd. 1998 Code)
10-6D-11: FINAL DEVELOPMENT PLAN:
A. Filing Of Plan:
1. Within six (6) months following the approval of the preliminary development plan, the applicant
shall file with the City Manager/Clerk copies of a final development plan. Upon the filing of the
final development plan, the City Manager/Clerk shall refer one copy of the plan and
accompanying papers to the Building and Zoning Administrator and one copy to the City
Engineer. This final development plan shall then be presented to the Planning and Zoning
Commission at the next regular meeting.
2. In its discretion and for good cause, the Planning and Zoning Commission may extend for six (6)
months the period for the filing of the final development plan, upon request of the applicant.
B. Review And Approval Or Disapproval:
1. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall review the final development plan and shall
recommend to the City Council within forty five (45) days after the filing of the final development
plan, that the plan be approved if that plan is in substantial compliance with the approved
preliminary development plan. If the preliminary development plan has been approved by the
City Council with modifications, the final development plan shall include those modifications.
2. If the City Council disapproves a final development plan, the applicant shall file with the City
Manager/Clerk a revised final development plan within forty five (45) days of the date of
disapproval, or the City Council may withdraw its approval of the outline development plan.
C. Required Information: The final development plan shall include all those items required by the
preliminary development plan and, in addition, the following information:
1. The proposed names of all streets, public ways, and places dedicated for public use; and the
location, width dimensions, and specifications of all streets, alleys, sidewalks, and walkways.
2. The type and location of all permanent monuments at block and lot corners and elsewhere
within the development.
3. All radii, arcs, chords, points of tangency, and central angles for curved streets and the radii of
all rounded curves.
4. The location, size, grade, and specifications of all proposed sewers, pumping stations,
manholes, and other necessary appurtenances.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 313/349
5. The location, size, grade, and specifications of all proposed water and gas mains and the
location, size, and specifications of all fire hydrants.
6. The location and character of all proposed electric transmission lines.
7. The certification of the engineer preparing the documents with his or her license number and
seal and the date of preparation.
8. Certificate of approval for construction of water, electric, and gas service from the respective
utility companies accompanied by a plat showing any easements required.
9. Four (4) sets of improvement plans and profile. All plans and drawings are to be submitted on
full-size plan and profile paper.
10. Four (4) copies of all easement agreements for utility or other purposes.
11. Four (4) copies of a proposed resolution to be adopted by the City Council accepting lands to
be dedicated for public use.
12. Four (4) copies of any agreement to be entered into between the applicant and the City
providing for the grading of streets and installation of sewer system and other utilities or other
improvements as may be required.
13. Four (4) copies of any deed restrictions or covenants required by the City Council under
subsection 10-6D-7A of this Article, or any other conditions imposed by the City Council under
Section 10-6D-7 of this Article.
14. Four (4) copies of a proposed resolution to be adopted by the City Council approving and
accepting the final development plan. (Ord. 3-97, 11-3-1997; amd. 1998 Code)
10-6D-12: BUILDING PERMITS:
Upon approval of the final development plan, the Building and Zoning Administrator shall issue
building permits in accordance with all applicable State and local codes, regulations, and ordinances
for buildings and structures in the area covered by the approved final development plan. (Ord. 3-97,
11-3-1997; amd. 1998 Code)
10-6D-13: FAILURE TO BEGIN PLANNED DEVELOPMENT:
A. Extension Of Time Period: If no construction has begun or no use established in the planned
development within one year from the approval of the final development plan, the final
development plan shall lapse and be of no further effect. In its discretion and for good cause, the
Planning and Zoning Commission may extend for six (6) additional months the period for the
beginning of the construction or the establishment of a use.
B. Lapse Of Plan: If a final development plan lapses under the provisions of this Section, the City
Manager/Clerk shall remove the planned development from the Zoning Map and shall file a notice
of revocation of the recorded final development plan. The zoning regulations applicable before the
final development was approved shall then be revived and in effect. (Ord. 3-97, 11-3-1997; amd.
1998 Code)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 314/349
10-6D-14: CHANGES IN FINAL DEVELOPMENT PLAN:
No changes shall be made in the approved final development plan during the construction of the
planned development, except under authorization by the Planning and Zoning Commission. No
amendments shall be made in the approved final development plan, unless they are shown to be
required by change in conditions that have occurred since the final development plan was approved or
by changes in the development policy of the community. (Ord. 3-97, 11-3-1997; amd. 1998 Code)
10-6D-15: ENFORCEMENT:
A. Review Permits And Examine Construction: At least once every six (6) months following the
approval of the final development plan, the Building and Zoning Administrator shall review all of the
building permits issued for the planned development and examine the construction which has
taken place on the site. The construction and provision of all of the common open spaces and
public and recreational facilities which are shown on the final development plan must proceed at
the same rate as the construction of dwelling units.
B. Failure To Follow Plan: If the Building and Zoning Administrator finds that the final development
plan has not been followed, he or she shall forward this information to the Planning and Zoning
Commission, which may recommend to the City Council revocation of approval of the final
development plan. (Ord. 3-97, 11-3-1997; amd. 1998 Code)
10-6D-16: SEVERABILITY:
If any of the provisions of this Article are for any reason illegal or void, then the lawful provisions of this
Article which are separable from said unlawful provisions, shall be and remain in full force and effect,
the same as if the Article contained no illegal or void provisions. (Ord. 3-97, 11-3-1997; amd. 1998
Code)
Chapter 7
COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS
ARTICLE A. C-1 HIGHWAY COMMERCIAL DISTRICT
10-7A-1: PERMITTED PRINCIPAL USES AND STRUCTURES:
Automotive display, sales, service and repair.
Automotive repair, paint and body shop.
Bowling alley.
Bus terminal.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 315/349
Dance hall and skating rink.
Drive-in bank.
Drive-in eating and drinking establishments.
Dwelling unit above a store or shop.
Farm implement display, sales, service and repair.
Funeral parlor.
Lumber yard or building material sales yard, and manufacture and sale of precut and/or partially
assembled building materials.
Medical, dental, chiropractic office or clinic.
Monument and marker display and sales.
Motel, hotel or tourist camp.
Railroad and public utilities, but not including storage or maintenance yards and buildings.
Restaurant, nightclub, cafe or tavern.
Retail sales. (1975 Code § 10-7-1; amd. Ord. 5-80, 6-3-1980; Ord. 3-82, 5-4-1982; Ord. 4-87, 6-2-
1987; Ord. 3-89, 4-18-1989)
10-7A-2: PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES:
Satellite antennas.
Storage warehouses in conjunction with the permitted principal uses or structures of this District.
Temporary buildings used in conjunction with construction work; provided, that such buildings are
removed promptly upon completion of the construction work.
Uses and structures clearly incidental and necessary to the permitted principal uses or structures of
this District. (1975 Code § 10-7-2; amd. Ord. 6-85, 9-17-1985)
10-7A-3: MINIMUM REQUIRED OFF-STREET PARKING:
Use Number Of Spaces
Automotive display, sales, service and
repair, farm implement display, sales,
service and repair
1 space/300 sq. ft. of sales,
service or office floor area
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 316/349
Bowling alley 4 spaces/lane or alley
Bus terminal 6 spaces plus 1 off-street loading space for each
bus
serving the terminal
Drive-in bank 4 spaces/teller window
Drive-in eating and drinking
establishment
5 spaces/100 sq. ft. of floor area
Funeral parlor 1 space/4 seats in the main chapel
Motel, hotel or tourist camp and dwelling
unit above a store or shop
1 space/unit or campsite
Railroads and public utilities, monument 1 space/employee plus 1/vehicle mark and display
and sales used by the facility
Restaurant, nightclub, cafe or tavern,
dance hall and skating rink
1 space/100 sq. ft. of floor area
Retail sales 1 space/300 sq. ft. of sales area
(1975 Code § 10-7-3; amd. Ord. 3-82, 5-4-1982)
10-7A-4: MINIMUM LOT AREA, WIDTH, DEPTH:
For commercial uses, there are no minimum lot area, width or depth specifications. (1975 Code § 10-
7-4)
10-7A-5: MINIMUM REQUIRED YARDS:
A. Front Yard: Fifteen feet (15').
B. Side And Rear Yards: No side or rear yard except where apartments are above a store or shop, a
rear yard of twenty feet (20') shall be provided and where adjacent to an A or R District, a side yard
of ten feet (10') and a rear yard of twenty feet (20') shall be provided. (1975 Code § 10-7-5)
10-7A-6: MAXIMUM HEIGHT:
The maximum height for buildings and structures in this District shall be four (4) stories or fifty feet
(50'). (1975 Code § 10-7-6)
10-7A-7: PERMITTED SIGNS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 317/349
A. Trade, business or industry identification signs, provided that they:
1. Do not exceed twenty five feet (25') in height.
2. Are not within twenty five feet (25') of an A or R District.
3. Do not overhang the public right of way except those signs which project not more than one foot
(1') beyond the front face or integral part of the building other than identification signs of less
than two (2) square feet in area.
4. Are not within twenty five feet (25') of a highway intersection or highway structure.
B. Advertising signs and billboards, provided that they:
1. Do not exceed twenty five feet (25') in height.
2. Are not within twenty five feet (25') of an A or R District.
3. Are not within seventy five feet (75') of another billboard.
4. Do not exceed one hundred (100) square feet in area.
C. No sign or billboard shall be located in, overhang or project into a required yard.
D. All signs and billboards shall be maintained in a neat and presentable condition and in the event
their use shall cease, they shall be promptly removed and the surrounding area restored to a
condition free from refuse and rubbish.
E. Any sign not conforming to the provisions of this Title, shall be made to conform or be removed.
(1975 Code § 10-7-7)
ARTICLE B. C-2 GENERAL RETAIL DISTRICT
10-7B-1: PERMITTED PRINCIPAL USES AND STRUCTURES:
Automotive sales, service and repair.
Bus terminal.
Business and professional offices and studios.
Clubs and lodges,
Commercial amusements.
Dance or music schools.
Dry cleaners or laundry.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 318/349
Dwelling unit above a store or shop.
Farm implement sales, service and repair.
Hotels and motels.
Lumber yard or building material sales yard.
Medical, dental, chiropractic clinics.
Personal service and repair shops.
Plumbing and heating sales, service and repair shops.
Printing, publishing and engraving,
Public buildings and utilities but not including storage or maintenance yards or buildings.
Public garages, storage garages and parking lots.
Restaurant, nightclub, cafe or tavern.
Retail businesses.
Wholesale display and salesroom. (1975 Code § 10-8-1)
10-7B-2: PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES:
Satellite antennas.
Storage warehouses in conjunction with the permitted principal uses or structures of this District.
Temporary buildings used in conjunction with construction work; provided, that such buildings are
removed promptly upon completion of the construction work.
Uses and structures clearly incidental and necessary to the permitted principal uses or structures of
this District. (1975 Code § 10-8-2; amd. Ord. 6-85, 9-17-1985)
10-7B-3: MINIMUM REQUIRED OFF-STREET PARKING:
No off-street parking is required in this District. (1975 Code § 10-8-3)
10-7B-4: MINIMUM LOT AREA, WIDTH, DEPTH:
For commercial uses, no minimum lot area, width, or depth specifications are set forth. (1975 Code
§ 10-8-4)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 319/349
10-7B-5: MINIMUM REQUIRED YARDS:
No required yards except where apartments are above a store or shop, a rear yard of twenty feet (20')
shall be provided and where adjacent to an R District, a front and side yard of ten feet (10') and a rear
yard of twenty feet (20') shall be provided. (1975 Code § 10-8-5; amd. 1998 Code)
10-7B-6: MAXIMUM HEIGHT:
The maximum height of buildings and structures in this District shall be four (4) stories or fifty feet
(50'). (1975 Code § 10-8-6)
10-7B-7: PERMITTED SIGNS:
A. Advertising signs, billboard and trade, business or industry identification signs, provided that:
1. Freestanding signs do not exceed twenty five feet (25') in height. (1975 Code § 10-8-7)
2. Signs attached to a building shall not project above the height of the building or more than five
feet (5') from the face of the building, including sign mounting hardware. The sign shall be
permanently mounted to prevent movement.
a. Awnings shall be permitted to display signs, however, the lowest point of the awning shall not
be lower than seven feet (7') from the sidewalk, nor shall the awning extend any closer to the
curb line than three feet (3').
b. Marquees shall be permitted and shall not extend beyond the curb line.
3. No commercial sign shall overhang the public right of way. "Public right of way" is defined in the
Central Retail District as not including the sidewalks. (1998 Code)
4. No sign shall exceed one hundred fifty (150) square feet in area nor shall any sign cover more
than ten percent (10%) of the building face which it covers.
B. No sign or billboard shall be located in, overhang or project into a required yard.
C. All signs and billboards shall be maintained in a neat and presentable condition and in the event
their use shall cease, they shall be promptly removed and the surrounding area restored to a
condition free from refuse and rubbish.
D. Any sign not conforming to the provisions of this Title shall be made to conform or be removed.
(1975 Code § 10-8-7)
Chapter 8
INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 320/349
ARTICLE A. M-1 LIGHT INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT
10-8A-1: PERMITTED PRINCIPAL USES AND STRUCTURES:
Animal hospital or kennel.
Automobile paint and body shop.
Farm implement display, sales, service and repair.
Frozen food locker.
Grain storage bins.
Lumber yard and building material sale and storage.
Manufacturing and processing uses that are wholly contained within a building and have no exterior
storage, create no offensive noise, dust, odor, vibration or create electrical interference.
Plumbing, heating, air conditioning and sheet metal shops.
Processing and handling of cheese, butter and other milk products.
Railroad and public utilities including storage and maintenance yards.
Tool, die, gauge and machine shops.
Truck and freight terminal.
Truck display, sales, repair and storage.
Welding and repair shop.
Wholesaling and warehousing but not including the bulk storage of liquid fertilizer or petroleum
products under pressure. (1975 Code § 10-9-1)
10-8A-2: PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES:
Dwelling units for watchmen or caretakers employed on the premises; provided, that an open yard of
at least two thousand four hundred (2,400) square feet is reserved and maintained for use by the
occupants.
Satellite antennas.
Temporary buildings used in conjunction with construction work; provided, that such buildings are
removed promptly upon completion of the construction work.
Uses and structures clearly incidental and necessary to the permitted principal uses or structures of
this District. (1975 Code § 10-9-2; amd. Ord. 6-85, 9-19-1985)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 321/349
10-8A-3: MINIMUM REQUIRED OFF-STREET PARKING:
Use Number Of
Spaces
Lumber yard and building material sale and storage, farm implement
display, sales, service and repair
1
space/employee
plus 1
space/vehicle
used by the
industry
Manufacturing and processing 1 space for every
2 employees
plus 1
space/vehicle
used by the
industry
Tool, die, gauge and machine shops; railroad and public utilities; automobile
paint and body shop; plumbing, heating, air conditioning and sheet
metal shops; processing and handling of cheese, butter and other milk
products; frozen food locker
1
space/employee
and 1/each
vehicle used by
the industry
Truck and freight terminal; animal hospital or kennel; truck display sales,
repair and storage; grain storage bins; welding and repair shop
1 space/300 sq.
ft. of sales
service or office
floor area
Wholesaling and warehousing 1 space for every
200 sq. ft. of
floor area
All uses shall provide at least one loading space for each ten thousand (10,000) square feet of floor
area. (1975 Code § 10-9-3)
10-8A-4: MINIMUM REQUIRED YARDS:
Front 25 feet
Rear 25 feet
Side 20 feet
Side street, corner lot 25 feet
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 322/349
Where the rear or side yard of a parcel abuts a railroad, up to one-half (1/2) the width of the railroad
right of way may be used for the required yard. (1975 Code § 10-9-4)
10-8A-5: MAXIMUM HEIGHT:
The maximum height of buildings and structures in this District shall be four (4) stories or fifty feet
(50'). (1975 Code § 10-9-5)
10-8A-6: PERMITTED SIGNS:
A. Temporary signs advertising the sale or lease of the premises, not exceeding twelve (12) square
feet in area.
B. Billboards and advertising signs, provided:
1. That they are not within one hundred fifty feet (150') of a highway intersection, highway
structure, residence, park, school, cemetery, public or semi-public building.
2. That they are not within one hundred fifty feet (150') of another billboard or advertising sign.
C. Trade, business or industry identification signs for the firm located on the site, provided that:
1. Freestanding signs shall not exceed one hundred fifty (150) square feet in area or twenty five
feet (25') in height.
2. Signs mounted flush on the wall of a building shall not exceed ten percent (10%) of the area of
the wall of the building on which they are located or two hundred (200) square feet, whichever is
smaller.
3. Overhanging signs, attached to a building, shall not project above the height of the building or
more than four feet (4') from the wall of the building and shall not have more than one hundred
(100) square feet of area.
4. Not more than one sign of each category above may be provided for any single use, although
each sign may be a double-faced or back-to-back sign.
D. All signs shall be maintained in a neat and presentable condition and in the event that they shall
become illegible or their use shall cease, they shall be removed promptly and the area occupied
restored to a condition free from refuse and rubbish.
E. Any sign not conforming to the provisions of this Title shall be made to conform or be removed.
(1975 Code § 10-9-6)
ARTICLE B. M-2 HEAVY INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 323/349
10-8B-1: PERMITTED PRINCIPAL USES AND STRUCTURES:
Animal hospital or kennel.
Automobile paint and body shop.
Concrete products manufacture and central mixing and proportioning plant.
Contractor shop and storage yard.
Grain elevator and feed mill.
Grain storage bins.
Lumber yard and building material sale and storage.
Manufacturing and processing uses that are wholly within a building and have no exterior storage,
create no offensive noise, dust, odor, vibration or create electrical interference.
Plumbing, heating, air conditioning and sheet metal shops.
Processing and handling of cheese, butter and other milk products.
Railroads and public utilities including storage and maintenance yards.
Structural iron and steel fabrication.
Tool, die, gauge and machine shops.
Truck and freight terminal.
Welding and repair shop.
Wholesaling and warehousing but not including the bulk storage of liquid fertilizer or petroleum
products under pressure. (1975 Code § 10-10-1)
10-8B-2: PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES:
Dwelling units for watchmen or caretakers employed on the premises; provided, that an open yard of
at least two thousand four hundred (2,400) square feet is reserved and maintained for the use of the
occupants.
Satellite antennas.
Temporary buildings used in conjunction with construction work; provided, that such buildings are
removed promptly upon completion of the construction work.
Uses and structures clearly incidental and necessary to the permitted principal uses or structures of
this District. (1975 Code § 10-10-2; amd. Ord. 6-85, 9-17-1985)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 324/349
10-8B-3: SPECIAL EXCEPTION USES AND STRUCTURES:
Subject to Section 10-3-3 of this Code and the other requirements contained in this Title, the Board of
Adjustment may permit the following:
Auto wrecking and junkyards on sites of two (2) acres or more; provided, that front yards be
maintained as an open space free of weeds and debris; and that no open burning of waste or
discarded materials shall be conducted on the site.
Bulk storage of liquid fertilizer and petroleum products under pressure; provided, that such use shall
not be located within three hundred feet (300') of any existing dwelling, park, school, church or place
of public assembly.
Poultry processing plants; provided, that the provision for drainage, sanitation, waste disposal, and fly
control are approved by the County Health Officer, and that it is located so that prevailing winds will
not cause dust or odors to create a nuisance for developed properties in the vicinity; and that one
parking space for each employee and one space for each vehicle used by the industry be provided.
Sanitary landfill or waste disposal area, provided it is not used for disposal of dead animals; that
refuse shall be covered with dirt daily if it contains raw garbage; that a nuisance due to smoke, odor or
blowing of trash and debris shall not be created; and that the site shall be restored to a condition
compatible with the adjacent area upon conclusion of the dump operation. An access road having at
least a graveled surface and five (5) parking spaces shall be provided. No landfill or waste disposal
area shall be located closer than one-fourth (1/4) mile to any dwelling, park, school or place of public
assembly.
Stockyards, rendering works, loading pens, buying stations and/or sale barns and yards; provided,
that it is not closer than one-fourth (1/4) mile to any dwelling unit other than that of the owner or
operator, or any park, school, church or place of public assembly; that the provisions for drainage,
sanitation, waste disposal and fly control are approved by the County Health Officer, that it is located
so that prevailing winds will not cause dust or odors to create a nuisance for developed properties in
the vicinity; and that one parking space for each employee and one space for each vehicle used by
the industry be provided. (1975 Code § 10-10-3; amd. 1998 Code)
10-8B-4: MINIMUM REQUIRED OFF-STREET PARKING:
A. One off-street parking space for each one thousand two hundred (1,200) square feet of floor area
of the main building or for each three (3) employees, whichever is greater.
B. Off-street parking space shall be provided for any increase in floor area of any existing building in
the same ratio - one thousand two hundred (1,200) square feet or for each three (3) employees,
whichever is greater.
C. Any building erected or converted for industrial use shall provide not less than one truck unloading
space either within the building or upon the lot and adjacent to the building for each ten thousand
(10,000) square feet of floor area or fraction thereof. (1975 Code § 10-10-4)
10-8B-5: MINIMUM REQUIRED YARDS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 325/349
Front 6 feet
Rear 6 feet
Sides 6 feet
Side street, corner lot 6 feet
(Ord. 6-82, 7-20-1982)
10-8B-6: MAXIMUM HEIGHT:
The maximum height of buildings and structures in this District shall be sixty feet (60'). (1975 Code
§ 10-10-6)
10-8B-7: PERMITTED SIGNS:
A. Temporary signs advertising the sale or lease of the premises, not exceeding twelve (12) square
feet in area.
B. Billboards and advertising signs, provided:
1. That they are not within one hundred fifty feet (150') of a highway intersection, highway
structure, residence, park, school, cemetery, public or semi-public building.
2. That they are not within one hundred fifty feet (150') of another billboard or advertising sign.
C. Trade, business or industry identification signs for the firm located on the site, provided that:
1. Freestanding signs shall not exceed one hundred fifty (150) square feet in area or twenty five
feet (25') in height.
2. Signs mounted flush on the wall of a building shall not exceed ten percent (10%) of the area of
the wall of the building on which they are located or two hundred (200) square feet, whichever is
smaller.
3. Overhanging signs, attached to a building, shall not project above the height of the building or
more than four feet (4') from the wall of the building and shall not have more than one hundred
(100) square feet of area.
4. Not more than one sign of each category above may be provided for any single use, although
each sign may be a double faced or back to back sign.
D. All signs shall be maintained in a neat and presentable condition and in the event that they shall
become illegible or their use shall cease, they shall be removed promptly and the area occupied
restored to a condition free from refuse and debris.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 326/349
E. Any sign not conforming to the provisions of this Title shall be made to conform or be removed.
(1975 Code § 10-10-7)
Chapter 9
NONCONFORMING USES AND STRUCTURES
10-9-1: GENERAL INTENT:
Within the districts established by this Title, or amendments that may later be adopted, there exist lots,
structures, buildings, and uses of land which were lawful before this Title was passed or subsequently
amended, but which would be prohibited, regulated, or restricted under the terms of this Title or future
amendments.
A. It is the intent of this Chapter to permit these nonconformities to continue until they are removed or
abandoned, but not to encourage their survival. It is further the intent of this Chapter that
nonconformities shall not be enlarged upon, expanded or extended, nor be used as grounds for
adding other structures or uses prohibited elsewhere in the same district.
B. To avoid undue hardship, nothing in this Chapter shall be deemed to require a change in the plans,
construction, or designated use of any building on which construction was lawfully begun prior to
the effective date hereof or subsequent amendment of this Title and upon which substantial
improvements have been made.
C. Any use in existence at the time of adoption of this Title which was not an authorized
"nonconforming use" under the previous zoning ordinance shall not be authorized to continue as a
nonconforming use pursuant to this Chapter or amendments thereto. (Ord. 5-81, 9-1-1981)
10-9-2: NONCONFORMING USE OF LAND:
No existing nonconforming use shall be enlarged or increased, moved, nor extended to occupy a
greater area of land than was occupied at the effective date hereof or subsequent amendment of this
Title. If any such nonconforming use of land ceases for any reason for a period of more than one year,
any subsequent use of such land shall conform to the regulation specified by this Title for the district in
which such land is located. (Ord. 5-81, 9-1-1981)
10-9-3: NONCONFORMING USE OF STRUCTURES:
No existing structure devoted to a use not permitted by this Title in the district in which it is located
shall be enlarged, extended, reconstructed, or structurally altered except in changing the use of the
structure to a use permitted in the district in which it is located. If no structural alterations are made,
any nonconforming use of a structure, building and premises may be changed to another
nonconforming use of the same or of a more restricted classification. When a nonconforming use of a
structure, building or premises (including mobile homes) is discontinued or abandoned for one year,
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 327/349
the structure, building and premises shall not thereafter be used except in conformance with the
regulations of the district in which it is located. (Ord. 5-81, 9-1-1981)
10-9-4: NONCONFORMING STRUCTURES:
No nonconforming structure may be enlarged, altered or moved around on the lot in a way which
increases its nonconformity. However, should such a structure be destroyed by any means to an
extent of sixty percent (60%) or more of its replacement cost at time of destruction, it may only be
reconstructed to its original dimensions at its original location. (Ord. 5-81, 9-17-1991)
10-9-5: NONCONFORMING MOBILE HOMES:
No nonconforming mobile home may be replaced with another mobile home. (Ord. 5-81, 9-1-1981)
10-9-6: REGISTRATION OF NONCONFORMING USES AND STRUCTURES:
The owner of any use of land or structure in existence at the time of passage of this Title and made
nonconforming by the changes made in this Title shall apply for a nonconforming use certificate within
twelve (12) months after the effective date hereof. If the landowner has not registered the
nonconforming use of a structure within the twelve (12) month period, the Zoning Administrator shall
attempt to notify the landowner by certified mail of this requirement to register and allow thirty (30)
days to apply from date of receipt of notification. If the landowner receives said notification but fails to
register within thirty (30) days, the landowner is in violation of the Zoning Ordinance. If the landowner
does not receive said notification within eighteen (18) months of the effective date hereof, such
nonconforming use or structure shall be deemed legal and allowed to continue under the terms of this
Chapter. (Ord. 5-81, 9-1-1981)
10-9-7: REPAIRS AND MAINTENANCE:
All nonconforming structures may be repaired for normal maintenance. Nothing in this Chapter shall
be deemed to prevent the strengthening or restoring to a safe condition any building declared to be
unsafe by any official charged with protecting the public safety, upon order of such official. (Ord. 5-81,
9-1-1981)
Chapter 10
ZONING CHANGES AND AMENDMENTS
10-10-1: CHANGES AND AMENDMENTS; PROCEDURE:
The regulations imposed and districts created by this Title may be amended from time to time by the
City Council after a public hearing before the Council. The Council may, at its discretion, request a
report from the Planning and Zoning Commission on proposed regulation amendments or district
changes. At least fifteen (15) days' notice of the said Council hearing shall be published in a
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 328/349
newspaper having general circulation in the City. In case there is an adverse planning report or when
a protest is filed with the Council signed by the owners of twenty percent (20%) or more either of the
area of the lots included in such proposed change, or of those immediately adjacent thereto and within
two hundred feet (200') of the boundaries thereof, such amendments shall not be passed except by
the favorable vote of three-fourths (3/4) of all the members of the Council. (Ord. 5-93, 4-20-1993)
10-10-2: ZONING HEARINGS BY PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION:
Before making a report on a proposed amendment to the City Council, the Commission may upon the
Council's request hold a public hearing on the matter. Proper fifteen (15) days' notice shall be given
and a special notice of the hearing shall be given by mail to all interested parties including owners and
residents of property within two hundred feet (200') of the boundaries of the property under
consideration. (Ord. 5-93, 4-20-1993)
10-10-3: APPLICATION FOR CHANGE OF DISTRICT BOUNDARIES:
A. Application For Zone Change; Fee: Any person may submit to the Council an application
requesting a change in the zoning district boundaries as shown on the Official Zoning District Map.
Such application shall be filed with the City Manager accompanied by a fee of one hundred dollars
($100.00) and shall contain the following information: (1975 Code § 10-12-2; amd. Ord. 5-93, 4-20-
1993; 1998 Code)
1. The legal description and local address of the property.
2. The present zoning classification and the zoning classification requested for the property.
3. The existing use and proposed use of the property.
4. The names and addresses of the owners of all property within two hundred feet (200') of the
property for which the change is requested.
5. A statement of the reasons why the applicant feels the present zoning classification is no longer
valid.
6. A plat showing the locations, dimensions and use of the applicant's property and all property
within two hundred feet (200') thereof, including streets, alleys, railroads and other physical
features.
B. Fees Deposited To General Revenue Fund: All fees shall be deposited to the General Revenue
Fund of the City. Failure to approve the requested change shall not be deemed cause to refund the
fee to the applicant. (1975 Code § 10-12-2; amd. Ord. 5-93, 4-20-1993)
Title 11
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 329/349
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
11-1-1: SHORT TITLE:
This Title shall be known as the SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE OF THE CITY OF WEST LIBERTY,
IOWA. (Ord. 5-82, 7-20-1982)
11-1-2: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this Title is to provide minimum standards for the design, development, and
improvement of all new subdivisions and resubdivisions of land, so that existing land uses will be
protected, and so that adequate provisions are made for public facilities and services, and so that
growth occurs in an orderly manner, consistent with the Comprehensive Plan, and to promote the
public health, safety and general welfare of the citizens of the City. (Ord. 5-82, 7-20-1982)
11-1-3: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this Title, certain words herein shall be defined as, and interpreted as follows.
Words used in the present tense shall include the future, the singular shall include the plural, and the
plural shall include the singular, the masculine gender shall include the feminine, the term "shall" is
always mandatory, and the term "may" is permissive.
ALLEY: Public property dedicated to public use primarily for vehicular access to the back or side of
properties otherwise abutting on a street.
BLOCK: An area of land within a subdivision that is entirely bounded by streets, railroad rights of way,
rivers, tracts of public land, or the boundary of the subdivision.
CITY ENGINEER: The professional engineer registered in the State of Iowa designated as City
Engineer by the governing body or other hiring authority.
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN: The general plan for the development of the community, which may be
titled Master Plan, Comprehensive Plan or some other title, which Plan has been adopted by the
governing body. Such "Comprehensive Plan" shall include any part of such Plan separately adopted,
and any amendment to such Plan or parts thereof.
CUL-DE-SAC: A street having one end connecting to another street, and the other end terminated by
a vehicular turnaround.
EASEMENT: An authorization by a property owner for another to use a designated part of his property
for a specified purpose.
FLOOD HAZARD AREA: Any area subject to flooding by a one percent (1%) probability flood,
otherwise referred to as a 100-year flood; as designated by the Iowa Natural Resources Council or the
Federal Insurance Administration.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 330/349
FLOODWAY: The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent lands that must be
reserved in order to discharge the waters of a 100-year flood without cumulatively raising the
waterway surface elevation more than one foot (1').
GOVERNING BODY: The City Council of the City of West Liberty, Iowa.
IMPROVEMENTS: Changes to land necessary to prepare it for building sites including, but not limited
to, grading, filling, street paving, curb paving, sidewalks, walkways, water mains, sewers, drainage
ways, and other public works and appurtenances.
LOT: A portion of a subdivision or other parcel or tract intended as a unit for the purpose, whether
immediate or future, of transfer of ownership or for building development.
LOT, CORNER: A lot situated at the intersection of two (2) streets.
LOT, DOUBLE FRONTAGE: Any lot which is not a corner lot, which abuts two (2) streets.
OWNER: The legal entity holding title to the property being subdivided, or such representative or
agent as is fully empowered to act on its behalf.
PLANNING COMMISSION: The appointed commission designated by the governing body for the
purpose of this Title, and may also be the Zoning Commission, in which case such Commission shall
be known as the Planning and Zoning Commission.
PLAT: A map, drawing, or chart on which a subdivider's plan for the subdivision of land is presented,
which he submits for the approval and intends, in final form, to record.
PLATS OFFICER: The individual assigned the duty to administer this Title by the governing body or
other appointing authority.
RESUBDIVISION: Any subdivision of land which has previously been included in a recorded plat. In
appropriate context it may be a verb referring to the act of preparing a plat of previously subdivided
land.
STREET: Public property, not an alley, intended for vehicular circulation. In appropriate context with
the term "street", may refer to the right of way bounded by the property lines of such public property,
or may refer to the paving installed within such right of way.
STREET, ARTERIAL: The street primarily intended to carry traffic from one part of the City to another,
and not intended to provide access to abutting property.
STREET, MAJOR: An arterial street or other street which has or is planned to have continuity to carry
traffic from one section of the City to another.
SUBDIVIDER: The owner of the property being subdivided, or such other person or entity empowered
to act on the owner's behalf.
SUBDIVISION: The division of land into two (2) or more parts, for the purpose, whether immediate or
future, of transfer of ownership or building development. The term, when appropriate to the context,
may refer to the process of subdividing or to land subdivided. However, the sale or exchange of small
parcels of land to or between the owners of adjacent platted lots, where such sale or exchange does
not create any additional lots and where the land sold or exchanged constitutes less than fifty percent
(50%) of the area of the enlarged lot after such transfer, shall not be considered a subdivision.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 331/349
UTILITIES: Systems for the distribution or collection of water, gas, electricity, wastewater and storm
water. (Ord. 5-82, 7-20-1982)
11-1-4: PLATTING REQUIRED:
Every owner of any tract or parcel of land who has subdivided or shall hereafter subdivide or plat said
tract or parcel into two (2) or more parts, for the purpose of laying out an addition, subdivision, building
lot, or lots, acreage or suburban lots within the City or within two (2) miles from the corporate limits of
the City, shall cause plats of such area to be made in the form, and containing the information, as
hereinafter set forth before selling any lots therein contained or placing the plat on record. (Ord. 5-82,
7-20-1982)
11-1-5: RECORDING OF PLAT:
A. Approval Required: No subdivision plat, resubdivision plat or street dedication within the City, or
within two (2) miles of the corporate limits of the City, shall be filed for record with the County
Recorder, or recorded by the County Recorder, until a final plat of such subdivision, resubdivision,
or street dedication has been reviewed and approved in accordance with the provisions of this
Title.
B. Filing With County: Upon the approval of the final plat by the governing body, it shall be the duty of
the subdivider to immediately file such plat with the County Auditor and County Recorder, as
required by law. Such approval shall be revocable after thirty (30) days, unless such plat has been
duly recorded and evidence thereof filed with the City Clerk within such thirty (30) days. (Ord. 5-82,
7-20-1982)
11-1-6: FEES ESTABLISHED:
A. Fees Set By Resolution: The governing body shall, from time to time, establish by resolution fees
for the review of plats. No plat for any subdivision or resubdivision shall be considered filed with
the City Clerk, unless and until said plat is accompanied by the fee, as established by resolution of
the governing body, and as required by this Title. (Ord. 5-82, 7-20-1982)
11-1-7: BUILDING PERMIT ISSUANCE; CONDITIONS:
No building permit shall be issued for construction on any lot, parcel, or tract, where a subdivision is
required by this Title, unless and until a final plat of such subdivision has been approved and recorded
in accordance with this Title, and until the improvements required by this Title have been accepted by
the City. (Ord. 5-82, 7-20-1982)
11-1-8: VARIANCES:
Where, in the case of a particular proposed subdivision, it can be shown that strict compliance with the
requirements of this Title would result in extraordinary hardship to the subdivider, because of unusual
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 332/349
topography or other conditions, the governing body may vary, modify or waive the requirements so
that substantial justice may be done and the public interest secured. Provided, however, that such
variance, modification or waiver will not have the effect of nullifying the intent and purpose of this Title.
In no case shall any variance or modification be more than minimum easing of the requirements as
necessary to eliminate the hardship. In so granting a variance, the governing body may impose such
additional conditions as are necessary to secure substantially the objectives of the requirements so
varied, modified, or waived. (Ord. 5-82, 7-20-1982)
11-1-9: CHANGES AND AMENDMENTS:
This Title or any provision of this Title may be changed or amended from time to time by the governing
body; provided, however, that such changes or amendments shall not become effective until after a
public hearing has been held, public notice of which shall have been published at least once, not less
than four (4) days nor more than twenty (20) days before the date of the hearing. (Ord. 5-82, 7-20-
1982)
11-1-10: MOST RESTRICTIVE PROVISIONS APPLY:
Nothing contained herein shall serve to abrogate, limit, repeal, or otherwise modify any other
ordinance or regulation except as expressly set forth herein. If any provision of this Title conflicts with
the provisions of any other ordinance, regulation, or statute, the most restrictive shall apply. (Ord. 5-
82, 7-20-1982)
11-1-11: SEVERABILITY CLAUSE:
If any section, provision or part of this Title shall be adjudged invalid or unconstitutional, such
adjudication shall not affect the validity of the Title as a whole or any section, provision or part thereof
not adjudged invalid or unconstitutional. (Ord. 5-82, 7-20-1982)
11-1-12: PENALTY:
Any person who shall dispose of or offer for sale any lot or lots within the area of jurisdiction of this
Title, until the plat thereof has been approved by the governing body, and recorded as required by law,
shall forfeit and pay a penalty pursuant to Section 1-4-1 of this Code for each lot or part of lot sold,
disposed of or offered for sale. Nothing contained herein shall in any way limit the City's right to any
other remedies available to the City for the enforcement of this Title. (Ord. 5-82, 7-20-1982; amd. 1998
Code)
Chapter 2
PLAT PROCEDURES AND REQUIREMENTS
11-2-1: PRE-APPLICATION CONFERENCE:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 333/349
A. Scheduling Of Conference: Whenever a subdivision located within the platting jurisdiction of the
City is proposed, the owner and subdivider shall schedule a pre-application conference with the
Plats Officer. The conference should be attended by the Plats Officer and such other City or utility
representatives as is deemed desirable, and by the owner and his engineer, and/or planner, as
deemed desirable.
B. Purpose Of Conference: The purpose of such conference shall be to acquaint the City with the
proposed subdivision, and to acquaint the subdivider with the requirements, procedures, and any
special problems relating to the proposed subdivision. (Ord. 5-82, 7-20-1982)
11-2-2: SKETCH PLAN REQUIRED:
For the pre-application conference, the subdivider shall provide a map or sketch showing the location
of the subdivision, the general location of any proposed streets and other improvements, and the
general layout and arrangement of intended land uses in relation to the surrounding area. (Ord. 5-82,
7-20-1982)
11-2-3: PRESENTATION TO PLANNING COMMISSION AND CITY COUNCIL:
The subdivider may present the sketch plan to the Planning Commission and governing body for
review prior to incurring significant cost preparing the preliminary or final plat. (Ord. 5-82, 7-20-1982)
11-2-4: SUBDIVISION CLASSIFIED:
Any proposed subdivision or resubdivision shall be classified as a minor subdivision or a major
subdivision.
A. Minor Subdivision: Any subdivision which contains not more than four (4) lots fronting on an
existing street and which does not require construction of any public improvements, and which
does not adversely affect the remainder of the parcel shall be classified as a minor plat.
B. Major Subdivision: Any subdivision which, in the opinion of the governing body, does not for any
reason meet the definition of a minor plat, shall be classified as a major subdivision. (Ord. 5-82, 7-
20-1982)
11-2-5: PLATS REQUIRED:
In order to secure approval of any proposed subdivision, the owner and subdivider shall submit to the
City, plats and other information as required by this Title. The owner and subdivider of any major
subdivision shall comply with the requirements for a preliminary plat and the requirements for a final
plat. The owner and subdivider of a minor subdivision may elect to omit the submission of a
preliminary plat. (Ord. 5-82, 7-20-1982)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 334/349
11-2-6: REQUIREMENTS OF PRELIMINARY PLAT:
A. Preparation And Filing: The subdivider shall prepare and file with the City Clerk, twenty (20) copies
of the preliminary plat, drawn at a scale of one inch equals one hundred feet (1" = 100') or larger.
Sheet size shall not exceed twenty four inches by thirty six inches (24" x 36"). Where more than
one sheet is required, the sheets shall show the number of the sheet and the total number of
sheets in the plat, and match lines indicating where other sheets adjoin.
B. Contents Of Plat: The preliminary plat shall be clearly marked "Preliminary Plat" and shall show or
have attached thereto, the following:
1. Title, scale, north point and date.
2. Proposed name of the subdivision which shall not duplicate or resemble existing subdivision
names in the County.
3. The name and address of the owner and the name, address and profession of the person
preparing the plan.
4. A key map showing the general location of the proposed subdivision in relation to surrounding
development.
5. The names and locations of adjacent subdivisions and the names of record owners and location
of adjoining parcels of unplatted land. A list of all owners of record of property located within two
hundred feet (200') of the subdivision boundary shall be attached.
6. The location of property lines, streets and alleys, easements, buildings, utilities, watercourses,
tree masses, and other features affecting the plat.
7. Existing and proposed zoning of the proposed subdivision and adjoining property.
8. Contours at vertical intervals of not more than two feet (2') if the general slope of the site is less
than ten percent (10%) and at vertical intervals of not more than five feet (5') if the general slope
is ten percent (10%) or greater.
9. The legal description of the area being platted.
10. The boundary of the area being platted, shown as a dark line, with the approximate length of
boundary lines and the approximate location of the property in reference to known section lines.
11. The layout, number and approximate dimensions of proposed lots.
12. The location, width and dimensions of all streets and alleys proposed to be dedicated for public
use.
13. The proposed names for all streets in the area being platted.
14. Present and proposed utility systems, including sanitary and storm sewers, other drainage
facilities, water lines, gas mains, electric utilities, and other facilities.
15. Proposed easements, showing locations, widths, purposes and limitations.
16. Parcels of land proposed to be dedicated or reserved for schools, parks, playgrounds, or other
public, semi-public or community purposes, or shown for such purpose in the Comprehensive
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 335/349
Plan or other adopted plans.
17. A general summary description of any protective covenants or private restrictions to be
incorporated in the final plat.
18. Any other pertinent information, as necessary.
19. The fee as required by this Title1. (Ord. 5-82, 7-20-1982)
11-2-7: PROCEDURES FOR REVIEW OF PRELIMINARY PLATS:
A. Distribution Of Copies Of Plat: The City Clerk, upon receipt of twenty (20) copies of the preliminary
plat, shall file one copy in the records of the City, shall retain one copy for public inspection, and
shall forward the remaining copies of the plat to the plats officer.
B. Schedule Plat For Consideration: The plats officer shall provide copies of the plat to the City
Engineer, and such other person as necessary to review the plat, and shall schedule the plat for
consideration by the Planning Commission.
C. Planning Commission Report To Governing Body: The Planning Commission shall examine the plat
and report of the City Engineer, and such other information as it deems necessary or desirable, to
ascertain whether the plan conforms to the ordinances of the City, and conforms to the
Comprehensive Plan and other duly adopted plans of the City. The Planning Commission shall,
within forty five (45) days of the filing of the plat with the City Clerk, forward a report and
recommendation regarding the plat to the governing body. If such recommendation is to
disapprove or modify the plat, the reason therefor shall be set forth in writing in the report, and a
copy of the report and recommendation shall be provided to the applicant.
D. Decision Of Governing Body: The governing body shall examine the plat, the report of the City
Engineer, the report of the Planning Commission, and such other information as it deems
necessary or desirable. Upon such examination, the governing body shall ascertain whether the
plat conforms to the ordinances and standards of the City, conforms to the Comprehensive Plan
and other duly adopted plans of the City, and will be conducive to the orderly growth and
development of the City; in order to protect the public health, safety, and welfare. Following such
examination, the governing body may approve, approve subject to conditions, or disapprove the
plat. If the decision of the governing body is to disapprove the plat, or to approve the plat subject to
conditions, the reasons therefor shall be set forth in writing in the official records of the governing
body, and such decisions shall be provided to the applicant. Action on the preliminary plat by the
governing body shall be taken within sixty (60) days of the filing of the plan with the City Clerk,
unless such time period is extended by agreement between the subdivider and the City. (Ord. 5-
82, 7-20-1982)
11-2-8: DURATION OF APPROVAL OF PRELIMINARY PLAT:
The approval of a preliminary plat by the governing body shall be valid for a period of one year from
the date of such approval, after which such approval shall be void, and the subdivider shall take no
action requiring the precedent approval of a preliminary plat except upon application for and approval
of an extension of such period of validity, by the governing body. (Ord. 5-82, 7-20-1982)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 336/349
11-2-9: AUTHORIZATION TO INSTALL IMPROVEMENTS:
The approval of the preliminary plat shall constitute authorization by the governing body for the
installation of improvements as required by this Title, and as shown on the preliminary plat; provided,
no such improvement shall be constructed or installed until and unless the plans, profiles, cross
sections, and specifications for the construction of such improvement has been submitted to, and
approved in writing by the City Engineer. (Ord. 5-82, 7-20-1982)
11-2-10: COMPLETION AND ACCEPTANCE OF IMPROVEMENTS:
Before the governing body will approve the final plat, all of the foregoing improvements shall be
constructed and accepted by formal resolution of the City Council. Before passage of said resolution
of acceptance, the City Engineer shall report that said improvements meet all City specifications and
ordinances or other City requirements, and the agreements between the subdivider and the City. (Ord.
5-82, 7-20-1982)
11-2-11: PERFORMANCE BOND PERMITTED:
In lieu of the requirements that improvements be completed prior to the approval of a final plat, the
subdivider may post a performance bond with the City, guaranteeing that improvements not completed
shall be completed within a period of two (2) years from the date of approval of such final plat; but
such approval of the plat shall not constitute final acceptance of any improvements to be constructed.
Improvements will be accepted only after their construction has been completed. (Ord. 5-82, 7-20-
1982)
11-2-12: REQUIREMENT OF FINAL PLAT:
A. Filing Of Final Plat: The subdivider shall, within one year from the date of approval of the
preliminary plat, unless such time period has been extended, prepare and file with the City Clerk
twenty (20) copies of the final plat and required attachments, as set forth in this Title. Except for a
final plat for a minor subdivision as set forth herein, no final plat shall be considered by the
governing body until and unless a preliminary plat for the area included in the proposed final plat
has been approved and has not expired and become void as set forth above.
B. Scale And Size: The final plat shall be drawn at a scale of one inch equals one hundred feet
(1" x 100') or larger. Sheet size shall be no greater than eighteen inches by twenty four inches
(18" x 24") nor smaller than eight and one-half inches by eleven inches (81/2" x 11") and shall be of
a size acceptable to the County Auditor. If more than one sheet is used, each sheet shall clearly
show the number of the sheet, the total number of sheets included in the plat, and match lines
indicating where other sheets adjoin.
C. Contents Of Final Plat: The final plat shall be clearly marked "Final Plat" and shall show the
following:
1. The name of the subdivision.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 337/349
2. Name and address of the owner and subdivider.
3. Scale, and a graphic bar scale, north arrow and date on each sheet.
4. All monuments to be of record, as required by Iowa Code chapter 409A.
5. Sufficient survey data to positively describe the bounds of every lot, block, street, easement, or
other areas shown on the plat, as well as the outer boundaries of the subdivided lands.
6. All distance, bearing, curve, and other survey data, as required by Iowa Code chapter 409A.
7. All adjoining properties shall be identified, and where such adjoining properties are a part of the
recorded subdivision, the names of that subdivision shall be shown. If the subdivision platted is a
recorded subdivision, sufficient ties shall be shown to controlling lines appearing on the earlier
plat to permit an overlay to be made. Resubdivision shall be labeled as such in a subtitle
following the name of the subdivision wherever the name appears on the plat.
8. Street names and clear designation of public alleys.
9. Block and lot numbers.
10. Accurate dimensions for any property to be dedicated or reserved for public use, and the
purpose for which such property is dedicated or reserved for public use.
11. The purpose of any easement shown on the plat shall be confined to only those easements
pertaining to public utilities including gas, power, telephone, cable television, water, sewer,
easements for ingress and egress, and such drainage easements as are deemed necessary for
the orderly development of the land encompassed within the plat.
12. All interior excepted parcels, clearly indicated and labeled, "not a part of this plat".
13. A strip of land shall not be reserved by the subdivider unless the land is of sufficient size and
shape to be of some practical use or service as determined by the governing body.
14. The minimum unadjusted acceptable error of closure for all subdivision boundaries shall be
one to ten thousand (1 to 10,000) and shall be one to five thousand (1 to 5,000) for any
individual lot.
15. A statement by a registered land surveyor that the plat was prepared by the surveyor or under
the surveyor's direct personal supervision, signed and dated by the surveyor and bearing the
surveyor's Iowa registration number or seal; and a sealed certification of the accuracy of the plat
by the registered land surveyor who drew the plat. (Ord. 5-82, 7-20-1982)
11-2-13: ATTACHMENTS TO FINAL PLAT:
The following shall be attached to and accompany any final plat:
A. A certificate by the owner and his spouse, if any, that the subdivision is with their free consent, and
is in accordance with the desire of the owner and spouse. This certificate must be signed and
acknowledged by the owner and spouse before some officer authorized to take the
acknowledgements of deeds.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 338/349
B. A complete abstract of title and an attorney's opinion showing that the fee title to the subdivision
land is in the owner and that the land is free from encumbrances other than those secured by an
encumbrance bond.
C. A certificate from the County Treasurer that the subdivision land is free from taxes.
D. A certificate from the Clerk of the District Court that the subdivision land is free from all judgments,
attachments, or mechanics or other liens of record in his office.
E. A certificate from the County Recorder that the title in fees is in the owner and that it is free from
encumbrances other than those secured by an encumbrance bond.
F. The encumbrance bond, if any.
G. A statement of restrictions of all types that run with the land become covenants in the deeds of lots.
H. A certificate by the City Engineer that all required improvements have been satisfactorily completed
in accordance with the construction plans as approved and in substantial compliance with the
approved preliminary plat. Prior to such certification, as-built plans for all improvements shall have
been provided to the City Engineer. In lieu thereof, the City Clerk may certify that a performance
bond guaranteeing completion has been approved by the City Attorney and filed with the Clerk, or
that the governing body has agreed that the City will provide the necessary improvements and
installations and assess the cost against the subdivider of future property owners in the
subdivision.
I. Where the improvements have been installed, a resolution accepting and approving such
improvements, along with the maintenance bond required by this Title.
J. If private streets or other private improvements have been approved, an agreement in the form of a
covenant running with the land, in a form approved by the City Attorney, providing for the
construction or reconstruction of any improvements to meet City standards, the assessment of all
cost to the property owners in the event of annexation and dedication and acceptance, shall be
required.
K. A resolution and certificate for the approval by the Council and for signatures of the Mayor and
Clerk.
L. The applicable fee, if any. (Ord. 5-82, 7-20-1982)
11-2-14: PROCEDURES FOR REVIEW OF FINAL PLATS:
A. The City Clerk, upon receipt of twenty (20) copies of the final plat, shall file one copy in the records
of the City, shall retain one copy for the public inspection, and shall forward the remaining copies to
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 339/349
the plats officer.
B. The plats officer shall provide copies of the plat to the City Engineer, and such other persons as are
necessary to review the plat, and shall schedule the plat for review by the governing body.
C. The plats officer and the City Engineer shall examine the plat as to its compliance with the
ordinances and standards of the City, and its conformance with the preliminary plat, and shall set
forth their findings in writing. A copy of the findings shall be provided to the subdivider.
D. If the plat is found to substantially conform to the preliminary plat as approved, the final plat shall be
forwarded to the governing body for review. If the plat is found not to conform to the preliminary
plat, it shall be referred to the Planning Commission for review, prior to review by the governing
body. The Planning Commission shall then review the plat and shall forward a written
recommendation thereon to the governing body within forty five (45) days of the filing of the plat
with the City Clerk. If the recommendation is to disapprove the plat, or to require modification of the
plat, the reasons therefor shall be set forth in writing, and a copy of the recommendation shall be
provided to the subdivider.
E. Upon receipt of the plat and written reports thereon, the governing body shall review the plat and
attachments thereto. If the plat is found to conform to the ordinances and standards of the City and
the Comprehensive Plan and other duly adopted plans, all as of the date of approval of the
preliminary plat; and is found to substantially conform to the preliminary plat, the governing body
shall approve the plat, and shall cause its approval to be entered on the plat as required by law.
F. Action on the final plat, by the governing body, shall be taken within sixty (60) days of the date of
filing of the plat with the City Clerk, unless such time period is extended by agreement between the
subdivider and the City. If the action is to disapprove the plat, the reasons therefor shall be set
forth in the official records of the governing body and such decision shall be provided to the
subdivider. (Ord. 5-82, 7-20-1982)
Chapter 3
DESIGN STANDARDS
11-3-1: STANDARDS PRESCRIBED:
The standards set forth in this Title shall be considered the minimum standards necessary to protect
the public health, safety, and general welfare. (Ord. 5-82, 7-20-1982)
11-3-2: LAND SUITABILITY:
A. Unsuitability Reasons: No land shall be subdivided which is found to be unsuitable for subdividing
by reason of flooding, ponding, poor drainage, adverse soil conditions, adverse geological
formations, unsatisfactory topography or other conditions likely to be harmful to the public health,
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 340/349
safety or general welfare, unless such unsuitable conditions are corrected to the satisfaction of the
City.
B. Data Presented By Subdivider: If land is found to be unsuitable for subdivision for any of the
reasons cited in this Section, the governing body shall state its reasons in writing and afford the
subdivider an opportunity to present data regarding such unsuitability. Thereafter, the governing
body may reaffirm, modify or withdraw its determination regarding such unsuitability. (Ord. 5-82, 7-
20-1982)
11-3-3: LANDS SUBJECT TO FLOODING:
A. Approval By State; Compliance With Zoning: No subdivision containing land located in a floodway
or a flood hazard area shall be approved by the City without the approval of the Iowa Natural
Resources Council. No lot shall be located so as to include land located within a floodway or flood
hazard area unless the lot is of such size and shape that it will contain a buildable area not within
the floodway or flood hazard area, suitable for development as allowed by the Zoning Ordinance
(Title 10 of this Code) for the zone in which the lot is located.
B. Conditions For Inclusion: Land located within a flood hazard area or a floodway may be included
within a plat as follows, subject to the approval of the City:
1. Included within individual lots in the subdivision, subject to the limitations of this Section.
2. Reserved as open space for recreation use by all owners of lots in the subdivision with an
appropriate legal instrument, approved by the City, providing for its care and maintenance by
such owners.
3. If acceptable to the City, dedicated to the City as public open space for recreation or flood
control purposes. (Ord. 5-82, 7-20-1982)
11-3-4: PLAT TO CONFORM TO COMPREHENSIVE PLAN:
The arrangement, character, extent, width, grade and location of all streets and the general nature and
extent of the lots and uses proposed shall conform to the Comprehensive Plan of the City, provided
such Plan has been adopted by the City, and shall conform to such other plans, including but not
limited to a Major Street Plan, a Sanitary Sewer System Plan, or a Parks and Open Space Plan,
provided such Plan has been adopted by the City. (Ord. 5-82, 7-20-1982)
11-3-5: CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS FOR IMPROVEMENTS:
A. Adoption Of Technical Standards: In addition to the standards set forth in this Title, the City
Engineer shall from time to time prepare, and the governing body shall from time to time adopt by
resolution, technical standards for public improvements. Such technical standards for public
improvements shall contain the minimum acceptable specifications for the construction of public
improvements. Such technical standards may vary for classes of improvements, giving due regard
to the classification of streets or other improvements, and the extent and character of the area
served by the improvements.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 341/349
B. Effect Of Standards: Upon adoption by the governing body by resolution, such technical standards
for public improvements shall have such force and effect as if they were fully set forth herein. (Ord.
5-82, 7-20-1982)
11-3-6: STREET STANDARDS:
The following standards shall apply to all streets to be located within the subdivision:
A. Continuation Of Major Streets: Streets shall provide for the continuation of major streets from
adjoining platted areas, and the extension of major streets into adjoining unplatted areas. Where a
plat encompasses the location for a major street proposed in the Comprehensive Plan or Major
Street Plan, the plat shall provide for such major street.
B. Grades: Street grades shall align to existing streets, and all grades for streets shall be as approved
by the City.
C. Arterial Streets: Arterial streets shall be located so as to not require direct access from the arterial
street to abutting lots.
D. Widths: Street right-of-way widths and pavement widths shall be as specified in the Comprehensive
Plan, Major Streets Plan, or technical standards for public improvements.
E. Half Streets: Half Streets are prohibited, except, where an existing platted half-street abuts the
subdivision, a platted half street to complete the street shall be required.
F. Minor Streets: Minor streets should be designed to discourage through traffic while safely
connecting to major collector or arterial streets.
G. Street Jogs: Street jogs with center-line offsets of less than one hundred twenty five feet (125')
shall be prohibited, except where topography, or other physical conditions make such jogs
unavoidable.
H. Intersections: Streets shall intersect as nearly at right angles as possible, and no street shall
intersect any other street at less than sixty degrees (60°).
I. Lot Corners: At intersections of major streets, and otherwise as necessary, lot corners abutting the
intersection shall be rounded with a radius sufficient to provide necessary space within the right of
way for sidewalks, traffic-control devices, and other necessary improvements without
encroachment onto the corner lots.
J. Dead-End Streets: Dead-end streets are prohibited, except where a street is planned to continue
past the subdivider's property, a temporary dead-end may be allowed.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 342/349
K. Connectors Or Loops: Streets which connect with other streets, or loop streets, are preferable for
maintenance, fire protection and circulation, but cul-de-sacs may be permitted. Cul-de-sacs shall
not exceed five hundred feet (500') in length.
L. Alleys: In general, alleys shall be prohibited in residential areas and required in commercial areas
with normal street frontage. Dead-end alleys are prohibited unless provided with a turnaround with
a minimum right-of-way diameter of one hundred feet (100').
M. Larger Than Normal Lots: When a tract is subdivided into larger than normal lots or parcels, such
lots or parcels shall be arranged as to permit the logical location and opening of future streets and
appropriate resubdivision with provision for adequate utility connections for such resubdivision.
Easements for the future openings and extensions for such streets or utilities may, at the discretion
of the governing body, be made a requirement of the plat.
N. Street Names: Streets which are, or will become, extensions of existing streets shall be given the
same name as the existing streets. New street names shall not be the same or sound similar to
existing street names. All street names shall be at the approval of the governing body.
O. Private Streets: Private streets, not dedicated to the City, shall be avoided. The governing body
may approve a private street where unusual conditions make a private street desirable, provided
adequate covenants or other legal documents ensure that the City will not have or need to assume
any maintenance or other responsibility for such street. (Ord. 5-82, 7-20-1982)
11-3-7: BLOCK AND LOT STANDARDS:
The following standards shall apply to the layout of blocks and lots in all subdivisions, and to the
extent possible, in all resubdivisions:
A. Residential Blocks: No residential block shall be longer than one thousand three hundred feet
(1,300') or shorter than three hundred feet (300') measured from street line to street line. The width
of blocks should be arranged so as to allow two (2) tiers of lots, with utility easement.
B. Easements: In blocks over seven hundred feet (700') in length, the governing body may require a
public way or an easement at least ten feet (10') in width, at or near the center of the block, for use
by pedestrians.
C. Block Size And Shape: The size and shape of blocks or lots intended for commercial or industrial
use shall be adequate to provide for the use intended, and to meet the parking, loading, and other
requirements for such uses contained in the Zoning Ordinance (Title 10 of this Code).
D. Lot Arrangement And Design: Lot arrangement and design shall be such that all lots will provide
satisfactory building sites, properly related to topography and surrounding land uses.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 343/349
E. Lot Size And Shape: The size and shape of all lots shall comply with all requirements of the Zoning
Ordinance for the zone in which the lot is located.
F. Lots To Abut Street; Frontage: All lots shall abut a public street, or upon an approved private street,
with a minimum frontage of at least thirty five feet (35') measured as a straight line between the
two (2) front lot corners.
G. Access To Streets: Unless unavoidable, lots shall not front, or have direct access to arterial streets.
Where unavoidable, lots shall be so arranged as to minimize the number of access points.
H. Lot Lines Relative To Street: All lot lines shall be at right angles to straight street lines or radial to
curved street lines, except where, in the judgment of the governing body, a variation to this
provision will provide a better street and lot layout.
I. Corner Lots; Front Yard Setback: Corner lots shall have sufficient extra width to permit the required
front yard setback as specified in the Zoning Ordinance, oriented to either street.
J. Reversed Or Double Frontage Lots: Reversed frontage lots are prohibited. Double frontage lots
shall only be permitted where abutting a major street and a minor street, and such lots shall front
only on the minor street.
K. Drainage; Percolation Tests: Any lot not to be served by a sanitary sewage system shall have
sufficient area to allow for a satisfactory drain field. No subdivision to be served by septic systems
shall be approved by the governing body until percolation tests have been performed and the
results of said tests have been provided to, and reported on, by the City Engineer. (Ord. 5-82, 7-
20-1982)
11-3-8: PARKS AND OPEN SPACE:
All residential subdivisions should be so designed as to meet the neighborhood park and open space
needs of its residents. Such needs may be met by dedication and acceptance of public park land
and/or by reservation by covenant of private open space, provided there shall exist sufficient
covenants, running with the land, to ensure adequate maintenance by the property owners benefiting
from such open space. (Ord. 5-82, 7-20-1982)
11-3-9: PARKS AND SCHOOL SITES RESERVED:
When a tract being subdivided includes lands proposed to be parks or school sites in the
Comprehensive Plan or other official plan of the City, the subdivider shall indicate such areas on the
plat.
A. Park Sites: Proposed park sites shall be reserved for three (3) years, giving the City or other
authorized public agency the option to purchase the land at the appraised raw land value prior to
the subdivision as established by a certified land appraiser. The purchase price shall also include
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 344/349
one-half (1/2) of the cost of grading and paving, including curbs, of the portion of any streets that
are contiguous to the site and any taxes and interest incurred by the subdivider between the date
of reservation and the date of purchase by the public agency. Should the park site not be
purchased within three (3) years, the subdivider may then amend the final plat.
B. School Sites: Proposed school sites shall be reserved for three (3) years, giving the appropriate
school district the option to purchase the land at the appraised raw land value prior to the
subdivision as established by a certified land appraiser. The purchase price shall also include onehalf
(1/2) of the cost of the grading and paving, including curbs, of the portion of any streets that
are contiguous to the site and any taxes and interest incurred by the subdivider between the date
of reservation and the date of purchase by the school district. Should the school sites not be
purchased within three (3) years, the subdivider may then amend the final plat. (Ord. 5-82, 7-20-
1982)
Chapter 4
REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS
11-4-1: IMPROVEMENTS REQUIRED:
The subdivider shall, at his expense, install and construct all improvements required by this Title. All
required improvements shall be installed and constructed in accordance with the design standards
established for such improvements by the City, and as shown on the approved preliminary plat. (Ord.
5-82, 7-20-1982)
11-4-2: INSPECTION:
All improvements shall be inspected to ensure compliance with the requirements of this Title. The cost
of such inspection shall be borne by the subdivider, and shall be the actual cost of the inspection to
the City. (Ord. 5-82, 7-20-1982)
11-4-3: MINIMUM IMPROVEMENTS:
The improvements set forth below shall be considered the minimum improvements necessary to
protect the public health, safety and welfare: (Ord. 5-82, 7-20-1982)
A. Streets:
1. All streets and alleys within the platted area which are dedicated for public use shall be brought
to grade approved by the governing body after receiving the report and recommendations of the
City Engineer or designee. Street grades, wherever feasible, shall not exceed five percent (5%),
with due allowance for reasonable vertical curves. No street grade shall be less than one-half
(1/2) of one percent (1%).
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 345/349
2. All roadways shall be surfaced with Portland cement concrete or with asphaltic concrete over a
crushed stone base as the governing body may require.
3. Curb and gutter shall be required on all streets. All curb and gutter shall be constructed to the
grade approved by the governing body after receiving the report and recommendations of the
City Engineer or designee. Newly constructed curbs and gutters shall comply with the Americans
with Disabilities Guidelines (ADAAG). (1998 Code)
4. Under some circumstances the City may require, as a condition for approval of the plat,
dedication and improvement of a street having a width greater than necessary to meet the needs
of the platted area, but necessary to complete the City street system as it relates to both the
area being platted and other areas. In such event, the City will pay the subdivider the difference
in cost of improving the wider street and the street width reasonable to meet the foreseeable
needs of the subdivision taken alone. The streets shall, upon final approval and acceptance by
the City, become the property of the City. (Ord. 5-82, 7-20-1982; amd. 1998 Code)
B. Sanitary Sewer System:
1. The subdivider of the land being platted shall make adequate provision for the disposal of
sanitary sewage from the platted area with due regard being given to present or reasonably
foreseeable needs. There shall be constructed, at the subdivider's expense, a sanitary sewer
system including all necessary pumping stations, pumping equipment, manholes, and all other
necessary or desirable appurtenances to provide for the discharge of sanitary sewage from all
lots or parcels of land within the platted area to a connection with the City's sanitary sewers. The
sanitary sewer system shall be constructed in accordance with the plans and specifications of
the City and at the sewer grades as established by the City.
2. Under some circumstances, the City may require, as a condition for approval of the plat,
installation of a sanitary sewer that is larger than necessary to meet the needs of the platted
area, but necessary to complete the City sanitary sewer system as it relates to both the area
being platted and other areas. In such event, the City will pay the subdivider the difference in
cost of pipe and installation between the larger sewer and the diameter of sewer reasonable to
meet the foreseeable needs of the area.
3. The above mentioned facilities for the collection and disposal of sanitary sewage from the
platted areas shall, upon final approval and acceptance by the City, become the property of the
City.
C. Storm Sewer System:
1. The subdivider of land being platted shall install and construct a storm sewer system adequate
to serve the area, including anticipated extension of use to serve additional area. The storm
sewer system shall be constructed in accordance with plans and specifications of the City and at
sewer grades established by the City.
2. Under some circumstances, the City may require, as a condition for approval of the plat,
installation of a storm sewer system that is larger than necessary to meet the needs of the
platted area, but necessary to complete the City storm sewer system as it relates to both the
area being platted and other areas. In such event, the City will pay the subdivider the difference
in cost of pipe and installation between the larger sewer and the diameter of sewer reasonable
to meet the foreseeable needs of the area.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 346/349
3. The sewers shall, upon inspection, approval, and acceptance by the City, become the property
of the City. In the storm sewer design phase, consideration shall be given to alternatives and
principles of storm water management, or the provisions of a storm water management plan if
such plan has been adopted by the City.
D. Water Main System:
1. The subdivider of land being platted shall install and construct a water main system to
adequately serve all lots or parcels of land within the platted area, with due regard to the present
and reasonably foreseeable needs of the entire area, and shall connect the same to the City's
existing water mains.
2. Under some circumstances, the City may require, as a condition for approval of the plat,
installation of a water main that is larger than necessary to meet the needs of the platted area,
but necessary to complete the City water distribution system as it relates to both the area being
platted and other areas. In such event, the City will pay the subdivider the difference in cost of
pipe and installation between the larger water main and the diameter of water main reasonable
to meet the foreseeable needs of the area.
3. The water mains shall, upon inspection, approval, and acceptance by the City, become the
property of the City.
E. Other Improvements: The owner and subdivider of the land being platted shall be responsible for
the installation of sidewalks within the street area; the installation of walkways as necessary;
grading, seeding or sodding of all lots; the planting of any required trees in the parking area; the
installation of street signs, and the provision of street lighting. All such improvements shall be
under the direction of the City Engineer or director of the electric utility, as appropriate. (Ord. 5-82,
7-20-1982)
11-4-4: EASEMENTS REQUIRED:
A. Public Utilities: Where alleys are not provided, or where otherwise required by the present or future
placement of public utilities, easements of not less than ten feet (10') in width shall be granted by
the owner along rear, and where necessary, along side lot lines for public utility requirements.
Except where prohibited by topography, such easements shall be centered on lot lines. Easements
of greater width may be required along lot lines, or across lots when necessary for the placement
and maintenance of utilities. No building or structure, except as necessary for utilities, shall be
permitted on such easements.
B. Easements Along Streams And Watercourses: Wherever any stream or surface watercourse is
located in an area that is being subdivided, the subdivider shall, at his own expense, make
adequate provisions for the proper drainage of surface water and shall provide and dedicate to the
City an easement along said stream or watercourse as necessary for the proper maintenance of
the watercourse, and as approved by the City. (Ord. 5-82, 7-20-1982)
11-4-5: MAINTENANCE BOND REQUIRED:
The owner and subdivider of the land being platted shall be required to provide to the City proper
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 347/349
maintenance bonds, satisfactory to the City, so as to ensure that for a period of two (2) years from the
date of acceptance of any improvements, the owner and subdivider shall be responsible to maintain
such improvements in good repair. (Ord. 5-82, 7-20-1982)
11-4-6: ALTERNATIVE SYSTEMS FOR SEWER OR WATER:
Where connection to the City sewer or water system cannot reasonably be made, the City may
approve alternate facilities for the distribution of water or the collection and disposal of sanitary
wastes. Such alternate systems shall be designed to fully protect the public health, safety and welfare,
and shall meet all requirements of State, County, or other applicable health regulations. Prior to
granting approval of such alternate systems, the City shall require that the owner and the subdivider
provide to the City a waiver of assessment protest or such other legally binding documents necessary
to protect the City from the expense of the subsequent installation of sewer or water facilities. (Ord. 5-
82, 7-20-1982)
Title 12
TAX EXEMPTIONS
Chapter 1
INDUSTRIAL PROPERTY
12-1-1: PARTIAL TAX EXEMPTION:
There is hereby provided a partial exemption from property taxation of the actual value added to
industrial real estate by the new construction of industrial real estate and the acquisition of or
improvement to machinery and equipment assessed as real estate pursuant to Iowa Code section
427A.1, subsection 1, paragraph e, and subsequent amendments. (Ord. 5-89, 6-20-1989)
12-1-2: NEW CONSTRUCTION DEFINED:
"New construction" as referred to herein means new buildings and structures and includes new
buildings and structures which are constructed as additions to existing buildings and structures. New
construction does not include reconstruction of an existing building or structure which does not
constitute complete replacement of an existing building or structure nor refitting of an existing building
or structure, unless the reconstruction of an existing building or structure is required due to economic
obsolescence and the reconstruction is necessary to implement recognized industry standards for the
manufacturing and processing of specific products and the reconstruction is required for the owner of
the building or structure to continue to competitively manufacture or process those products, which
determination shall receive prior approval from the City Council upon the recommendation of the Iowa
Development Commission. (Ord. 5-89, 6-20-1989)
12-1-3: NEW MACHINERY AND EQUIPMENT:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 348/349
The new machinery and equipment referred to herein means new machinery and equipment assessed
as real estate pursuant to Iowa Code section 427A.1, subsection 1, paragraph e, unless the
machinery or equipment is part of the normal replacement or operating process to maintain or expand
the existing operational status. (Ord. 5-89, 6-20-1989)
12-1-4: AMOUNT OF EXEMPTION:
The actual value added to industrial real estate for the reasons specified in Section 12-1-1 of this
Chapter is eligible to receive a partial exemption from taxation for a period of five (5) years. "Actual
value added" as used in this Chapter means the actual value added as of the first year for which the
exemption is received, except that actual value added by improvements to machinery and equipment
means the actual value as determined by the assessor as of January 1 of each year for which the
exemption is received. The amount of actual value added which is eligible to be exempt from taxation
shall be as follows:
First year 75 percent
Second year 60 percent
Third year 45 percent
Fourth year 30 percent
Fifth year 15 percent
(Ord. 5-89, 6-20-1989)
12-1-5: LIMITATIONS ON AMOUNT OF EXEMPTION:
The granting of the exemption under this Chapter for new construction constituting complete
replacement of an existing building or structure shall not result in the assessed value of the industrial
real estate being reduced below the assessed value for the industrial real estate before the start of the
new construction added. (Ord. 5-89, 6-20-1989)
12-1-6: APPLICATION FOR EXEMPTION:
An application shall be filed for each project resulting in actual value added for which an exemption is
claimed. The application for exemption shall be filed by the owner of the property with the assessor by
February 1 of the assessment year in which the value added is first assessed for taxation.
Applications for exemption shall be made on forms prescribed by the Director of Revenue and shall
contain information pertaining to the nature of the improvement, its cost, and other information
deemed necessary by the Director of Revenue. (Ord. 5-89, 6-20-1989)
12-1-7: APPLICATION FOR PRIOR APPROVAL:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=864 349/349
A person may submit a proposal to the City Council to receive prior approval for eligibility for tax
exemption on new construction. The City Council, by ordinance, may give its prior approval of a tax
exemption for new construction if the new construction is in conformance with the zoning plans for the
City. The ordinance may be enacted not less than thirty (30) days after holding a public hearing in
accordance with Iowa Code section 362.3. Such prior approval shall not entitle the owner to
exemption from taxation until the new construction has been completed and found to be qualified real
estate. However, if the tax exemption for new construction is not approved, the person may submit an
amended proposal to the City Council to approve or reject. (Ord. 5-89, 6-20-1989)
12-1-8: DURATION:
The partial exemption shall be available until such time as this Chapter is repealed by the City
Council. (Ord. 5-89, 6-20-1989)
12-1-9: REPEAL:
When, in the opinion of the City Council, continuation of the exemption granted by this Chapter ceases
to be of benefit to the City, the City Council shall repeal this Chapter, but all existing exemptions shall
continue until their expiration. (Ord. 5-89, 6-20-1989)
12-1-10: LIMITATION ON TAX EXEMPTIONS:
A property tax exemption under this Chapter shall not be granted if the property for which the
exemption is claimed has received any other property exemption authorized by law. (Ord. 5-89, 6-20-
1989)