OFFICIAL CITY CODE  

Title 01 General Administration
  
CHAPTER 1  
  
OFFICIAL CITY CODE  
  
  
SECTION:  
  
1-1-1:  Title  
1-1-2:  Acceptance  
1-1-3:  Amendments  
1-1-4:  Maintenance of City Code  
  
  
1-1-1: 
  TITLE:   This codification of the general ordinances of the City of Ammon  
is declared to be the official City Code of the City of Ammon, and shall be known as:  
  
CODIFIED ORDINANCES  
OF THE  
CITY OF AMMON 
  
  
Any reference to the number of any section herein shall be understood to refer to the  
position of the same number, to its appropriate heading, and to the general penalty  
clause relating thereto when the reference is made to this Code by title in any legal  
document.  
  
  
1-1-2: 
  ACCEPTANCE:   Any official copy of this code shall be received without  
further proof in all courts and in all administrative tribunals of this state as the ordinances  
of a general and permanent effect of the city.  
  
  
1-1-3: 
  AMENDMENTS:   Any ordinance amending this Code shall set forth the  
Chapter, Title, and Section number of the section or sections to be amended. All such  
ordinances shall comply with the provisions of this Code and Chapter 9, Title 50, Idaho  
Code, regarding passage, execution, and publication of ordinances. All such  
amendments of ordinances shall be published as required and appropriate copies  
prepared for insertion in this Code.  
  
  
1-1-4: 
  MAINTENANCE OF CITY CODE:   The City Clerk shall promptly forward  
a copy of each page of each newly adopted or amended ordinances as codified to each  
person having an official copy of the City Code. The City Clerk may collect a fee for each  
copy of the City Code and an annual fee for maintenance thereof, provided such fees  
shall be established by resolution or ordinance duly passed by the City Council.  

CHAPTER 2  
  
SAVING CLAUSE  
  
  
SECTION:  
  
1-2-1:  Repeal of General Ordinances  
1-2-2:  Public Utility Ordinances  
1-2-3:  Saving Clause  
  
  
1-2-1: 
  REPEAL OF GENERAL ORDINANCES:   All general ordinances of the  
City are hereby repealed, except as herein specifically preserved or are by implication  
reserved from repeal, subject to the saving clauses herein contained, excluding without  
limitation the special ordinances relating to the following subjects:   Tax levies;  
appropriation of public monies; boundaries and annexations; franchises; ordinances  
granting special rights to persons or corporations; contracts; issuance of warrants; public  
salaries; ordinances establishing name or vacating streets, alleys, or other public places;  
improvement districts; bonds; local elections; the sale or exchange of real estate; sign  
ordinances; economic development; urban renewal; public utilities; zoning; and all  
special ordinances of any kind, except those provisions in such special ordinances which  
this Code expressly amends.  
  
  
1-2-2: 
  PUBLIC UTILITY ORDINANCES:   No ordinance or section thereof  
relating to railroad or railroad crossings of streets and other public ways, or relating to  
the conduct, duties, service, or rates of public utilities shall be repealed by the adoption  
of this Code or by the preceding section, except as this Code specifically provides for  
such repeal.  
  
  
1-2-3: 
  SAVING CLAUSE:   Any ordinance amending or repealing any section of  
this Code shall not be deemed or construed to abate any pending action based upon  
such amended or repealed section, nor shall the passage of such ordinance prevent the  
arrest, prosecution, and punishment of any violation of such section committed prior to  
the effective date of such ordinance.  
  
CHAPTER 3  
  
DEFINITIONS AND CONSTRUCTIONAL RULES  
  
  
SECTION:  
  
1-3-1:  General Constructional Rule  
1-3-2:  Plural and Singular Words  
1-3-3:  Masculine and Feminine Gender  
1-3-4:  Priority of Ordinance  
1-3-5:  Definitions  
1-3-6:  Captions  
  
  
1-3-1:  GENERAL CONSTRUCTIONAL RULE:   Except as expressly stated in this  
Code, all words shall have their ordinary, generally accepted meaning.  
  
  
1-3-2:  PLURAL AND SINGULAR WORDS:   Whenever any word in this Code is  
used in either the singular or plural form, then such word shall be deemed to include both  
the plural and singular forms of such word, unless the context indicates an intent  
otherwise.  
  
  
1-3-3:  MASCULINE AND FEMININE GENDER:   When any person is referred to  
in any section of this Code by use of the masculine gender, then such reference shall be  
deemed to include the feminine gender unless the context indicates an intent otherwise.  
  
  
1-3-4:  PRIORITY OF ORDINANCE:   In the event of any discrepancy or conflict  
between this Code and any ordinance passing or amending the same section of this  
Code, then the provisions of the ordinance shall prevail.  
  
1-3-5:  DEFINITIONS:   Whenever the following words or terms are used in this  
Code, they shall have the meanings ascribed below, unless the context clearly indicates  
otherwise:  
  
AGENT:  A person acting on behalf of another.  
  
BUILDING OFFICIAL OR INSPECTOR:  An Individual or organization designated by the  
City to perform inspection and related services under this ordinance.  
  
CITY:  The City of Ammon, County of Bonneville, State of Idaho.  
  
Title 1, Chapter 3 Page 1 of 3 Adopted 5-3-2018 

CITY ATTORNEY:  An attorney appointed by the Mayor, with consent of the Council, to  
provide general counsel and legal assistance to the City as set forth in the City's formal  
job description, and when separately retained by the Mayor or City Council to prosecute  
or defend all civil actions in which the City is a party.  
  
CITY PROSECUTING ATTORNEY:  An attorney appointed by the Mayor to prosecute  
violations of this Code, and misdemeanor and infractions under the State Code  
  
COUNCIL:  The lawfully elected City Council of the City.  
  
CRIME:  An act in violation of this Code or of the statutes of the State of Idaho.  
  
FELONY:  A crime as defined under the Idaho Code, Section 18-111.  
  
3INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE:  The International Building Code as adopted by  
ordinance of the City.  
  
INTERNATIONAL FIRE CODE:  The International Fire code as adopted by ordinance of  
the City.  
  
INTERNATIONAL MECHANICAL CODE:  The International Mechanical Code as  
adopted by ordinance of the City.  
  
INTERNATIONAL RESIDENTIAL CODE:  The International Residential Code as  
adopted by ordinance of the City.  
  
INFRACTION:  A civil public offense, not constituting a crime, which is punishable only  
by a penalty up to but not exceeding the maximum amount allowed by State Code 18- 
113A and for which no incarceration may be imposed.  
  
LICENSE:  The permission granted for the carrying on of a business, trade, profession  
or occupation.  
  
MISDEMEANOR:  Every crime except a felony.  
  
NATIONAL ELECTRIC CODE:  The National Electric Code as adopted by ordinance of  
the City  
  
NOTICE:  Unless provided otherwise in the Ammon City Code, notice shall be deemed as  
complete upon delivery to a person over the age of 18 at the residence or business of the  
person receiving said notice or placing of said notice in the mail of the United States Postal  
Service.  
  
OCCUPANT:  Any person who occupies the whole or any part of such building or land  
whether alone or with others.  
  
OFFENSE:  A crime or other violation of this Code.  
  
OPERATOR:  The person who is generally in charge of or responsible for conducting  
any business, profession, or enterprise.  
  
Title 1, Chapter 3 Page 2 of 3 Adopted 5-3-2018  

  
OWNER:  Any person owning real or personal property, including any part owner, joint  
owner, tenant in common, joint tenant, remainder man, or person holding a life estate or  
reversionary interest of any kind.  
  
PERSON:  A human being and any public or private corporation, firm, partnership, trust,  
estate, sole proprietorship, association, organization, government, or any other entity  
recognized under Idaho law.  
  
PERSONAL PROPERTY:  Money, goods, chattels, effects, rights in action, and all  
written instruments evidencing any pecuniary obligation.  
  
RIGHT OF WAY:  The privilege of the immediate use of the roadway or other property.  
  
STATE:  The State of Idaho.  
  
STREET:  All public roads, ways, alleys, and rights of way used for the movement of  
vehicular traffic, including any public sidewalks adjacent thereto.  
  
TENANT:  Any person who occupies any building or real property for a consideration to  
the owner.  
  
UNIFORM PLUMBING CODE:  The Uniform Plumbing Code as adopted by Ordinance  
of the City.  
  
UNIFORM CODE FOR ABATEMENT OF DANGEROUS BUILDINGS:  The Uniform  
Code for Abatement of Dangerous Buildings as adopted by Ordinance of the City.  
  
1-3-6:  CAPTIONS:   The captions and titles used at the commencement of each  
section or subsection of this Code are used only to indicate the content of the section and  
shall not limit, modify, or in any manner affect the scope, meaning, or intent of the  
provisions thereafter.  
  
  
Title 1, Chapter 3 Page 3 of 3 Adopted 5-3-2018   

CHAPTER 4  
  
GENERAL PENALTY PROVISIONS  
  
  
SECTION:  
  
1-4-1:  Misdemeanor Penalty  
1-4-2:  Infractions  
1-4-3:  Applicability of Penalty  
1-4-4:  Multiple Violations  
1-4-5:  Prosecution Discretion  
1-4-6:  Penalty Against Officers  
  
   
1-4-1:  MISDEMEANOR PENALTY:    Whenever any person commits a  
misdemeanor under the provisions of the City Code of the City of Ammon, the same shall  
be subject to the maximum penalty allowed, pursuant to Idaho Code 18-113, and/or 18- 
303 or its successor as may be amended from time to time.  Each misdemeanor penalty  
shall be subject to the maximum penalty plus any applicable court fees.  Each day of the  
violation shall be considered a separate offense and shall be punishable by separate fines  
and/or imprisonment.  In addition to any criminal penalties as provided herein, the City  
may enforce all ordinances and requirements by all civil remedies as permitted by law,  
including but not limited to withholding issuance of a building permit, certificate of  
occupancy, injunctive relief, writs of mandamus, stop work orders, etc.   
  
  
1-4-2:  INFRACTIONS:   Whenever any person commits an infraction as outlined  
in the Ammon City Code, the same shall be subject to penalty as defined by Idaho Code  
18-113A, or as amended or re-codified. Such person shall be punishable by a fine not  
exceeding the maximum penalty allowed by Idaho Code.  Infractions not designated by a  
specific infraction level within the City Code, shall be cited as Level 1 infraction on the first  
violation, the second violation shall be considered a level 2 infraction and the third and  
any subsequent violations shall be considered a level 3 infraction, subject to all penalties  
allowed by law.  Each subsequent violation, (after two (2), within a twelve (12) month  
period shall be cited as a Level 3 infraction.  In addition to any criminal penalties as  
provided herein, the City may enforce all ordinances and requirements by all civil remedies  
as permitted by law, including but not limited to withholding issuance of a building permit,  
certificate of occupancy, injunctive relief, writs of mandamus, stop work orders, etc.    
  
Each day such violation continues, shall be a separate violation, which shall be deemed  
as a separate infraction and a citation may be issued therefore. Violations may be  
assessed on a per violation per day basis and may be assessed at increasing levels of  
infractions pursuant to this section.  The fees for Level 1 and Level 2 infraction violations  
shall be adopted by the City Council by resolution.  The Level 3 violation penalty shall be  
the maximum allowed by Idaho Code 18-113A.  
  
Title 1, Chapter 4    Page 1 of 2    Adopted 5-3-2018  

1-4-3:  APPLICABILITY OF PENALTY:   The penalties provided in this  
Chapter shall be applied as though they were a part of every separate section of  
this Code.  
  
1-4-4:  MULTIPLE VIOLATIONS:   Whenever the same person violates the  
same section of this Code on two or more days, then each violation on each day  
shall be deemed a separate offense and shall be separately punishable for each  
such offense.  
  
1-4-5:  PROSECUTORIAL DISCRETION:   Whenever the same offense,  
act, or omission is punishable under different sections of this Code, the City  
Prosecuting Attorney may elect under which section to proceed; but no more than  
one sentence of imprisonment may be imposed against the same person for the  
same offense; provided, that revocation of a license or permit shall not be  
considered a penalty so as to bar imposition of a penalty under this Code.  
  
1-4-6:  PENALTY AGAINST OFFICERS:   The penalty provisions of this  
Chapter shall not apply to any section of this Code which designates the duties of  
any officer or employee of the City unless the intention to impose a fine or penalty  
is specifically and clearly expressed in the section creating the duty.  
  
Title 1, Chapter 4    Page 2 of 2    Adopted 5-3-2018  
  

CHAPTER 5  
  
MAYOR  
  
  
SECTION:  
  
1-5-1: Powers and Duties  
1-5-2: Term  
1-5-3: Special Meetings  
1-5-4: Ordinances and Contracts  
1-5-5: Mayor May Offer Reward  
1-5-6: Accounts and Reports of Officers  
1-5-7: Extraterritorial Powers  
1-5-8: Salary  
1-5-9: Aid to Enforce Laws  
1-5-10:  Appointment of Committees  
1-5-11:  Election or Appointment  
1-5-12:  Declaration of Candidacy  
1-5-13:  Elections and Petitions for Nomination  
1-5-14:  Form of Petition  
  
  
1-5-1: 
  POWERS AND DUTIES:   The Mayor shall be the chief executive officer  
of the City and shall have authority to hire, terminate, discipline, supervise, and control  
all appointive officers and employees of the City, in the manner provided by the Code or  
State law. The Mayor shall preside at all meetings of the City Council and may  
determine the order of business, subject to such rules as the Council may provide by  
ordinance. The Mayor shall have a vote only when the vote of the Council is equally  
divided at any meeting where a quorum is present. The Mayor shall have the power to  
veto any ordinance, resolution, or action taken by the Council, provided the Council may  
override such veto by a vote of one-half plus one of the members of the full Council. The  
Mayor shall have the authority and responsibility to enforce all police ordinances and  
regulations. The Mayor shall have authority to administer oaths and shall have all  
powers, prerogatives, and authority conferred by ordinance, by the laws of the State,  
and as may be conferred by resolution of the Council.  
  
  
1-5-2:  
 TERM:   The term of office of the Mayor shall be for a period of four (4)  
years, commencing upon the issuance of a certificate of election at the first regular  
Council meeting in January following his or her election. Any vacancy in the office of  
Mayor shall be filled in the manner provided by State law.  
  
  
1-5-3:  
 SPECIAL MEETINGS:   The Mayor may call special meetings of the  
Council, the object of which shall be submitted to the Council in writing, and the call and  
object of which, as well as the minutes required to be kept by law, shall be entered in the  
journal of the City Clerk.  
  
Page 1 of 3         REVISED 8-6-2009 

1-5-4: 
  ORDINANCES AND CONTRACTS:   The Mayor shall execute all  
ordinances, resolutions, and contracts approved by the Council, including deeds, bonds,  
warrants, and other agreements to which the City is a party.  
  
  
1-5-5: 
  MAYOR MAY OFFER REWARD:   The Mayor may offer a reward not  
exceeding One Thousand Dollars ($1,000) for the arrest and conviction of any person  
who violates this Code.  
  
  
1-5-6: 
  ACCOUNTS AND REPORTS OF OFFICERS:   The Mayor may require  
any officer or employee of the City to exhibit all accounts, files, or other papers  
pertaining to such office or employment and to report to the Council in writing regarding  
any subject or matter pertaining thereto.  
  
  
1-5-7: 
  EXTRATERRITORIAL POWERS:   The Mayor shall have the following  
extraterritorial powers over all persons, places, and activities located outside the  
corporate boundaries:  
  
(A) To prevent, remove, and abate nuisances located within three (3) miles of the  
corporate boundaries, at the expense of the person causing or maintaining the  
same and to exercise all powers conferred upon the City, pursuant to Idaho Code  
Section 50-334.  
  
(B) To enforce all health and quarantine laws and ordinances against any person or  
placed located within five (5) miles of the corporate boundaries.  
  
(C) To enforce all laws and ordinances regulating or prohibiting the loading, storage,  
and transportation of hazardous materials or chemicals within three (3) miles of  
the corporate boundaries.  
  
(D) To extend the City street lighting system for a distance of no greater than two (2)  
miles outside the corporate limits.  
  
(E) To enforce all platting, zoning, street, and surface drainage ordinances  
applicable within one (1) mile of the corporate limits, to the fullest extent  
permitted under Idaho Code Sections 50-1306, 50-1330, and 67-6526.  
  
(F) To enforce all ordinances and to exercise all police powers conferred upon the  
City, except taxation, regarding offenses committed within one (1) mile of the  
corporate limits, to the fullest extent permitted by Idaho Code Section 50-606.  
  
  
1-5-8: 
  SALARY:   The Mayor shall receive a salary of $15,000.00 annually,  
payable in monthly installments of $1,250.00 per month.  
  
  
Page 2 of 3         REVISED 8-6-2009  
  

  Loading....
   
  
1-5-9: 
  AID TO ENFORCE LAWS:   The Mayor may call on every citizen residing  
in the City over the age of twenty one (21) years and under the age of fifty (50) years to  
aid in enforcing the laws.  
  
  
1-5-10: 
  APPOINTMENT OF COMMITTEES:   The Mayor may appoint  
committees from among the members of the Council to assist in the management and  
administration of the City. Each committee shall consist of two (2) or more members of  
the Council.  
  
  
1-5-11: 
  ELECTION OR APPOINTMENT:   The Mayor shall be elected at large or  
appointed in the manner provided by law.  Any candidate seeking election to the office of  
Mayor shall file a declaration of candidacy as provided by this chapter.  At any general  
election, the candidate receiving the highest number of votes for mayor shall be declared  
the winner.      
  
  
1-5-12:  
 DECLARATION OF CANDIDACY:   Each candidate shall file a  
Declaration of Candidacy with the City Clerk before any Petition of Candidacy is signed  
or circulated.  The declaration of candidacy shall be accepted only on a designated form  
provided by the City Clerk.  Any candidate seeking election to the office of Mayor shall  
file their candidacy for one (1), and only one (1) elected office per election year. The  
candidate shall meet all other qualifications for the office of Mayor, as required by law.   
All nominating petitions must contain, at the time of initiating circulation of a petition, the  
designation for the office of Mayor.  The form must be in the same format and font as the  
remainder of the petition and may not be added or changed after the petition is  
circulated.  Only petition forms designating that the candidate is being nominated to the  
office of Mayor, and provided by the Ammon City Clerk, will be accepted by the City  
Clerk.  The name of the candidate must be disclosed at the time of obtaining the petition  
from the City Clerk.  No candidate shall circulate petitions for more than one elected seat  
in any election cycle.  Any petition not containing such designation for the office of  
Mayor, in the manner herein required, shall be null and void.  
  
  
1-5-13: 
  ELECTIONS AND PETITIONS FOR NOMINATION:   All elections shall  
be non-partisan in nature and shall be conducted in the manner provided in Chapter 4,  
Title 50, Idaho Code.  Candidates for election to the office of Mayor shall accompany the  
Declaration of Candidacy with (1) a Petition of Candidacy signed by not less than five (5)  
registered qualified electors; or (2) a nonrefundable filing fee of forty dollars ($40.00),  
which shall be deposited in the City treasury.  A qualified elector may not nominate more  
persons than the number of seats up for election.  Any signatures made in violation of  
this section shall be void for all petitions signed in violation of this section.    
  
  
1-5-14: 
  FORM OF PETITION:   Petitions of Candidacy shall be in submitted in  
and on the Petition of Candidacy form as provided by the City Clerk.    
  
  
Page 3 of 3         REVISED 8-6-2009  
   
  
CHAPTER 6  
  
COUNCIL  
  
  
SECTION:  
  
1-6-1:  Regular Meetings  
1-6-2:  Special Meetings  
1-6-3:  Open Meetings  
1-6-4:  Term of Office  
1-6-5:  Salary  
1-6-6:  President of the Council  
1-6-7:  Consent Agenda  
1-6-8:  Funds Controlled by Council  
1-6-9:  Election or Appointment  
1-6-10:  Declaration of Candidacy  
1-6-11:  Elections and Petitions for Nomination  
1-6-12:  Form of Petition  
  
  
1-6-1: 
  REGULAR MEETINGS:   A minimum of one (1) regular meeting of  
Council shall be held each month. All regular meetings of the Council shall be held at  
City Hall, 2135 South Ammon Road, Ammon, Idaho. Regular meetings will be held on  
the first Thursday of the month, and/or on the third Thursday of the month. Meetings  
shall commence at 7:00p.m. The Mayor shall have the power to cancel or recess any  
meeting to a different place or time upon giving due notice thereof.    
  
  
1-6-2: 
  SPECIAL MEETINGS:   The Mayor or one half plus one members of the  
full Council may call a special meeting provided the object of which shall be submitted to  
the Council in writing, and the call and object of the meeting and all minutes required to  
be kept by law shall be entered upon the journal kept by the Clerk.  
  
  
1-6-3: 
  OPEN MEETINGS:   All regular and special meetings of the Council shall  
be open to the public, except the Council may retire into a closed executive session as  
permitted by State law. The Clerk shall record the vote of Council (2/3 vote in favor) to  
retire into executive session, and the Clerk shall state in the minutes the general  
purpose for such session. The Clerk or any other person appointed by the Mayor shall  
keep such minutes as will indicate the general tenor of the meeting, which minutes shall  
be recorded in the Clerk’s journal. No final decision for which an affirmative vote of a  
majority of the Council is required by law may be made while the Council is in executive  
session. For the purposes hereof, the term “meeting” shall mean any convocation of any  
meeting of the Council (at which a quorum is present) for the purpose of making a  
decision or deliberating toward a decision on any matter.  
  
  
1-6-4: 
  NUMBER, OATH AND TERM OF OFFICE:  The number of Council  
Members shall be six, each having a Council seat number for election purposes  
Title 1, Chapter 6    Page 1 of 3    REVISED 3-7-2013

assigned by the City Clerk.  Each Council Member shall take office after ascribing to the  
oath of office and upon receipt of their certificates of election.  Subscription to the oath of  
office and delivery of the certificated of election shall be done at the first regular Council  
meeting in January of the year following a general election.  Newly elected members  
shall be sworn into office in ascending Council seat number.  Each member shall serve  
for a term of four (4) years unless any newly elected member has been elected in  
conjunction with an increase or decrease in the number of Council members at which  
time such newly elected member will serve according to the term prescribed in Title 50  
Chapter 7 of the Idaho State Code and until his or her successor is elected and qualified  
or appointed and takes the oath of office.  An appointed member of the Council shall  
serve until the next general city election.   
  
  
1-6-5: 
  SALARY OF COUNCIL MEMBERS: Each Council Member shall receive  
a salary of $8,400.00 annually, payable in monthly installments of $700.00 per month.  
  
  
1-6-6: 
  PRESIDENT OF THE COUNCIL:   At the first regular Council meeting in  
January of the year following a general election, the Council shall elect one of the  
Council members as President of the Council. The President of the Council shall preside  
at all meetings in the absence of the Mayor. During any temporary absence or disability  
of the Mayor, the President of the Council shall exercise the office of the Mayor until the  
Mayor shall return or the disability is removed. In case of vacancy in the office of Mayor,  
the President shall exercise the office of Mayor until such vacancy is filled. In the  
temporary absence of the Mayor and the President of the Council, the senior member of  
the Council, as determined from the date and order of swearing in, shall temporarily  
serve as the President of the Council until the Mayor or President returns.  
  
  
1-6-7: 
  CONSENT AGENDA:   Whenever the Mayor considers an item to be  
routine and non-controversial, he or she may place the same on the consent agenda for  
consideration at any regular meeting of the Council; provided, however, any action which  
may be taken only by ordinance may not be placed on the consent agenda. Items of  
business on the consent agenda may include, but need not be limited to, the following:    
approval of minutes; approval of citizen appointments; referrals to committees; approval  
of reports; approval or authorization of communications; approval or resolutions or other  
items which had been considered by the Council at earlier meetings; and setting of  
public hearings. The consent agenda may be considered by the Council as a single item  
and may be introduced by a motion to approve the consent agenda. On objection to the  
inclusion of any item on the consent agenda by any member of the Council, that item  
shall be removed from the consent agenda and may be considered at any time in the  
meeting which the Mayor deems appropriate. Neither a formal motion nor a second is  
necessary to remove an item from the consent agenda. Such objections shall be  
recorded prior to taking the vote to approve the consent agenda. There shall be no  
debate or discussion of any item on a consent agenda beyond asking questions for a  
simple verification. Passage of the consent agenda shall be fully equivalent to approval,  
adoption, or enactment of each motion, resolution, or other item of business thereon as if  
each item thereon had been acted upon individually. Approval of the motion must be by  
a roll call vote. The Clerk shall record in the Council minutes each item passed under the  
consent agenda, individually and in full.  
  
Title 1, Chapter 6    Page 2 of 3    REVISED 3-7-2013  
  

  
   
  
  
1-6-8: 
  FUNDS CONTROLLED BY COUNCIL:   All monies and funds belonging  
to or controlled by the City shall be controlled and administered by the Mayor and  
Council in the manner required by law and subject to all ordinances and rules and  
regulations adopted by the Council as may be necessary for the efficient and prudent  
use and protection of the same.  
  
  
1-6-9: 
  ELECTION OR APPOINTMENT:   All members of the Council shall be  
elected at large or appointed in the manner provided by law.  Any candidate seeking  
election to the council shall file for one (1) of the assigned council seats. At any general  
election the candidate or candidates to receive the highest number of votes for each  
assigned council seat shall be declared the winner(s).  The City Clerk shall assign a  
permanent number from one to six for each council seat. Candidates for odd-numbered  
seats shall stand for election in one biennial election and candidates for even-numbered  
seats shall stand for election in the next biennial election.  The Clerk shall maintain a  
written record of the numbers assigned to each seat and the identity of the Council  
member occupying the same.  The City Clerk shall provide a copy of such record upon  
request of any person during the regular office hours of the Clerk.    
  
  
1-6-10:  
 DECLARATION OF CANDIDACY:   Each candidate shall file a  
Declaration of Candidacy with the City Clerk before any Petition of Candidacy is signed  
or circulated.  The declaration of candidacy shall be accepted only on a designated form  
provided by the City Clerk.  Any candidate seeking election to the City Council shall file  
their candidacy for one (1), and only one (1), council seat per election year. The  
candidate shall meet all other qualifications for the office of City Councilmember, as  
required by law.  All nominating petitions must contain, at the time of initiating circulation  
of a petition, the council seat number for which the candidate is being nominated.  The  
council seat number must be in the same format and font as the remainder of the  
petition and may not be added or changed after the petition is circulated.  Only petition  
forms designating a particular seat and a particular candidate, provided by the Ammon  
City Clerk, will be accepted by the City Clerk.  The name of the candidate and the seat  
designation must be disclosed at the time of obtaining the petition from the City Clerk.   
No candidate shall circulate petitions for more than one designated seat in any election  
cycle.  Any petition not containing such designated seat number, in the manner herein  
required, shall be null and void.  
  
  
1-6-11: 
  ELECTIONS AND PETITIONS FOR NOMINATION:   All elections shall  
be non-partisan in nature and shall be conducted in the manner provided in Chapter 4,  
Title 50, Idaho Code.  Candidates for election to the Council shall accompany the  
Declaration of Candidacy with (1) a Petition of Candidacy signed by not less than five (5)  
registered qualified electors; or (2) a nonrefundable filing fee of forty dollars ($40.00),  
which shall be deposited in the city treasury.  A qualified elector may not nominate more  
persons than the number of seats up for election.  Any signatures made in violation of  
this section shall be void for all petitions signed in violation of this section.    
  
  
1-6-12: 
  FORM OF PETITION:   Petitions of Candidacy shall be in submitted in  
and on the Petition of Candidacy form as provided by the City Clerk.    
Title 1, Chapter 6    Page 3 of 3    REVISED 3-7-2013  
    
  

CHAPTER 7  
  
APPOINTIVE OFFICERS  
  
  
SECTION:  
  
1-7-1:  Appointment  
1-7-2:  Compensation  
1-7-3:  Duties  
1-7-4:  Bonds  
1-7-5:  Personnel Policy and Code of Conduct  
1-7-6:  Reports and Accounts  
  
  
1-7-1: 
  APPOINTMENT:  The Mayor shall, with the consent of the Council,  
appoint the following positions:   City Clerk, City Treasurer, City Attorney, City  
Administrator, Building Official, City Engineer, Fire Chief, IT Director, Parks Director,  
Planning Director and such other appointive officers deemed necessary for the efficient  
operation of the City.  The Mayor may remove any person from an appointive office, but  
such removal shall be by and with the affirmative vote of one-half plus one of the  
members of the full Council; provided that the Council, by the unanimous vote of all its  
members, may, upon its own initiative, remove any appointive officer.   
  
    
1-7-2: 
  COMPENSATION:   The Council shall determine the compensation and  
benefits to be paid or given to all appointive officers.  
  
  
1-7-3: 
  DUTIES:   All appointive officers shall have such duties as may be  
prescribed by ordinance or by a written agreement approved by the Council.  
  
  
1-7-4:  
 BONDS: Bonding of all city appointed officers and city administrator shall  
be set in such amounts as the city council may by separate ordinance determine and as  
required by Idaho Code §§ 50-204.   
  
  
1-7-5:  
 PERSONNEL POLICY AND CODE OF CONDUCT:   All full-time  
appointive officers shall be subject to the City Personnel Policy and Code of Conduct as  
may be adopted by the City Council and Mayor.  
  
  
1-7-6: 
  REPORTS AND ACCOUNTS:   The Mayor and Council may require any  
appointive officer to exhibit his or her accounts, papers, or other documents, and to  
make written reports pertaining to his or her office.  
  
Title 1 Chapter 7     Page 1 of 1     Adopted 11-19-09  

CHAPTER 8  
  
EMPLOYEE POLICIES AND PROCEDURES  
  
  
SECTION:  
  
1-8-1:  Appointment  
1-8-2:  Personnel Policy and Code of Conduct  
1-8-3:  Salaries and Classification  
1-8-4:  Rules and Regulations  
1-8-5:  Availability of Policies  
1-8-6:  Deferred Compensation  
  
  
1-8-1: 
  APPOINTMENT:   All appointive officers and employees of the City shall  
serve at the discretion of the Mayor and Council and shall have no right of continued  
employment or employment benefits, except as agreed in writing and expressly  
approved by the Council.  
  
  
1-8-2:  
 PERSONNEL POLICY AND CODE OF CONDUCT:   All employees shall  
be subject to the Personnel Policy and Code of Conduct as approved by ordinance or  
resolution of the Council, except to the extent such Personnel Policy or Code of Conduct  
is inconsistent with any written collective bargaining contract approved by the Council.  
  
  
1-8-3: 
  SALARIES AND CLASSIFICATION:   All employees shall receive such  
salaries as may be also determined by the Council. Officers or employees shall be paid  
such salaries and benefits as may be determined by a written collective bargaining  
agreement or other agreement approved by the Council.  
  
  
1-8-4: 
  RULES AND REGULATIONS:   All employees shall abide by rules and  
regulations adopted by the division in which they are employed and by rules and  
regulations adopted by the Mayor.  
  
  
1-8-5: 
  AVAILABILITY OF POLICIES:   Any person hired after the effective date  
of this Code shall be given a copy of the Personnel Policy, the Code of Conduct as  
adopted and in effect, and his or her pay grade classification schedule at the time he or  
she is hired. Notwithstanding the foregoing, nothing herein shall prevent the application  
or enforcement of any policy or procedure set forth in the Personnel Policy or Code of  
Conduct in the event an employee fails to receive a copy thereof at the time of his or her  
employment. One copy of the Personnel Policy, Code of Conduct, and classified pay  
grade schedules shall be maintained in the office of the City Clerk, Personnel  
Department, and each division of the City. If the Personnel Policy or Code of Conduct is  
amended or modified after the effective date of this Code, a copy of such amendment or  
modification shall be posted for a period of not less than two (2) weeks in the office of   
the City Clerk, Personnel Department, and in a conspicuous place in each of the  
administrative offices of each division of the City.  
  
  
1-8-6: 
  DEFERRED COMPENSATION:   The Mayor and Council may, by  
ordinance or by contract, provide for any retirement plan, deferred compensation plan,  
insurance benefits, or other program benefits permitted by law.  

OATH, BONDS AND OFFICIAL CONDUCT  
  
CHAPTER 9  
  
OATH, BONDS AND OFFICIAL CONDUCT  
  
  
SECTION:  
  
1-9-1:  Oath  
1-9-2:  Bonds  
1-9-3:  Qualifications of Elective Officers  
1-9-4:  Interest in Contracts  
1-9-5:  Nepotism  
1-9-6:  Payments Unlawful  
1-9-7:  Payments for Public Service Prohibited  
1-9-8:  Public Accounts Required  
1-9-9:  Bribery  
1-9-10:  Compensation for Past Official Behavior  
1-9-11:  Gifts to Public Servants  
1-9-12:  Compensation for Assisting Private Interests  
1-9-13:  Interest in Sales  
1-9-14:  Unlawful Payment of Warrants  
  
  
1-9-1: 
  OATH:   Every elective officer of the City, before duty, shall take and  
subscribe before a person authorized to administer public oaths, an oath substantially in  
the following form:  
  
I do solemnly swear (or affirm, as the case may be) that I  
will support the Constitution and Laws of the United States;  
the Constitution and Laws of the State of Idaho; and the  
Laws of the City of Ammon; and that I will faithfully  
discharge the duties of (insert office) according to the best  
of my ability.  
  
Said oath shall be certified by the officer before whom it was taken and the subscribed  
oath and certification shall be filed with the City Clerk. Such oath of office shall be taken,  
subscribed, and filed within ten (10) days after the officer has notice of his election or  
appointment, or before the expiration of fifteen (15) days from the commencement of his  
term of office, when no such notice has been given. The oath may be taken before any  
officer authorized to administer oaths.  
  
  
1-9-2: 
  BONDS:  Before performing any duties of their respective offices, the City  
Administrator, City Clerk, Treasurer and Fire Chief shall be covered by a bond and/or  
insurance policy in amounts to be determined by the Council.  In addition, the Mayor,  
City Council and all employees in the City Office shall be covered by a bond and/or an  
insurance policy in amounts to be determined by the Council.  
  

  Loading....
OATH, BONDS AND OFFICIAL CONDUCT  
  
1-9-3: 
  QUALIFICATIONS OF ELECTIVE OFFICERS:   No person shall hold any  
elective office unless he or she is a qualified elector of the City at the time of his or her  
election.  
  
  
1-9-4: 
  INTEREST IN CONTRACTS:   No elective or appointive officer of the City  
shall have any interest in any contract prohibited by state law. No employee of the City  
shall have any interest in any contract in which he or she shall have any official  
discretion regarding the execution or administration thereof.  
  
  
1-9-5: 
  NEPOTISM:   It shall be unlawful for any elective or appointive officer of  
the City to appoint or vote for the appointment of any person related to such officer or  
any of his or her associates in office by affinity or consanguinity within the second  
degree to any clerkship, office, position, employment, or duty when the salary or  
compensation of such appointee is to be paid out of public funds.  
  
  
1-9-6: 
  PAYMENTS UNLAWFUL:   No officer or employee of the City shall pay  
out of any public funds under his or her control or to draw or authorize the drawing of  
any warrant or authority for payment out of any public fund, any salary or compensation  
of a person who is ineligible under the preceding section.  
  
  
1-9-7: 
  PAYMENTS FOR PUBLIC SERVICES PROHIBITED:   It shall be  
unlawful for any officer or employee of the City to personally accept payment for any  
service performed by such employee in the ordinary course of employment.  
  
  
1-9-8: 
  PUBLIC ACCOUNTS REQUIRED:   It shall be unlawful for any elective or  
appointive officer who receives fees for services, or who receives public monies for  
safekeeping, to fail to keep a public account in which all receipts of fees or monies are  
entered. Such account shall also include a statement of whom and on what account  
such monies or fees are received. It shall also be unlawful for any elective or appointive  
officer to fail to keep a like account of all disbursements of public monies and to whom  
and on what account the same were paid.  
  
  
1-9-9: 
  BRIBERY:   It shall be unlawful for any officer or employee of the City to  
accept any pecuniary benefit as consideration for the recipient’s decision, opinion,  
recommendation, vote, or other exercise of discretion as a public servant or to accept  
any benefit as consideration for a violation of a known legal duty as a public servant.  
  
  
1-9-10:  
 COMPENSATION FOR PAST OFFICIAL BEHAVIOR:   It shall be  
unlawful for any officer or employee of the City to accept or agree to accept any  
pecuniary benefit as compensation for having, as a public servant, given the decision,  
opinion, recommendation, or vote favorable to another or for having otherwise exercised  
a discretion in his favor, or for having violated his duty.  
  
  

  Loading....
OATH, BONDS AND OFFICIAL CONDUCT  
  
1-9-11: 
  GIFTS TO PUBLIC SERVANTS:  
  
(A) It shall be unlawful for any officer or employee of the City exercising regulatory  
functions, or conducting inspections or investigations, or carrying on civil or  
criminal litigation on behalf of the City, or having custody of a prisoner, to solicit,  
accept, or agree to accept any pecuniary benefit from a person known to be  
subject to such regulation, inspection, investigation, or custody, or against whom  
such litigation is known to be pending or contemplated.  
  
(B) It shall be unlawful for any officer or employee of the City, having discretionary  
function to perform in connection with contracts, purchases, payments, claims, or  
other pecuniary transaction of the government, to solicit, accept, or agree to  
accept any pecuniary benefit from any person known to be interested in or likely  
to become interested in any such contract, purchase, payment, claim, or  
transaction.  
  
(C) For the purposes of this section, the term “pecuniary benefit” shall mean any  
benefit in the form of money, property, or any other thing the primary significance  
of which is economic gain, but excluding any advantage promised generally to a  
group or class of voters as a consequence of public measures which such officer  
supports or opposes.  
  
(D) This section shall not apply to:  
  
1. fees prescribed by law to be received by such officer or employee or any  
other benefit for which the recipient gives legitimate consideration or to  
which he is otherwise legally entitled;  
  
2. gifts or other benefits on account of kinship or other personal,  
professional, or business relationship independent of the official status of  
the receiver;  
  
3. trivial benefits incidental to personal or business contacts and having no  
substantial risk of undermining official impartiality.  
  
  
1-9-12:   
COMPENSATION FOR ASSISTING PRIVATE INTERESTS:   It shall be  
unlawful for any officer or employee of the City to solicit, accept, or agree to accept  
compensation for advice or other assistance in preparing or promoting a bill, contract,  
claim, or other transaction or proposal as to which such officer or employee knows that  
he or she has or is likely to have an official discretion to exercise.  
  
  
1-9-13:  
 INTEREST IN SALES:   It shall be unlawful for any officer or employee of  
the City to be a purchaser at any sale made by them in their official capacity, or to act as  
a vendor at any purchase made by them in their official capacity.  
  
  
1-9-14:  
 UNLAWFUL PAYMENT OF WARRANTS:   It shall be unlawful for any  
officer or employee of the city charged with the disbursement of public monies to pay  
any warrant or any other evidence of indebtedness when the same has been purchased,  
sold, received, or transferred contrary to the provisions of this chapter.  
  

CHAPTER 10  
  
ORDINANCES  
  
  
SECTION:  
  
1-10-1:  Presentment of Ordinances  
1-10-2:  Manner of Passage  
1-10-3:  Passage  
1-10-4:  Veto by Mayor; Passage over Mayor’s Veto  
1-10-5:  Veto Certificate  
1-10-6:  Becoming Law Without Mayor’s Signature  
1-10-7:  Certificate  
1-10-8:  Passage Date  
1-10-9:  Publication and Effective Date  
1-10-10: Recording of Ordinances  
1-10-11: Book of Ordinances  
1-10-12: Special Ordinances and Resolutions  
  
  
1-10-1: 
  PRESENTMENT OF ORDINANCES: Ordinances may be considered only  
at a regular meeting or a special meeting of the Council called for that purpose. All  
ordinances shall be presented in writing and the passage, execution, and publication  
thereof shall conform to the provisions of this chapter.  
  
  
1-10-2: 
  MANNER OF PASSAGE:   Every ordinance shall be read at three  
different Council meetings, two (2) readings of which may be by title only, and one (1)  
reading of which shall be in full, unless one-half plus one of the members of the Council  
shall dispense with this rule. An ordinance shall contain no subject which is not clearly  
expressed in its title and no ordinance or sections thereof shall be revised or amended  
unless the new ordinance contains the entire ordinance or sections as revised or  
amended, and the ordinance or section so revised or amended is repealed in its entirety.  
The passage or adoption of ordinances of a general and permanent nature shall be by  
roll call and the yeas and nays shall be recorded by the Clerk. To pass or adopt any  
ordinance, a concurrence of a majority of the Council shall be sufficient, unless a great  
number of votes is required by this Code or by state law.  
  
  
1-10-3: 
  PASSAGE:   When any ordinance is passed, it shall forthwith be signed  
by the Mayor and attested by the Clerk, and the date of its passage by the Council shall  
be stated thereon. The Clerk shall attach to each ordinance a certificate of its  
authenticity, passage, and execution and the seal of the City shall be impressed on the  
original thereof.  
  
  
1-10-4: 
  VETO BY MAYOR; PASSAGE OVER MAYOR’S VETO:   If the  
mayor neglects or refuses to sign an ordinance, he shall return the same to the Council  

  Loading....
 ORDINANCES  
  
with his or her objections and veto in writing on or before the date of the next regular  
meeting of the Council following its passage.  When an ordinance is so returned by the  
Mayor, the Council may reconsider the same.  If one-half plus one members of the full  
Council approve the ordinance, it shall become law notwithstanding the Mayor’s veto.    
  
  
1-10-5:  
 VETO CERTIFICATE:   When any ordinance has been passed over the  
Mayor’s veto, the Clerk shall attach a certificate to the ordinance stating the same was  
vetoed by the mayor and that it received the required vote of the Council and the date of  
such action.  
  
  
1-10-6:  
 BECOMING LAW WITHOUT MAYOR’S SIGNATURE:   If the Mayor  
refuses or neglects to sign any ordinance and fails to return the same to the Council in  
accordance with Section 1-10-4 above, it shall become effective without his signature.  
  
  
1-10-7: 
  CERTIFICATE:   When any ordinance has become effective without the  
signature of the Mayor, the Clerk shall certify thereon that the Mayor has failed to sign or  
veto the ordinance, and that it has become effective without his signature.  
  
  
1-10-8:  
 PASSAGE DATE:   An ordinance shall be considered passed on the date  
of its execution by the Mayor. In the case of passage pursuant to Section 1-10-4, the  
ordinance shall be deemed passed on the date of the regular meeting at which the  
ordinance was passed by the Council over the Mayor’s veto. In the case of passage  
pursuant to Section 1-10-6, the ordinance shall be deemed passed at the conclusion of  
the next regular meeting following the meeting at which it was originally passed by the  
Council.  
  
  
1-10-9: 
  PUBLICATION AND EFFECTIVE DATE:   All ordinances shall become  
effective upon their publication in the Official Newspaper and proof of publication thereof  
is filed with the Clerk. In lieu of publishing the entire ordinance, the City may publish a  
summary of the ordinance in accordance with Section 50-901(A), Idaho Code. Approval  
of the summary by the Council and the City Attorney shall be conclusive with respect to  
the completeness, adequacy, and accuracy of the summary.  
  
  
1-10-10: 
 RECORDING OF ORDINANCES:   The Clerk shall keep all original  
ordinances as passed, executed, and published in a book provided by the City.  
  
  
1-10-11: 
 BOOK OF ORDINANCES:   The City shall provide a book to be known as  
the City Ordinance Book.  
  
  
1-10-12: 
 SPECIAL ORDINANCES AND RESOLUTIONS:   All ordinances of a  
special nature and resolutions in the nature of ordinances and orders to enter into  
contracts shall be presented in writing to the Council. Such ordinances, resolutions, or  
orders may be disposed of on one reading, or otherwise, as the Council may determine.  
On the final passage of any such ordinance, resolution, or order, the ayes and nays shall  
be called and recorded and a concurrence of a majority of the whole number elected or  
appointed shall be necessary to pass the same. Such ordinance, resolution, or order  
shall be entered in full by the Clerk in the minute book, but unless otherwise directed by  
the Council, need not be engrossed or entered in the book of ordinances. Such  
ordinances of a special nature, resolution, or order need not be published unless their  
publication be required by law.  
  
CHAPTER 11  
  
ELECTIONS  
  
  
SECTIONS:  
  
1-11-1:  Conduct of Elections  
1-11-2:  Election Precincts  
1-11-3:  Campaign Expenditures  
1-11-4:  Opening and Closing of Election Polls  
1-11-5:  Election Signs  
  
1-11-1: 
  CONDUCT OF ELECTIONS:   The conduct of all general and special  
elections, the nomination of candidates for elective office, notices of election,  
qualifications of elector and officers, and appointment and compensation of deputy  
registrars and election officials, provisions for polling places, canvassing of the election  
returns, and all other election procedures of the City, shall be governed by Chapter 4,  
Title 50, Idaho Code. The registration of qualified electors shall conform to Title 34,  
Idaho Code.  
  
  
1-11-2:  
 ELECTION PRECINCTS:   Unless otherwise determined by ordinance or  
resolution of the Council, all election precincts within the City shall conform to the  
precinct boundaries established by the Bonneville County Board of Commissioners  
pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 3, Title 34, Idaho Code.  
  
  
1-11-3:  
 CAMPAIGN EXPENDITURES:   The provisions of Section 67-6601  
through 67-6623 and 67-6623 through 67-6628, Idaho Code, insofar as they relate to the  
reporting of campaign contributions, shall apply to all elections for Mayor and members  
of the Council.  
  
  
1-11-4: 
  OPENING AND CLOSING OF ELECTION POLLS:   At all general and  
special elections of the City, the polls shall open, remain open, and be closed as  
specified and provided in of the Idaho Code. The City does hereby elect, by this  
ordinance, to have the polls open at 8:00 a.m. and close at 8:00 p.m. at all general and  
special elections.  
  
1-11-5:   
ELECTION SIGN REGULATIONS:  All election signs must  
comply with Title 10, Chapter 34, Sign Ordinance of the City and all State Codes  
regarding the regulations of election signs   
  
Title 1, Chapter 11    Page 1 of 1   REVISED 3-7-2013  
  
  
(B) Such petition shall be in substantially the following form:  
  
We the undersigned, being qualified and registered  
electors of the City of Ammon, State of Idaho, hereby  
declare that we have read, or heard read at length, section  
by section, the proposed ordinance or measure attached  
hereto and fully understand its contents, meaning and  
purpose, and believe it should become a law of the City for  
the following reasons:  (here state the reasons in not more  
than two hundred (200) words). We herewith request such  
ordinance or measure be submitted to a vote of the people  
if not passed by the Council.  
  
  
(Signed)   
  
   
Street and Number  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  

  Loading....
  
(C) Any number of copies of the petition and proposed ordinance may be circulated  
at the same time and all shall be considered as one petition, but each copy of the  
petition must be verified by at least one qualified and registered elector, which  
verification shall be substantially as follows:  
  
STATE OF IDAHO  )  
:  
County of Bonneville )  
  
I,     , swear, under  
penalty of perjury, that every signator on the foregoing  
petition signed his or her name in my presence. I believe  
that each has stated his or her name and the  
accompanying information on the signature sheet correctly,  
and that the person was eligible to sign this petition.  
  
  
  
(Signed)   
  
   
Post Office Address  
   
Telephone Number  
  
  
SUBSCRIBED AND SWORN to before me this _____ day  
of __________________, _______.  
  
  
   
Notary Public for Idaho  
Residing at    
My commission expires:    
  
  
1-12-3:  
 EXAMINATION BY CLERK:  Upon the filing of such petition, the Clerk  
shall ascertain whether or not said petition is signed by the requisite number of qualified  
and registered electors and otherwise conforms to law. The Clerk shall attach to the  
petition a certificate showing the result of such examination and if the petition is found  
insufficient, the certificate shall state the reasons therefor and the changes necessary to  
conform to law. The City Clerk may request the advice and counsel from the City  
Attorney for the purpose of determining the sufficiency of the petition. The Clerk's  
certificate shall be filed in the Clerk's office within fourteen (14) days after the petition  
was filed with the City Clerk, and the Clerk shall notify the person filing such petition of  
the filing of the Clerk's certificate which notice shall be in writing and shall be delivered  
within three (3) days after the filing of the certificate. Delivery of such notice shall be  
presumed complete upon its physical delivery to such person, or upon its deposit into  
the U.S. mail, postage prepaid, certified mail, return receipt request, addressed to the  
last known address of such person. If, by the Clerk's certificate, the petition is shown to  
be insufficient or defective, it may be amended, additional signatures added, or  

  Loading....
  
otherwise perfected, within thirty (30) days from the date of said certificate. If the petition  
is not perfected within thirty (30) days, the Clerk shall declare the petition null and void. If  
the petition filed with the Clerk is found by the Clerk to be in due form with the required  
number of signatures, the Clerk shall certify in writing that the petition is in proper form,  
and shall submit the same to the Council at its next regular meeting, provided however,  
if the Clerk's certification is made less than two (2) days prior to the next regular Council  
meeting, the petition may be submitted to the Council at the next following Council  
meeting.  
  
  
1-12-4:  
 SIGNATURE REQUIREMENTS:  The requirements for signature,  
verification of valid petitions, printing of petitions and time limits, except as expressly  
modified herein, shall generally conform to Chapter 18, Title 34, Idaho Code.  
  
  
1-12-5: 
  SUBMISSION TO POPULAR VOTE BY COUNCIL:  Except as otherwise  
provided in this Chapter, the Council shall, within twenty (20) days after the date of the  
Clerk's certificate to the initiative petition, either pass such ordinance without alteration or  
call a special election within ninety (90) days after the date of the certification; provided  
however, that if any other City election is to be held within ninety (90) days after the filing  
of the certification, the proposed ordinance shall be submitted to the electorate without  
alteration at such election. If a majority of the electors voting on the proposed initiative  
measure vote in favor thereof, the same shall thereupon or at the time fixed therein,  
become effective as a City ordinance.  
  
  

  Loading....
  
  
1-12-6:  
 REFERENDUM PETITION:  All petitions for referendum shall be filed not  
less than sixty (60) days following the final adoption of any ordinance subject to  
referendum, and shall be processed in the manner set forth in the preceding three (3)  
sections. The petition shall be substantially as follows:  
  
We, the undersigned, being qualified and registered  
electors of the City of Ammon, Idaho, declare that we have  
read, or heard read in full (insert ordinance number subject  
to referendum) and we understand its contents, meaning  
and purpose and believe it should not become a law of the  
City for the following reasons:  (State reasons why  
ordinance should not be passed in two hundred (200)  
words or less.)  We request that a referendum vote be  
called on this ordinance at a special election called for  
such purpose.  
  
(Signed)   
   
Street and Number  
  
STATE OF IDAHO        )  
:  
County of Bonneville  )  
  
I,     , swear, under penalty of  
perjury, that every person who signed this sheet of the  
foregoing petition signed his or her name thereto in my  
presence. I believe that each has stated his or her name  
and the accompanying information on the signature sheet  
correctly, and that the person was eligible to sign this  
petition.  
(Signed)   
   
Post Office Address  
   
Telephone Number  
  
SUBSCRIBED AND SWORN to before me this _____ day  
of ___________________, _______.  
  
   
Notary Public for Idaho  
Residing at    
My commission expires:    
  
  
  
  
  
  

  Loading....
  
Within ninety (90) days after the date the Clerk certifies the referendum petition  
conforms to this chapter, the Council shall hold a special election to submit the  
referendum measure, without alteration, to the electorate unless the Council shall  
otherwise repeal such ordinance prior thereto; provided however, if any City general  
election is to be held within such ninety (90) days, the referendum measure shall be  
submitted to a vote at such election. If a majority of the voters voting on the measure  
vote in favor of the measure, the ordinance shall thereupon become null and void.  
  
  
1-12-7:  
 SUBMISSION ON COUNCIL'S OWN MOTION:  The Council may submit  
to popular vote, for adoption or rejection, at any election any initiative or referendum  
ordinance or measure in the same manner and with the same force and effect as  
provided herein. The Council may also call a special advisory election to obtain a non- 
binding vote on any matter.  
  
  
1-12-8:  
 FORM OF BALLOT:  The form of ballot and method of voting on any  
initiative or referendum petition shall be the same as in any general City election.  
  
  
1-12-9: 
  PUBLICATION:  The Clerk shall publish every proposed or referred  
ordinance at least twice in the official newspaper of this City before the date of the  
election at which such proposition or ordinance is to be voted upon. All special elections  
held pursuant to the Chapter shall be conducted, the votes canvassed, and the result  
declared in the same manner as provided by law in respect to other City elections.  
  
  
1-12-10: 
 INCONSISTENT MEASURES:  Nothing herein shall prevent two or more  
initiative measures concerning the same subject matter from being voted upon at the  
same election; provided however, if both initiative measures are approved and are  
inconsistent in any respect, the measure receiving the highest number of votes shall  
prevail, and the other shall entirely fail to become law.  
  
  
1-12-11: 
 REQUIRED TIME BETWEEN ELECTIONS:  No more than one special  
referendum or initiative election may be held within any period of six (6) months.  
  
  
1-12-12: 
 LIMITATIONS ON RIGHT:  The right of initiative or referendum shall not  
be exercised with respect to any measure pertaining to issuance of bonds, tax levies,  
fiscal appropriations, zoning, or any other matter in conflict with the Constitution and  
laws of the State of Idaho. Such right or rights shall, to the extent consistent with the  
Constitution of the State of Idaho, be limited to legislative matters and shall not be  
exercised to impair any vested contract or property right or deprive any person of due  
process of law.  
  
  
1-12-13: 
 RECALL:  The Mayor and members of the City Council shall be subject to  
recall in accordance with Chapter 17, Title 34, Idaho Code. Appointive officers of the City  
shall not be subject to recall.  
  
CHAPTER 13  
  
FINANCES  
  
  
SECTION:  
  
1-13-1:  Presentment and Allowance of Claims  
1-13-2:  Tort Claims  
1-13-3:  Acceptance of Payment  
1-13-4:  Payment of Claims  
1-13-5:  Register of Warrants  
1-13-6:  Payment of Registered Warrants  
1-13-7:  Canceled Warrants to be Filed  
1-13-8:  Designation of Depositories  
1-13-9:  Deposit of Public Funds by Treasurer  
1-13-10: Certification of Depositories by Council  
1-13-11: Investment of Idle Funds  
1-13-12: Compliance with State Laws  
1-13-13: Surplus Personal Property Disposition  
  
  
1-13-1: 
  PRESENTATION AND ALLOWANCE OF CLAIMS:  
  
A.  
All claims for payment for goods or services for which a written purchase order or  
contract has been duly approved or authorized by the Council shall be filed with the City  
Clerk prior to payment thereof. All such claims shall be reviewed by the City Clerk and  
shall be certified as correct prior to submission to the Council.  
  
B.  
All bills shall be accepted, certified for payment and paid within sixty (60)  
calendar days after the billing is delivered to the Clerk, unless the claimant and the City  
have agreed by written contract for a longer period of time in which payment is to be  
made.  
  
C.  
All claims, accounts or invoices shall state in detail the nature of each item for  
which payment is sought, the date the same became due and shall be accompanied by  
an affidavit of the claimant or his authorized agent stating that the service was performed  
or that the article was furnished as therein stated, or that the liability has accrued and  
that the same is a just and correct statement of the claim.  
  
D.  
All claims for which payment has not been made within the time frame set forth  
above shall bear interest at the rate provided in Section 63-3045, Idaho Code, unless a  
different rate of interest or date of accrual has been agreed upon in writing between the  
City and the claimant.  
  
  
E.  
Unless otherwise agreed in writing, no payment shall be made for partial  
deliveries or partial completion of any services.  
  
Page 1 of 4    FINANCE                   REVISED 8-20-2009  
  

  Loading....
   
  
  
  
F.  
Upon presentation of the claim to the Council, the claim may be allowed in whole  
or in part, and if rejected, it shall not be again considered by the Council except upon a  
majority vote of the whole Council to reconsider the claim.  
  
G.  
Payment of such claims shall in all other respects conform to the provisions of  
Idaho Code Section 67-2302.  
  
  
1-13-2:   
TORT CLAIMS:  All claims for damages against the City shall be filed with  
the Clerk within the time and in the manner specified by Chapter 9, Title 6, Idaho Code.  
When the claim is filed, the Clerk shall date stamp the claim and execute an  
acknowledgment of the receipt of the claim. A claim shall be considered filed upon  
delivery of the claim to the Clerk and upon delivery to the claimant of a date stamped,  
acknowledged copy of the claim.  
  
  
1-13-3: 
  ACCEPTANCE OF PAYMENT:  Whenever the Council orders payment of  
any claim, whether in whole or in part, acceptance of any warrant or check by the  
claimant shall be considered a settlement in full of said claim, and the same shall not be  
presented for further allowance, unless upon an affirmative vote of three-fourths of the  
members of the full Council.  
  
  
1-13-4:  
 PAYMENT OF CLAIMS:  All claims allowed against the City shall be paid  
by warrant or check drawn upon the Treasurer, and signed by the Mayor, with the  
corporate seal of the City affixed thereto. Such warrants or checks shall also contain a  
statement of the amount of the appropriation and such other information as will  
adequately identify the claim.  
  
  
1-13-5: 
  REGISTER OF WARRANTS:  The Clerk shall keep a register of all  
warrants drawn on the Treasurer showing the number, the date and the name of the  
payee, for what drawn, and upon what fund. Upon the return of the canceled warrant,  
the Clerk shall note in the register the date of their return.  
  
  
1-13-6: 
  PAYMENT OF REGISTERED WARRANTS:  The Treasurer shall keep a  
register of the warrants showing the number, date, amount of each warrant, the name of  
the payee, for what drawn, the funds on which drawn, the date of presentment, the date  
of payment, and the amount paid thereon. Should any warrant be presented for payment  
and sufficient funds are not available to pay the same, the Treasurer shall sign the  
warrant and endorse thereon the words:  "Presented but not paid for want of funds,"  
giving the date of presentation and specifying the rate of interest such warrant shall  
draw. All warrants shall be paid in the order of presentation and registered by the  
Treasurer out of the appropriate funds. All warrants shall be canceled by the Treasurer  
when paid and shall be returned to the Clerk.  
  
  
Page 2 of 4    FINANCE                   REVISED 8-20-2009  
  

  Loading....
   
  
1-13-7:  
 CANCELED WARRANTS TO BE FILED:  Canceled warrants returned by  
the Treasurer shall be filed in the office of the Clerk.  
  
  
1-13-8:  
 DESIGNATION OF DEPOSITORIES:  The following financial institutions  
are hereby designated as the official depositories of the City: Bank of Commerce, First  
Security Bank of Idaho, Key Bank of Idaho and US Bank. Notwithstanding the foregoing,  
the Council may designate other depositories by ordinance or resolution.  
  
  
1-13-9:  
 DEPOSIT OF PUBLIC FUNDS BY TREASURER:  Except where public  
moneys in the custody of the Treasurer at any one time are less than $1,000, the  
Treasurer shall deposit, and at all times keep on deposit, in such designated  
depositories or in the Treasurers Fund of the State of Idaho, all public moneys coming  
into his hands. In no case shall the deposit or deposits of public funds of the City in such  
depositories exceed at any one time in the aggregate the total of the capital and surplus  
or reserves and unallocated or undivided earnings, as applicable of any such depository.  
  
  
1-13-10: 
 CERTIFICATION OF DEPOSITORIES BY COUNCIL:  Not less than once  
every six (6) months the City Council shall certify to the Treasurer the capital and surplus  
or reserves and unallocated or undivided earnings, as applicable, of each public  
depository into which public moneys have been deposited. Such certificates shall be  
immediately served on the Treasurer following their approval by the City Council.  
  
  
1-13-11: 
 INVESTMENT OF IDLE FUNDS:  The Treasurer is hereby authorized  
and empowered to invest surplus or idle funds of the City in any investment permitted by  
Idaho Code Section 67-1210, and interest received on all such investments, unless  
otherwise required by law or ordinance, shall be paid into the general fund of the City.  
  
  
1-13-12: 
 COMPLIANCE WITH STATE LAW:  The deposit and investment of all  
public moneys of the City shall conform in all respects to the Idaho Public Depository  
Law, as set forth in Chapter 1, Title 57, Idaho Code.  
  
  
1-13-13:    
SURPLUS PERSONAL PROPERTY DISPOSITION:  The City Council  
shall have the power and authority to sell or offer for sale at public auction any personal  
property belonging to the City not necessary for the operation of the City.    
  
A. A resolution with general descriptions of property to be sold shall be passed by  
the City Council approving any proposed auction or selling of personal property,  
said resolution shall provide for the destruction of the property in the event the  
property fails to be sold.    
  
B. In the event the City Council determines certain personal property to be of no  
value, a resolution for disposition shall be approved in which such items shall be  
disposed of in the manner provided for in said resolution.      
  
C. Prior to offering the property for sale, the City Council shall advertise notice of the  
Page 3 of 4    FINANCE                   REVISED 8-20-2009  
  

  Loading....
   
  
auction in a newspaper, as defined in section 60-106, Idaho Code, either  
published in the City or having a general circulation in the City, not less than ten  
(10) calendar days prior to the auction.  However, personal property not  
exceeding two-hundred fifty dollars ($250) in value may be sold at private sale  
without notice or public auction.  
  
D. Proceeds from the sale of personal property shall be paid into the City treasury  
for the general use of the City.  
  
E. In addition to the purchase price, a purchaser of City property shall pay all fees  
  
required by law for the transfer of property. 
  
F. All surplus personal property sold at auction or otherwise shall be paid in full by  
  
negotiable funds at time of property transfer.   
  
G. In addition to any other powers granted by law, the City Council may at their  
discretion, grant to or exchange with the federal government, the state of Idaho,  
any political subdivision or taxing district of the state of Idaho or any local  
historical society, or any other not-for-profit (nonprofit) corporation or like entity  
which is registered or incorporated in Idaho, with or without compensation, any  
personal property owned by the City, after adoption of a resolution by the City  
Council that the grant or exchange of property is in the public interest. Notice of  
such grant or exchange shall be as provided in section 60-106, Idaho Code.    
  
H. No City employee or immediate family member of a City employee or City Official  
shall bid at auction or purchase personal property being sold by the City.  
  
I. Any resolution required by this section may be approved at any regularly or  
specially scheduled meeting of the City Council.  
  
Page 4 of 4    FINANCE                   REVISED 8-20-2009  


 PUBLIC RECORDS  
  
CHAPTER 14  
  
PUBLIC RECORDS  
  
  
SECTION:  
  
1-14-1:  Open Records Policy  
1-14-2:  Hours  
1-14-3:  Exceptions  
1-14-4:  Copying Costs  
1-14-5:  Identification and Retrieval of Records  
1-14-6:  Custodian Defined  
1-14-7:  Request for Examination  
1-14-8:  Response to Requests for Examination  
1-14-9:  Mailing of Records  
1-14-10: Electronic Duplication  
1-14-11: Objection to Records Production  
1-14-12: Retention of Temporary Records  
1-14-13: Destruction or Alteration of Records  
  
  
1-14-1:  
 OPEN RECORDS POLICY:  All records of the City shall be open to  
inspection and every person shall have a right to examine and make a copy thereof,  
subject to the provisions of this chapter. Nothing herein shall impose a duty upon the  
custodian of any public record to research, sort, manipulate, index or process  
information contained in any public record.  
  
  
1-14-2: 
  HOURS:  All records open to the public shall be available for inspection or  
copying upon the request of any person during the hours of 9:00 a.m., to and until 5:00  
p.m., of every day except legal holidays. Public records may not be removed from the  
custodian's office without the permission of such custodian.  
  
  
1-14-3: 
  EXCEPTIONS:  Except as otherwise determined by specific resolution of  
the Council, the public shall have no right to inspect or copy the following records:  
  
A.  
All records exempt from inspection and copying by law.  
  
B.  
Records prepared, considered or received in relation to or in anticipation of any  
matter which is properly the subject of an executive session under Idaho Code Section  
67-2345.  
  
C.  
All public records to the extent it is necessary to preserve any privilege  
established by law or pursuant to the Idaho Rules of Evidence, or to the extent  
necessary to preserve and maintain records relating to a privilege of any officer,  
employee, agent of the City or any other person who delivers records or documents to  
the City having an expectation of the confidentiality thereof under such privileges.  

  Loading....
 PUBLIC RECORDS  
  
  
  
1-14-4:  
 COPYING COSTS:  Every division or department of the City may  
establish a reasonable fee for providing copies under the provisions of this chapter,  
provided such fees shall not exceed the actual expense of making the copy. The  
custodian of the public records may require payment of the estimated costs of copying in  
advance.  
  
  
1-14-5:  
 IDENTIFICATION AND RETRIEVAL OF RECORDS:  All requests for  
inspection or copying shall be made directly to the custodian of the desired records and  
shall be sufficiently specific to allow ready identification of the records desired. In the  
event a request for inspection or copying fails to state the specific identity or location of  
public records, then the custodian shall have no obligation to locate, retrieve or copy  
such records, beyond indicating the general location of records of the type indicated and  
then allowing such person to examine the records so indicated.  
  
  
1-14-6:  
 CUSTODIAN DEFINED. For the purpose of this chapter, the term  
"custodian" shall mean the person having actual physical custody of the records for  
which inspection or copying is sought.  
  
  
1-14-7:  
 REQUESTS FOR EXAMINATION:  The custodian shall make no inquiry  
of the person requesting inspection or copying of any public record, except to determine  
the nature or identity of the records sought and the mailing address and telephone  
number of the person making the request. The custodian of the public records, or his or  
her agent, may require the request for inspection or copying be made in writing, and in  
such event, the time frames set forth in Section 1-14-8 below shall not commence until  
the written request is delivered to the person having physical custody of such records,  
notwithstanding any prior verbal request.  
  
  
1-14-8:  
 RESPONSE TO REQUESTS FOR EXAMINATION:  The custodian of any  
public record shall grant or deny a request for examination or copying within three (3)  
working days after the request is received, provided if the custodian determines a longer  
period of time is needed to locate or retrieve the records, the custodian shall notify the  
person requesting the records and shall provide the public records no later than ten (10)  
working days following receipt of the request. No request shall be denied, unless the  
denial is in writing, following approval by the City Attorney, in accordance with Idaho  
Code Section 9-339. For the purposes of this section, a request for copying shall not be  
deemed made until the request has been personally communicated to, or a written  
request is delivered to, the custodian of the records sought. Communications or written  
requests made to any other officer, agent or employee of the City shall not be deemed  
effective until such communication or written request is actually delivered to such  
custodian.  
  
  
1-14-9: 
  MAILING OF RECORDS:  In the event a request is made for copies of  
public records to be delivered by mail or other carrier, the custodian may require  
advance payment of the mailing or shipping costs for such public records.  

  Loading....
 PUBLIC RECORDS  
  
  
  
1-14-10: 
 ELECTRONIC DUPLICATION:  No person shall, without the consent of  
the custodian, use any electronic machine, computer, tape recorder, copier or device,  
other than equipment provided by the City, for the purpose of copying any public record.  
The custodian may consent to such copying only upon a determination that such  
copying presents no risk of having such record altered, damaged or destroyed.  
  
  
1-14-11: 
 OBJECTION TO RECORDS PRODUCTION:  In the event the custodian  
of any public record of the City produces records upon the request of any person, such  
response shall be deemed satisfactory, unless such person files a written objection with  
the producing custodian within three (3) working days after such records are produced.  
Such objection shall state the specific reason why the response is inadequate and shall  
be considered a new request for the purposes of this chapter and Idaho Code Sections  
9-337 through 9-347.   
  
  
1-14-12: 
 RETENTION OF TEMPORARY RECORDS:  Temporary records which  
are not routinely subject to audit, or duplicate copies of any public records, may be  
destroyed by the custodian thereof, without further resolution of the City Council and  
without passage of a resolution listing, in detail, the records to be destroyed. At the  
commencement of each fiscal year, the Clerk shall notify all division directors of the  
nature of all temporary records which shall be kept for routine public audit purposes and  
which may be destroyed only after passage of a resolution by the City Council. Any  
temporary record which is not subject to routine audit and which in the discretion of the  
custodian thereof has no continuing legal or historical significance and for which no  
significant public purpose would be served by retaining the same may be destroyed in  
the ordinary course of business without resolution of the Council or supervision of the  
City Clerk. All other permanent, semi-permanent and temporary records shall be kept  
and retained for the periods required under Idaho Code Section 59-907.  
  
  
1-14-13: 
 DESTRUCTION OR ALTERATION OF RECORDS:  Any person who  
alters, destroys, falsifies or who without authority removes or attempts to remove any  
public records from the office of the custodian or who deliberately disarranges or  
destroys the classification, retention or retrieval system therefore, is guilty of a  
misdemeanor. Such person may also be denied any further right of access to such  
records.  
  
CHAPTER 15  
  
ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS  
  
  
SECTION:  
  
1-15-1:  Corporate Seal Design  
1-15-2:  Adoption of Seal  
1-15-3:  Custodian of Corporate Seal  
1-15-4:  Official Newspaper  
1-15-5:  Official City Map  
1-15-6:  Policies, Procedures, Specifications and Standards  
  
  
1-15-1: 
  CORPORATE SEAL DESIGN:   The corporate seal of the City shall be approved  
by the City Council.  
  
  
1-15-2:  
 ADOPTION OF SEAL:   The seal described above is adopted as the corporate  
seal of the City of Ammon, Bonneville County, Idaho.  
  
  
1-15-3:  
 CUSTODIAN OF CORPORATE SEAL:   The Clerk shall be the custodian of the  
corporate seal of the City.  
  
  
1-15-4:  
 OFFICIAL NEWSPAPER:   The Post Register is designated as the official  
newspaper of the City. All writings required to be published by the City under any law of the  
State, or any provision of this Code, shall be published in the official newspaper.  
  
  
1-15-5:  
 OFFICIAL CITY MAP:   A map of the City, kept current by the Planning Director  
shall, at all times, be kept on file in the City Office, which map shall be known as the Official  
Map of the City. The boundaries of the City as shown on said map shall constitute the official  
city limits of the City. Such map shall be deemed to be a part of this Code as fully as if set forth  
herein.  
  
1-15-6:             
POLICIES, PROCEDURES, SPECIFICATIONS AND STANDARDS:  The City  
Council may from time to time adopt policies, procedures, specifications, standards, etc., in  
order to provide and promote consistency in the application of the City’s business, regulatory  
authority, needs and requirements. The same may be adopted by resolution of the City Council  
or by ordinance as the City Council so determines.    
  
  
  
Title 1, Chapter 15     Page 1 of 1   Adopted 12-18-2008  

Title 02 Boards and Commissions

CHAPTER 1  
  
PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION  
  
  
SECTION  
  
2-1-1:  Appointment  
2-1-2:  Qualifications  
2-1-3:  Term of Office  
2-1-4:  Organization; Rules and Meetings  
2-1-5:  Duties  
  
  
2-1-1: 
  APPOINTMENT:  The Mayor, with the consent by the Council, shall  
appoint a Planning and Zoning Commission of not less than six (6) or more than twelve  
(12) members.  
  
  
2-1-2:  
 QUALIFICATIONS:  All members of the Commission shall reside within  
Bonneville County, provided no more than three members may reside outside the  
boundaries of the City. All members shall have resided within Bonneville County for a  
period of two (2) consecutive years immediately preceding their appointment. No elected  
or appointed officer of the City shall serve as an official member of the Planning and  
Zoning Commission.  
  
  
2-1-3: 
  TERM OF OFFICE:  Members of the Planning and Zoning Commission  
shall serve a term of three (3) years. The term of each member shall expire on  
December 31 of the third year following their appointment, provided the terms of no  
more than one-third (1/3) of the full commission shall expire in any one (1) year.  
Vacancies in the office of the commission during the term of an appointed member shall  
be filled by the Mayor and Council for the unexpired term of the incumbent. Members  
may be removed by a majority vote of the full Council. Members shall be selected  
without respect to political affiliation and shall serve without compensation.  
  
  
2-1-4:  
 ORGANIZATION; RULES AND MEETINGS:  The Commission shall elect  
its own chairperson and create and fill such other offices as necessary. One (1) regular  
meeting shall be held each month for not less than nine (9) months in each year. A  
majority of the members of the Commission shall constitute a quorum at any meeting. All  
meetings and records of the Commission shall be open to the public. Written rules  
consistent with this Chapter and the laws of the State for the transaction of business of  
the Commission shall be adopted, and a written record of the resolutions, findings and  
determinations shall be kept.  
  
  
 2-1-5: 
  DUTIES:  The Planning and Zoning Commission shall examine all  
proposals, applications and petitions and shall make recommendations to the City  
Council concerning the zoning of properties within the City and properties to be annexed  
thereto. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall recommend to the Council changes  
regarding the City's comprehensive plan. The commission may suggest changes in the  
Zoning Ordinance and shall study and make recommendations for the laying out,  
widening, extending and locating of streets, roads and highways in the City, the future  
development, growth and beautification of the City's streets, parks, grounds and lands.  
  
The Planning and Zoning Commission shall have all powers and duties assigned to it by  
the Zoning Ordinance. It shall act in an advisory capacity to the Board of Adjustment  
when requested by the Board. All maps, plats and replats of land which require the  
approval of the Council shall be submitted first to the Planning and Zoning Commission  
for its recommendation. The Planning and Zoning Commission also shall perform other  
duties required under state law or as directed by the Council.  
  
CHAPTER 2  
  
BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT  
  
  
SECTION:  
  
2-2-1:  Appointment  
2-2-2:  Qualifications  
2-2-3:  Term  
2-2-4:  Vacancies  
2-2-5:  Removal  
2-2-6:  Organization  
2-2-7:  Rules and Regulations  
2-2-8:  Duties  
  
  
2-2-1: 
  APPOINTMENT:  The Mayor and the City Council may, in lieu of acting  
as a Board of Adjustment for the City appoint a separate Board to aid in the  
administration of the planning and zoning ordinance, with the powers and duties as  
provided in such planning and zoning ordinance. Such Board, if appointed, shall consist  
of five (5) members, each to be appointed by the Mayor with the consent of the City  
Council.  
  
  
2-2-2: 
  QUALIFICATIONS:  Members of the Board of Adjustment shall be  
residents and electors of the City. The Mayor, members of the City Council and any  
appointed officer of the City shall not serve as a member of the Board. One member of  
the Board shall be a member of the Planning and Zoning Commission.  
  
  
2-2-3: 
  TERM:  Members of the Board of Adjustment shall be appointed for a  
term of four (4) years, provided that the terms of the members of the first Board so  
appointed shall be such that the term of not more than two (2) members shall expire in  
any one year. Terms shall expire on December 31 of the third year following their  
appointment.  
  
  
2-2-4: 
  VACANCIES:  The Mayor, with consent of the City Council, shall appoint  
a qualified person to fill the unexpired term of any member of the Board in the event of a  
vacancy.  
  
  
2-2-5: 
  REMOVAL:   Any member of the Board of Adjustment may be removed  
for cause by the City Council upon written charges and after a public hearing, if such  
public hearing is requested.  
  
  
2-2-6:  
 ORGANIZATION:  The Board shall elect its own chairperson and may  
appoint other officers from among its members. The Zoning Official shall serve as a non- 
voting ex-officio member of the Board.  
  
  
2-2-7:  
 RULES AND REGULATIONS:  The Board shall adopt rules and  
regulations necessary to carry into effect the provisions of this Chapter. Meetings shall  
be held when necessary. The Board shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the  
vote of each member on every question. The meetings, minutes and records of the  
Board shall be open to the public.  
  
  
2-2-8:  
 DUTIES:  The Board of Adjustment shall have such duties and authority  
as set forth in the Zoning Ordinance. It shall perform other duties as required by state  
law or as directed by the City Council.  

CHAPTER 3  
  
PARKS, RECREATION AND TRAILS COMMISSION  
  
  
SECTION:  
  
2-3-1:  Appointment   
2-3-2:  Qualifications  
2-3-3:  Term of Office  
2-3-4:  Compensation  
2-3-5:  Organization  
2-3-6:  Rules and Regulations  
2-3-7:  Duties  
  
  
2-3-1:  APPOINTMENT:   The Mayor, subject to the confirmation of the Council,  
shall appoint a Parks and Recreation Commission, consisting of nine (9) members.    
  
2-3-2:  QUALIFICATIONS: All members shall have resided in the City of  
Ammon for a period of 18 months immediately preceding their appointment.  All  
members shall be a minimum of eighteen (18) years of age, except one (1)  
representative appointed to represent the youth of the community may be under the age  
of eighteen (18) at the time of their appointment.  No elected or appointed officer of the  
City shall serve as an official member of the Parks, Recreation and Trails Commission.    
  
  
2-3-3:  TERMS:   Members of the Parks, Recreation and Trails Commission shall  
serve a term of three (3) years.  The term of each member shall expire on December 31  
of the third year following their appointment, provided the terms of no more than one- 
third (1/3) of the full commission shall expire in any one (1) year.  Vacancies in the office  
of the commission during the term of an appointed member shall be filled by the Mayor  
following the requirements in section 2-3-1 of this chapter.  Terms of each member  
appointed shall expire on December 31 of the year in which their appointment expires.    
  
Upon the formation of the Parks and Recreation Commission the following appointments  
shall be made:  
  
3 persons appointed for a term of three (3) years.  
3 persons appointed for a term of two (2) years.  
3 persons appointed for a term of one (1) year.  
  
  
  
2-3-4:  COMPENSATION:   All members of the Commission shall serve and act  
without compensation, except that their actual and necessary expenses shall be allowed  
and the City shall purchase the necessary and suitable equipment and supplies to  
enable the Commission to properly transact and attend to its business.  
  
Title 2 Chapter 3    Page 1 of 3      Amended 5-3-2018  
  

  Loading....
  
2-3-5:  ORGANIZATION:   At the first meeting of each new year, the members of  
the Commission shall elect one of their members, President and Vice President and  
such other offices as deemed necessary by the Commission.  The City Parks and  
Recreation staff shall provide secretarial service for the Commission and shall furnish all  
records of minutes to the City Clerk for all matters pertaining to meetings including  
notices, agendas and minutes.  Posting of a public meeting at the Ammon City Hall shall  
be the responsibility of the Parks and Recreation Director.     
  
  
2-3-6:  RULES AND REGULATIONS:   The Commission shall adopt such rules  
and regulations as it deems necessary to carry out the provisions of this Chapter.  
  
  
2-3-7:  DUTIES:   The Parks, Recreation and Trails Commission shall act as an  
advisory Commission to the Mayor and City Council.  
  
It shall be the duty of the Parks, Recreation and Trails Commission to work in  
conjunction with the Parks and Recreation staff, and to advise and recommend to the  
Mayor and City Council in the orderly and efficient administration of the City Parks and  
Recreation system.  To study the economic and physical conditions and problems in  
connection with the maintenance, operation, and use of the public playgrounds and  
recreational facilities, and to make suggestions to the Parks and Recreational Director  
as to the improvement and most efficient use thereof, and to work with the Parks and  
Recreation Director toward a comprehensive and well-rounded plan of City-wide  
recreation compatible with available funds. The Commission shall represent the public  
interest in consideration of the acquisition, development, use, and expansion of needed  
playground and recreational areas, and in making recommendations regarding  
personnel employment for all recreational activity under the supervision and control of  
the Parks and Recreational Director.  
  
Furthers duties shall be as follows:  
  
? To propose and recommend rules and regulations for the control and regulation  
of the use of public parks grounds, buildings, and playground facilities;  subject to  
approval by the Mayor and City Council.  
? To study and propose plans, and recommend rules and regulations for the  
planting, growing, care, regulation and control of trees and shrubbery in all public  
places.  
? To represent the public interest in making suggestions and recommendations  
for the development, use and expansion of needed and required playground and  
other recreational and leisure program activities.  
? To propose set priorities to plans and recommendations and suggestions for  
the future growth development and regulation of park, playground and recreation  
facilities of the City; subject to approval by the Mayor and City Council.  
? To propose plans, recommendations, and suggestions to the annual budget to  
be submitted by the Parks and Recreation Director for the projects and  
expenditures for the next fiscal year prior to the budget proposal being submitted  
to City Council for approval.  
Title 2 Chapter 3    Page 2 of 3      Amended 5-3-2018  
  

  
? To suggest and recommend such rules and regulations necessary and  
desirable to carry out the intent of the Chapter.  
? To review and comment on the Parks and Recreations Department’s  Strategic   
and Action Plans.  
? To review and comment on the City’s Comprehensive Plan as that plan relates  
to Parks and Recreation.  
? To suggest and recommend such rules and regulations necessary and  
desirable to carry out the intent of the Chapter, and to improve and correlate the  
problems of governmental administration of all recreation and leisure programs of  
the City.  
? To work with the Planning and Zoning Commission and the Planning  
Department in implementing the Connecting Our Communities trail plans and  
review the City trail system, making recommendations as needed for additional  
trails.  
? To appoint members of the commission to subcommittees to provide  
community information to the Parks and Recreation Commission concerning  
particular facilities or programs of the parks and leisure movement of the City.  
  
  
2-3-8: Meetings:   One (1) regular meeting shall be held each month for not less than  
nine (9) months in each year.  A majority of the members of the Commission shall  
constitute a quorum at any meeting.  All meetings and records of the Commission shall  
be open to the public.  Written rules consistent with this chapter and consistent with the  
laws of the State of Idaho shall be adopted and a written record of all meetings shall be  
kept.  
Title 2 Chapter 3    Page 3 of 3      Amended 5-3-2018  
  
CHAPTER 4  
  
TRAFFIC SAFETY COMMISSION  
  
  
SECTION:  
  
2-4-1:  Appointment  
2-4-2:  Qualifications  
2-4-3:  Term  
2-4-4:  Organization  
2-4-5:  Duties  
  
  
2-4-1: 
  APPOINTMENT:   The Mayor, subject to the confirmation of the Council,  
may appoint a Traffic Safety Commission of not less than three (3) or more than seven (7)  
members, who shall hold office for the term hereinafter provided.  
  
  
2-4-2: 
  QUALIFICATIONS:   The members of the Traffic Safety Commission  
appointed shall be residents and electors of the City of Ammon with not more than  
one-third of the members of such Commission to hold appointive or elective office  
otherwise with the City; provided, however, that one member of said Commission may be  
a non-resident.  
  
  
2-4-3:  
 TERM:   The term of office for said Commission members shall be for two  
(2) years; except that for the first appointments, the term shall be determined by drawing  
lots so that as nearly as may be, one-third respectively shall serve for one (1) year, two  
(2) years, and three (3) years, and thereafter successive appointments shall serve for a  
term of two (2) years.  
  
  
2-4-4: 
  ORGANIZATION:   The Commission shall have a chairman and a secretary  
to be selected by the Commission.  
  
  
2-4-5: 
  DUTIES:     
  
A. The Commission shall study the traffic throughout the City to the discovery and  
elimination of special hazards, the promotion of traffic safety by traffic controls,  
laws, regulations, and other means, and shall make recommendations to the  
Council concerning traffic safety from time to time.  
  
B. The Commission shall serve as the Board of Hearing for appeals of parking  
infraction citations.  This Board shall meet as needed to review appeals of citations  
issued by the Enforcement Officer or their designee for violations of Sections 9-4- 
1 of the Ammon City Code.  
  
Page 1 of 1  Revised 11-3-2016  
  

CHAPTER 5  
  
CITIZEN ADVISORY COMMITTEE  
  
  
SECTION:  
  
Appointment 
2-5-1:    
Qualifications 
2-5-2:    
Compensation 
2-5-3:    
Organization 
2-5-4:    
Duties 
2-5-5:    
  
  
2-5-1: 
  APPOINTMENT:   The Mayor may, subject to confirmation by the Council,  
appoint various Citizen Advisory Committees of up to fourteen (14) members, who shall  
serve at the pleasure of the Mayor and Council.  
  
  
2-5-2:  
 QUALIFICATIONS:   All members of the Committee shall have resided  
within the City of Ammon for a minimum of six (6) months.    
  
  
2-5-3: 
  COMPENSATION:   No compensation shall be paid to any member for the  
serves on the Committee.  
  
  
2-5-4:  
 ORGANIZATION:   The Committee shall select one (1) of its members as  
chairman and one (1) member as secretary, and shall keep a written record of all meetings  
of the Committee, and of all recommendations which the Committee may make to the  
Mayor and Council.  All meetings of the Committee shall be posted as a public meeting.  
  
  
2-5-5:  
 DUTIES:   The Committee shall be given direction from the Mayor and  
Council on the specific item or concern to be addressed.  The Committee shall furnish the  
Mayor and Council a report or recommendation as directed at the time responsibilities are  
assigned.   
  
2-5-6:    
TERM: The term of each appointment shall be as set by the City  
Council at the time of the assignment.  Terms can be renewed by a vote of the City Council.  
  
 YOUTH ADVISORY COUNCILYOUTH ADVISORY COUNCIL   
  
CHAPTER 6  
  
YOUTH ADVISORY COUNCIL  
  
  
SECTION:  
  
2-6-1:  Creation  
2-6-2:  Qualifications  
2-6-3:  Term of Office  
2-6-4:  Organization  
2-6-5:  Duties and Authority  
2-6-6:  Voluntary Service on Council  
2-6-7:  Meetings  
  
  
2-6-1: 
  CREATION:   The Mayor, subject to the confirmation by the Council may appoint  
a Youth Advisory Council consisting of not less than five (5) or more than fifteen (15) members,  
to be appointed by the Mayor, subject to approval by the Council.  
  
  
2-6-2: 
  QUALIFICATIONS:   No personal shall be eligible for appointment to the  
Advisory Council who is not a citizen of the United States and a resident of the City for at least  
three (3) years immediately prior to his appointment.  
  
  
2-6-3: 
  TERM OF OFFICE:   The term of office for the first members appointed to the  
Advisory Council shall be one (1), two (2), and three (3) years, to be determined by lot, and  
thereafter the terms of office for each member appointed shall be three (3) years. Vacancies  
shall be filled by the Mayor, confirmed by the Council, for the unexpired balance of the term of  
the member whose place is being filled. Members may be removed by the majority vote of the  
Council at any time. Members shall be selected without respect to political affiliations, race, or  
religion, and shall serve without compensation.  
  
  
2-6-4:  
 ORGANIZATION:   The members of the Advisory Council shall select their  
permanent chairman, vice chairman, and secretary, and such other subordinates as they deem  
necessary. The Advisory Council shall adopt such rules and regulations as the members, by  
majority vote, may determine are necessary to carry into effect the provisions of the Chapter.  
The chairman, and in the event of his absence or inability to act, the vice chairman, shall  
preside at all meetings. The secretary shall keep a record of all meetings and shall see that a  
true copy of all minutes is promptly provided to the Council. The Council shall provide suitable  
accommodations and equipment to enable the Advisory Council to conduct its meetings.  
  
  
  
  

  Loading....
 YOUTH ADVISORY COUNCILYOUTH ADVISORY COUNCIL   
  
  
2-6-5: 
  DUTIES AND AUTHORITY:   The purpose of the Youth Advisory Council shall be  
to act as an advisory agency to the Council and other public agencies in the prevention and  
control of juvenile delinquency, and to that end it shall exercise the following functions:  
  
(A) It shall initiate and develop fact finding studies and research programs concerned with  
the nature, causes, and means of prevention of juvenile delinquency, and the treatment  
of juvenile delinquents.  
  
(B) It shall, from time to time, make known to the public agencies and the organizations  
which are concerned with and have the responsibility for the prevention and control of  
juvenile delinquency, the results of its studies, and shall make such recommendations as  
it may deem of value in connection therewith.  
  
(C) It shall advise and assist such agencies in the study, initiation, and development of new  
techniques, services, facilities, and programs to present and reduce juvenile  
delinquency, including ways and means by which recommended services, facilities, and  
programs may be initiated and developed.  
  
(D) It shall endeavor to give publicity to the nature, causes, and means of preventing and  
controlling juvenile delinquency, by press releases, radio, television, and any other  
means it deems will enlist the cooperation of the public in the program.  
  
(E) It shall study all laws pertaining to the control of juvenile delinquency and shall formulate  
recommendations for such changes therein or additions thereto as it deems advisable.  
  
  
2-6-6: 
  VOLUNTARY SERVICE ON COUNCIL:   The members of the Youth Advisory  
Council shall serve on a voluntary basis, without compensation, and the Council shall incur no  
expense to the City without previous authorization of the Council.  
  
  
2-6-7: 
  MEETINGS:   The Youth Advisory Council shall hold regular meetings once a  
month, on such date as may be fixed by its rules and regulations, and may hold special  
meetings at the call of the chairman.  
  
Title 03 Operation Divisions


  
B.  
Notice of Sale:  A Notice of Sale shall be published at least once a week for not  
less than two (2) consecutive weeks in the official newspaper, with the second  
publication being not less than five (5) nor more than ten (10) days before the date of the  
sale. Whenever the Police Division knows the name and address of the owner or other  
person entitled to possession of any article to be sold at such sale, a copy of the notice  
of sale shall also be mailed to such owner or other person entitled to possession at his  
or her last known address, postage prepaid, at least five (5) days prior to such sale.  
  
C.  
Conduct of Sale:  The sale shall be by public auction for cash, lawful money of  
the United States of America. The City may determine the number of items to be sold at  
the sale and may determine whether these items are sold singly or in lots. The City,  
upon request, shall give or cause to be given a bill of sale to the highest bidder upon  
payment of the amount bid. All goods shall be sold as is and without warranty of title,  
merchantability, fitness, or other express or implied warranty of any kind or nature.  
  
D.  
Proceeds:  The proceeds of sale shall be applied first to all costs assessed or  
incurred against the personal property so sold including any storage charges and  
expenses of sale incurred by the City Clerk and the Police Division, and the balance of  
such proceeds, if any, shall be deposited in a separate fund with the City Treasurer for a  
period of one (1) year from the date of sale. Any person claiming title to or ownership of,  
such proceeds by reason of ownership of such personal property at the time of sale shall  
make written application therefore to the Police Division. If satisfactory proof of such title  
or ownership is furnished within one (1) year of the receipt of such proceeds, then the  
proceeds shall be delivered to the claimant. If no claim and proof is made before the  
expiration of one (1) year from the date of the receipt of the proceeds, the same shall be  
credited to the general fund of the City, and no claim therefore shall be thereafter  
considered.  
  
  
3-1-8: 
  REIMBURSEMENT TO OWNER:  If the owner of any article held under  
the provisions of this Chapter, appears prior to the time of such sale and makes proper  
proof of ownership, the City shall deliver possession thereof to the owner upon payment  
of any storage costs therefore. The City shall from time to time prepare a uniform  
schedule of reasonable storage charges for such articles, which schedule shall be filed  
with the City Clerk and at the office of the Police Division.  
  
  
3-1-9: 
  EXTRATERRITORIAL POWERS:  All police officers may exercise, to the  
fullest extent permitted by law, all extraterritorial authority conferred upon them pursuant  
to Idaho Code Section 67-2337, may make arrests and issue citations while in fresh  
pursuit of any person who has violated any state law or City ordinance, and shall aid and  
assist the Mayor in enforcing any extraterritorial powers or authority as set forth in this  
Code.  
  
CHAPTER 2  
  
FIRE AND PUBLIC SAFETY DIVISION  
  
  
SECTION:  
  
3-2-1:  Creation of Division  
3-2-2:  Appointment of Chief and Deputy Chief  
3-2-3:  Supervision and Removal of Fire Chief  
3-2-4:  Duties of Division  
3-2-5:  Abatement of Hazards  
3-2-6:  Limitation of Outside Employment  
3-2-7:  Fire Chief to Make Monthly Report  
3-2-8:  Scope of Duties  
  
  
3-2-1:  CREATION OF DIVISION:   The Fire and Public Safety Division is hereby  
established as an administrative division of the City.  
  
  
3-2-2:  APPOINTMENT OF CHIEF AND DEPUTY CHIEF:   The Mayor, subject  
to confirmation of the Council, shall appoint a Fire Chief and DEPUTY Assistant Chief.  
The Division shall be managed by the Fire Chief and in his or her absence or removal,  
by any other officer designated by the Chief. The Fire Chief may, subject to the approval  
of the Mayor and City Council, hire battalion chiefs and other officers and employees  
necessary for the proper operation of the Division.  
  
  
3-2-3:  SUPERVISION AND REMOVAL OF FIRE CHIEF:   The Fire Chief shall  
be supervised by the Mayor and Council and may be removed, with or without cause, at  
any time by the Mayor, subject to confirmation by a vote of at least one half plus one of  
the full membership of the Council.  
  
  
3-2-4:  DUTIES OF DIVISION:   The Fire Chief shall manage the Fire and Public  
Safety Division and the equipment and property belonging thereto, and shall supervise  
and direct the Division in preventing and fighting fires, protecting life and property from  
harm from toxic or radioactive substances or chemicals, explosives, or other hazardous  
substances. The Fire and Public Safety Division shall inspect, as often as necessary, all  
buildings and structures within the City, except single family residential dwellings, for the  
purpose of ascertaining and causing to be corrected, any violations of the International  
Fire Code.  
  
3-2-5:  ABATEMENT OF HAZARDS:   The Fire and Public Safety Division shall  
administer and enforce the International Fire Code and the Code for Abatement of  
Dangerous Buildings.  
  
  
Title 3 Chapter 2  Page 1 of 2  Amended 5-3-2018  

  Loading....
  
3-2-6:  LIMITATION OF OUTSIDE EMPLOYMENT:   No member of the Fire and  
Public Safety Division shall engage in any other employment or undertaking that will  
interfere or conflict with their duties as a member of the Division. All members of the  
Division shall first request the approval of the Fire Chief before engaging in such  
employment or undertaking, which approval shall be in writing.  
  
  
3-2-7:  FIRE CHIEF TO MAKE MONTHLY REPORT:   The Fire Chief shall make  
reports to the Mayor and Council as requested. This report shall describe the condition  
of the Division, including a description of all fire or other hazardous occurrences that  
have taken place during the preceding month, and the expenses incurred by reason  
thereof.  
  
  
3-2-8:  SCOPE OF DUTIES:   Nothing in this Chapter, the International Fire  
Code, the Code for Abatement of Dangerous Buildings, or any other fire or public safety  
code adopted by the City shall create a private duty or obligation of the City to any  
person, or give rise to any private right of action, on account of any failure by the City or  
any member of the Fire and Public Safety Division to perform the duties prescribed  
therein  
Title 3 Chapter 2  Page 2 of 2  Amended 5-3-2018  

CHAPTER 3  
  
PUBLIC WORKS DIVISION  
  
  
SECTION:  
  
3-3-1:  Establishment of Public Works Division  
3-3-2:  Duties of the Division  
3-3-3:  Public Works Director  
3-3-4:  Duties of Director  
3-3-5:  No Private Duty  
  
  
3-3-1: 
  ESTABLISHMENT OF PUBLIC WORKS DIVISION:  The Division of  
Public Works is hereby established as an administrative division of the City.  
  
  
3-3-2: 
  DUTIES OF THE DIVISION:  The Division of Public Works shall  
supervise and control:  
  
(A) The construction, operation, and maintenance of all public streets, sidewalks,  
alleys, bridges, highways, and rights of way, including the placement and  
operation of street regulatory and informational signs.  The need for and the  
placement of any sign not existing shall be reviewed and approved by the City  
Engineer for compliance to adopted policies, standards or guidelines adopted by  
the City.  
  
(B) The construction, operation, and maintenance of all sewer facilities and  
appurtenances, including sanitary sewers, pumping stations, storm sewers,  
drains, ditches, culverts, streams, and water courses under the jurisdiction of the  
City.  
  
(C) The administration of all rules, regulations, and ordinances pertaining to the  
construction, maintenance, and operation of all streets, sidewalks, rights of way,  
easements, sewers, sanitation facilities, waterlines and pumps, gas lines,  
telephone and communication lines, and subdivision improvements.  
  
(D) The making of all surveys, maps, public works plans, drawings, and other  
documents required for the construction, maintenance, and operation of all public  
works owned or operated by the City.  
  
(E) The preparation of contract drawings, specifications, and cost estimates for all  
public works construction and maintenance, and the supervision of such  
construction, including field inspections.  
  
(F) The construction, operation, and maintenance of all public water supply and  
distribution facilities.  

  Loading....
  
(G) The collection and disposal of all refuse and the cleaning of all streets and alleys,  
including the removal of snow there from.  
  
  
3-3-3: 
  PUBLIC WORKS DIRECTOR:  The Division of Public Works shall be  
managed by a Public Works Director, who shall be appointed by the Mayor, subject to  
confirmation by the Council. The Director of Public Works may be combined with another  
appointive office of the City with the appointment by the Mayor subject to confirmation by  
at least one half plus one of the membership of the full Council. The Director may be  
removed by the Mayor, with or without cause, subject to a confirming vote of at least  
one-half (½) of the members of the full Council, or by the Council on its own initiative,  
upon a unanimous vote of the full Council.  
  
  
3-3-4: 
    DUTIES OF DIRECTOR:  The Director shall, together with the  
department heads, prepare and present the annual operating and capital budgets of the  
Division. The Director shall have full authority to establish technical standards, methods  
and procedures for the Division and to see that they are properly executed.  All public  
works construction projects approved by the Mayor and Council shall be carried out by  
the Director according to design and time schedules within allocated budgets. The  
Director shall formulate and recommend to the Mayor and Council policies and  
procedures for the planning, design, construction, maintenance, repair, and  
improvement of all public works and places owned or operated by the City, except as  
otherwise provided in this Code.  
  
  
3-3-5:  
 NO PRIVATE DUTY:  Nothing in this chapter shall create a private right,  
duty or obligation of the City in favor of any person, or give rise to any private right of  
action, on account of any failure by the City or any employee of the Public Works  
Division to perform the duties prescribed herein.  
  
CHAPTER 4  
  
PLANNING AND BUILDING DIVISION  
  
  
SECTION:  
  
3-4-1:  Planning and Building Division Established  
3-4-2:  Duties  
3-4-3:  Appointment of Personnel of Planning and Building Division  
  
  
3-4-1: 
  PLANNING AND BUILDING DIVISION ESTABLISHED:   The Division of  
Planning and Building is hereby established as an administrative division of the City.  
  
  
3-4-2: 
  DUTIES:   The Division of Planning and Building shall have the following  
duties:  
  
A.  
The enforcement of the Zoning Ordinance, the Sign Code, the Subdivision  
Ordinance, and all codes or ordinances relating to the construction of any building or  
structure within the City and any health or safety regulations applicable thereto, except  
for the International Fire Code.  
  
B.  
Preparation and administration of the Comprehensive Plan and any ordinances  
or regulations necessary to implement the same.  
  
C.  
The issuance and enforcement of permits issued pursuant to such Codes and  
the performance of inspections required thereby.  
  
D.  
The establishment and planning of all public streets, alleys, and thoroughfares  
within the City, the naming of such streets and thoroughfares, and the issuance of  
building numbers for structures located thereupon.  
  
E.  
The coordination and planning of public and private urban mass transit systems  
within the City.  
  
F.  
The coordination and administration of all laws, statutes, and regulations  
pertaining to any census of the City or other procedure or analysis conducted for the  
purpose of determining the population of the City.  
  
G.  
Coordination and operation of all federal and state administrative programs  
providing for enhancement of the economic base of the City or otherwise promoting the  
growth and development of the labor force within the City.  
  
H.  
Coordination and administration of any matter involving the Ammon  
Redevelopment Agency or other similar board or commission whose responsibilities  
encompass the urban revitalization or growth of the City.  
  

  Loading....
  
I.  
Coordination and administration of any matter involving the Ammon Planning and  
Zoning Commission in conjunction and cooperation with the zoning administrator.  
  
J.  
Such other duties as may be required by the Mayor or City Council.  
  
  
3-4-3: 
  APPOINTMENT OF PERSONNEL OF PLANNING AND BUILDING  
DIVISION:  
  
(A) Director:   The Division of Planning and Building shall be managed by the  
Planning and Building Director, who shall be appointed by the Mayor subject to  
confirmation by at least one half plus one of the membership of the full Council.  
The Director of the Planning and Building Division may be combined with another  
appointive office of the City with the appointment by the Mayor subject to  
confirmation by at least one half plus one of the membership of the full Council.  
  
(B) Removal:   The Director may be removed by the Mayor, with or without cause,  
subject to confirmation by at least one half plus one of the membership of the full  
Council, or by the Council upon its own initiative upon a unanimous vote thereof.  
  
(C) Other Personnel:   Other personnel as deemed desirable or necessary for the  
operation of the Division of Planning and Building may be appointed or the  
services contracted for by the Mayor with the confirmation of the Council, and  
shall be subject to termination, with or without cause, by the Mayor, subject to  
confirmation by at least one half plus one of the membership of the full Council.  
The duties as performed may be combined with other duties or responsibilities of  
personnel within the City.  
  
CHAPTER 5  
  
RECREATION DEPARTMENT  
  
  
SECTION:  
  
3-5-1:  Established  
3-5-2:  Duties  
  
  
3-5-1:  
 ESTABLISHED:   There is hereby established a Recreation Department.  
The Mayor shall, subject to the confirmation of the Council, appoint a Recreation  
Director who shall have supervision and control of the recreational facilities of the City.  
The Recreation Director may be combined with another appointive office of the City with  
the appointment by the Mayor subject to confirmation by at least one half plus one of the  
membership of the full Council. The compensation for such duties shall be set by the  
Council.  
  
  
3-5-2: 
  DUTIES:   The Director shall have the following duties:  
  
(A) To formulate and recommend to the Mayor and the Council policies and  
procedures in connection with the management, operation, and control of the  
City playgrounds, swimming pools, community centers, camps, theaters,  
gymnasiums, museums, and athletic fields, and activities connected therewith.  
The director will administer such policies and procedures when approved by the  
Mayor and Council and may employ personnel as required and approved by the  
Mayor and Council, and utilize other employees of the City for such services  
where available to conduct the activities required.  
  
(B) To recommend to the Mayor and Council, as directed, a schedule of fees and  
rates to be charges for the services of the department.  
  
To perform such other duties as may be required by the Mayor and Council.  

Title 04 Business Regulations

CHAPTER 1    
  
BUSINESS LICENSES   
  
  
SECTION:  
  
4-1-1: License Required  
4-1-2: Form of License  
4-1-3: License Fees Payable in Advance  
4-1-4: Application for License  
4-1-5: Temporary License  
4-1-6: Approval of License  
4-1-7: License Nontransferable  
4-1-8: Separate License Required  
4-1-9: Licenses, Denial, Suspension or Revocation  
4-1-10: Licenses to be Displayed  
4-1-11: Expiration Date  
4-1-12: Penalty  
  
  
4-1-1:  LICENSE REQUIRED:   No person shall operate, conduct, or engage in  
any industry, vocation, occupation, trade, or other business subject to the provisions of  
this Title without first obtaining an appropriate license from the City. Licenses shall be  
issued upon payment of the fees, which shall be determined by a schedule of fees adopted  
by the City Council by resolution which may be amended from time to time and upon the  
applicant's compliance with the applicable provisions of this Title and upon approval of the  
City Council. All licenses shall be a personal privilege of the holder. Except as expressly  
provided in this Title, a license shall become null and void if the holder ceases to personally  
supervise, conduct, and operate the trade or business for which the license has been  
issued. Unless otherwise provided in this Title, no license fee or any part thereof may be  
refunded even though the licensee does not operate for the period or any portion of the  
period for which the license was issued.  Prior to the issuance of a business license the  
City Clerk shall provide the application to the following departments for review; Building  
Department, Fire Department, Public Works Department and Zoning Department.  No  
license shall be issued to any business or location that is out of compliance with any City  
Code.  
  
Under criteria following adopted policy which shall be approved by resolution, business  
license fees may be waived for certain not for profit organizations.  
  
EXCEPTION:  Offices or businesses operated by the State of Idaho or the Federal  
Government shall be exempt from the business license fee.  These businesses shall  
continue to be licensed and provide all required information required of a business license  
to the City Clerk.  
  
  
Title 4 Chapter 1    Page 1 of 4     Adopted 7-12-2018  
  
  
  

  Loading....
   
  
4-1-2:  FORM OF LICENSE:   The City Clerk shall prepare license forms for  
licenses issued under this Title. The license shall specify the holder's name, the type of  
business licensed, the principal place of business of the licensee and the expiration date  
of the license. The Clerk shall account for all licenses signed by the Mayor, shall  
countersign the licenses and deliver the licenses to licensees. The City Clerk shall collect  
all license fees and promptly deliver them to the City Treasurer. The City Treasurer shall  
issue a receipt for any license fees received from the Clerk.  
  
  
4-1-3:  LICENSE FEES PAYABLE IN ADVANCE:   License fees shall be paid in  
advance at the office of the City Clerk. The applicable fees for the license applied for shall  
be determined by a schedule of fees adopted by the City Council by resolution which may  
be amended from time to time.  
  
  
4-1-4:  APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:   Any person desiring to obtain any license  
provided for in this Title shall submit an application as provided by the City Clerk.  The  
application together with the license fee shall be delivered to the City Clerk. The City Clerk  
shall prescribe the form of the application. The application shall contain the following  
information:  
  
(A) Applicant's full name, form of doing business (i.e. sole proprietorship, partnership  
or corporation), and the name under which the business is to be conducted;  
  
(B) Applicant's state of residence and principal place of business;  
  
(C) Applicant's business and residential mailing addresses and telephone numbers;  
  
(D) The street address within the City where each place of business is to be conducted;  
  
(E) The nature of the business to be licensed;  
  
(F) Any other information required by this Title or by the Clerk in order to determine  
the applicant's fitness or qualifications for the license; and  
  
(G) In this ordinance wherein reference is made to the Chief of Police, if the City shall  
have contracted for law enforcement services, such term shall be deemed to  
include and refer to the officer in charge of the services provided for the City under  
the law enforcement contract.  
  
  
4-1-5:  TEMPORARY LICENSE:   Upon receipt of the affirmative recommendation  
of the all applicable City Division Directors, the Clerk may approve a temporary license to  
any applicant.  Such temporary license shall expire upon the issuance or denial of a  
license by the Council or at the expiration of ninety (90) days after the date such temporary  
license was approved, whichever is sooner.   
  
  
4-1-6:  APPROVAL OF LICENSE:   Upon receipt of application for a business  
license the Clerk shall forward the application and any necessary documents to the Fire  
Title 4 Chapter 1    Page 2 of 4     Adopted 7-12-2018  
  
  
  

  Loading....
   
  
Department, Zoning Department and any other agencies or departments necessary for  
examination and inspections.  No business license shall be issued to any business within  
the City that is in violation of any City or State Code until such violation has been corrected.   
Approval of licenses shall be placed on the consent agenda of the first meeting after  
inspections and approvals of the appropriate departments, except those that require  
review by the Council as determined by department personnel.  In the event of denial the  
Clerk shall return the license fee with a notice of denial to the applicant, unless otherwise  
specified by this code.    
  
  
4-1-7:  LICENSE NONTRANSFERABLE:   Except as specifically provided by this  
Code or State law, licenses issued by the City shall not be assigned or transferred to any  
person other than the named holder. Issuance of a license by the City shall not authorize  
any person other than the person or entity named thereon to conduct such business; nor  
shall it authorize any business other than that named to be done or transacted. Issuance  
of a license shall not permit the named business to be conducted in any place other than  
the location or locations described in the application without prior approval of the Council.  
All licenses shall state the location of the business upon the face thereof.  
  
  
4-1-8:  SEPARATE LICENSES REQUIRED:   A separate license and license fee  
shall be required for each business subject to the provisions of this Title, regardless of  
whether two (2) or more businesses are conducted or operated by the same person or  
entity or whether two (2) or more businesses are conducted within the same building or at  
the same location.  
  
  
4-1-9:  LICENSES, DENIAL, SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION: The Council  
may revoke any license issued under this Title, at any time, if the licensee does not comply  
with the applicable provisions of this Title or other provisions of the City Code.  A license  
applied for or issued under this Chapter may be denied, suspended or revoked, if any  
criminal history investigation reveals, that the applicant or licensee does not comply with  
the applicable provisions or intent of this Title  or other provisions of the City Code.    
  
If a criminal history check reveals that there is a pending criminal investigation or criminal  
charge that would result in the revocation or denial of a business license or if there is a  
conviction or withheld judgment entered for the charge, the City Clerk shall deny the  
application, until such time, as the applicant has been cleared of such charges.  An  
applicant would then be allowed the opportunity to reapply after being cleared of said  
investigation or criminal charge.    
  
The City Clerk may revoke or suspend any license issued under this chapter upon giving  
ten (10) days’ notice to the license holder.  Appeals of the City Clerk’s decision must be  
filed no later than fourteen (14) days after the revocation or suspension and shall be heard  
at the next available City Council meeting.  Denials of licenses issued pursuant to this  
chapter shall be based on non-compliance to the stated provisions of this chapter.   
Appeals on denials shall be handled the same as revocations or suspensions.  Failure to  
appeal shall be deemed as a final decision of the City.  The ruling of the City Council shall  
be the final decision of the City.   
Title 4 Chapter 1    Page 3 of 4     Adopted 7-12-2018  
  
  
  

  
   
  
The use of any license issued under the provisions of Title 4 of this City Code for any  
business or action for which the license was not issued shall be a violation of this chapter  
and said license shall be subject to immediate suspension and/or revocation.  
  
4-1-10:  DISPLAY OF LICENSE:  All licensees shall post their licenses in a place  
conspicuous to the public in each business location and shall produce the license  
whenever required by any officer or other person having the authority to examine it.  
  
  
4-1-11:  EXPIRATION DATE:   All licenses shall expire one (1) year from the date  
of issue unless another date is endorsed on the license by the Clerk.   
  
  
4-1-12:  PENALTY:  Any violation of the provisions of this chapter shall be  
deemed an infraction and shall be subject to penalties prescribed for such violations  
under section 1-4-2 of this code.  In addition to the foregoing penalties in section  
1-4-2 of the City Code, the City may seek an order of injunction from the Bonneville  
County Court prohibiting the business of engaging in business within the City.  Said  
business shall be liable for any court costs and all attorney costs incurred by the  
City in relation thereto.  
Title 4 Chapter 1    Page 4 of 4     Adopted 7-12-2018  
  
  
CHAPTER 2  
  
LIQUOR BY THE DRINK   
  
  
SECTION:  
  
4-2-1: Definitions  
4-2-2: License to Sell or Dispense Required  
4-2-3: License Fee  
4-2-4: Application for License  
4-2-5: Investigation  
4-2-6: Form of License; Display  
4-2-7: Expiration of Licenses  
4-2-8: Multiple Licenses Prohibited  
4-2-9: Transfer of Licenses  
4-2-10:  Establishment License - Persons Not Qualified to be Licensed  
4-2-11:  Sanitary Requirements  
4-2-12:  Location Restrictions  
4-2-13:  Right of Entry  
4-2-14:  Hours of Sale  
4-2-15:  Restriction on Sales by Licensee   
4-2-16:  Sales to Disqualified Person Under Age 21  
4-2-17:  Liquor Catering Permit  
4-2-18:  Persons Under Specified Ages Prohibited to be at Licensed Places  
4-2-19:  Exceptions  
4-2-20:  Penalty  
  
  
4-2-1:  DEFINITIONS:  Certain words and phrases used in this Chapter are  
defined as follows:  
  
BARTENDER:     Any person, whether agent, servant, employee, or person acting  
in any other capacity, who pours, mixes, or prepares any liquor by the drink, wine  
by the drink or beer by the drink upon any premise licensed to sell alcohol by the  
drink.   A bartender can only operate within the City of Ammon when employed  
by a business that holds a license as required by Chapters 2, 3 and/or 4 of the  
City Code.  
  
DIRECTOR:     The Director of the Idaho Department of Law Enforcement.  
  
INTERDICTED PERSON:     A person to whom the sale of liquor is prohibited  
under the laws of the State.  
  
LICENSE:     A license issued by the City Clerk authorizing a licensee to sell liquor by the  
drink at retail.  
  
LICENSEE:     The person/business to whom a license to sell and dispense liquor by the  
drink is issued under the provisions of this Chapter.  
Page 1 of 5    LIQUOR BY THE DRINK   Adopted 7-12-2018  

  Loading....
   
  
  
LIQUOR:     Any kind of liquor which may be sold by a State liquor store.  
  
PREMISE:     The building, room or place in which the retail sale of wine by a licensee is  
authorized under this chapter.  
  
  
4-2-2:  LICENSE TO SELL OR DISPENSE REQUIRED:   No person shall sell or  
dispense liquor/alcohol by the drink at retail on any premises in the City without first  
obtaining all licenses as required by the Ammon City Code and Title 23, Chapter 9, Idaho  
Code, as amended.    
  
Any person, whether agent, servant, employee, or person acting in any other capacity,  
who dispenses liquor by the drink upon any premise licensed to sell liquor by the drink,  
must hold a valid bartender’s license pursuant to section 4-14-2, of the Ammon City Code.   
  
All licenses issued under this chapter shall be pursuant to all requirements and regulations  
of the Idaho State Code Title 23 and related Ammon city Codes as they may apply.  
  
  
4-2-3:  LICENSE FEE:   Each licensee shall pay in advance an annual license  
fee which shall be determined by a schedule of fees adopted by the City Council by  
resolution which may be amended from time to time.    
  
  
4-2-4:  APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:   Each applicant for a license to sell liquor  
by the drink shall file with the City Clerk an application on a form designated by the Clerk,  
, stating the following:  
  
(A) The application shall include a copy of a current license issued by the Director (of  
Law Enforcement of the State) pursuant to the provisions of Title 23, Chapter 9,  
Idaho Code, as amended.  
  
(B) The application shall include a copy of a current license issued by Bonneville  
County allowing the sale of liquor by the drink.    
  
(C) The names and addresses of all persons of contact and responsible for the  
operation of the business.  This list shall include owner of the business as well as  
all managers.  
  
(D) Any other information reasonably necessary for the City Clerk to determine the  
applicant's qualifications or disqualifications for a license.  
  
(E) If during the term of any license issued under this Chapter any change shall take  
place in any of the information stated in the application, the licensee shall deliver  
a verified report of the change to the Clerk no later than seven (7) working days  
after the change occurs.  
  
  
Page 2 of 5    LIQUOR BY THE DRINK   Adopted 7-12-2018  

  Loading....
   
  
4-2-5:  INVESTIGATION:   Upon receipt of an application for a license or for a  
transfer of a license under this Chapter, accompanied by the necessary documents and  
fees, the Clerk shall review all information in the application. If it is determined that the  
contents of the application meet the requirements of this chapter and, that the applicant is  
qualified to receive a license, that the premises are suitable for carrying on the intended  
business and that the property is zoned appropriately to allow for the sale of liquor by the  
drink, a license shall be issued or transferred. Otherwise, the application shall be denied  
and the license or transfer fee refunded.    
  
  
4-2-6:  FORM OF LICENSES; DISPLAY:   Every license issued under this Chapter  
shall state the name of the person or business entity to whom issued and the location by  
street and number or other definite designation of the premises. If issued to a partnership,  
the names of the persons constituting the partnership shall be stated. If issued to a  
corporation or association, the names of the principal officers and the members of the  
governing board shall be stated. The license shall be signed by the licensee and shall be  
posted on the licensed premises in a place conspicuous to the public. No person except  
the named licensee shall exercise any of the privileges granted under the license.  
Licenses issued under this Chapter apply only to premises for which they have been  
issued.    
  
A copy of all employees licensed as a bartender shall be kept and maintained in an orderly  
fashion.  All bartender’s licenses, names of persons acting as bartenders and hours  
worked shall be available upon request of any police or enforcement officer  
representing the City of Ammon.  It shall be the responsibility of the business to  
confirm and maintain required documentation for all persons acting as bartenders  
within the business. Failure to maintain the required documentation of bartender’s  
license shall constitute a violation of this ordinance by the business and deemed  
an infraction.  Further, the City shall have the authority to revoke the business  
license and any City license issued authorizing the sale of liquor, beer or wine by  
the drink until compliance is established.  
  
All licenses issued under this chapter shall be pursuant to all requirements and  
regulations of the Idaho State Code Title 23 and related Ammon City Codes as  
they may apply.    
  
  
4-2-7:  EXPIRATION OF LICENSES:    All licenses issued under this chapter  
shall be paid in advance and shall expire one (1) year from the date of issue unless  
another date is endorsed on the license by the Clerk.   
  
4-2-8:  AGE RESTRICTIONS:  Pursuant to the laws of the State of Idaho Title 23,  
any amendments and subsequent new regulations related to age shall apply to the  
regulations of the City of Ammon.  The following Idaho Code Title 23, chapters and  
sections are provided for easy reference:  
  
(A) 23-312, Persons Under Twenty-One and Intoxicated Persons – Inhibited Sales  
  
(B) 23-943, Persons Under Specified Ages Forbidden to Enter, Remain In or Loiter at  
Certain Licensed Places.  
Page 3 of 5    LIQUOR BY THE DRINK   Adopted 7-12-2018  

  Loading....
   
  
  
(C) 23-944, Exceptions from Restriction on Entering or Remaining  
  
(D) 23-949, Persons Not Allowed to Purchase, Possess, Serve, Dispense, or  
Consume Beer, Wine or Other Alcoholic Liquor   
  
  
4-2-9:  TRANSFER OF LICENSES:   No license may be transferred to another  
person, unless the transferee first obtains approval of the City upon application containing  
substantially the same information required by Section 4-2-4 of this Chapter. If the  
proposed transferee is qualified for the license, the City Clerk shall approve the transfer  
and shall reissue the license in the name of the transferee. The fee for each license  
transfer shall be determined by a schedule of fees adopted by the City Council by  
resolution which may be amended from time to time.   
  
4-2-10:  REPEALED  
  
4-2-11:  REPEALED  
  
  
4-2-12:  LOCATION RESTRICTIONS:  No license shall be issued that does not  
meet the requirements of Idaho State Code 23-913.  Any license issued must meet the  
zoning requirements of the City of Ammon Title 10.   
  
  
4-2-13:  RIGHT OF ENTRY:   Any duly authorized police officer shall have the right  
at any time to enter and examine the premises of any licensee to ascertain compliance  
with the laws of the State and the City. It shall be unlawful to refuse any police or  
designated enforcement officer admittance to the premises for such purpose.  
  
  
4-2-14:  HOURS OF SALE:   Pursuant to Idaho Code 23-927, no liquor shall be  
sold, offered for sale, or given away upon any licensed premises during the following  
hours:  
  
(A) Between one o’clock (1:00) a.m. on Christmas and ten o’clock (10:00) a.m., of the  
following day.    
  
(B) Between one o’clock (1:00) a.m. and ten o’clock (10:00) a.m. of any day.    
  
It shall be unlawful for any person to dispense liquor for consumption on the premises in  
any place not licensed as an eating place under Title 4, Chapter 1 of the City of Ammon  
Code.    
  
  
4-2-15:  REPEALED  
  
  
4-2-16:  REPEALED  
4-2-17:  LIQUOR CATERING PERMIT:   An alcohol beverage catering permit is a  
permit issued pursuant to section 23-934A of the Idaho State Code which authorizes the  
Page 4 of 5    LIQUOR BY THE DRINK   Adopted 7-12-2018  

  Loading....
   
  
permittee to serve and sell liquor by the drink, beer and wine, or beer, or wine, at a party  
or convention.  An alcohol beverage catering permit shall be limited to authorization to sell  
liquor or beer or wine, or any combination thereof, based upon the type of license which  
the applicant possesses.  An applicant is not required to hold an liquor, beer or wine permit  
within the City to apply for a catering permit, but must hold a valid permit within the State  
of Idaho.  Applications for such permit shall be submitted to the City Clerk who shall verify  
the type of license held by the applicant.  After determination of qualification of the  
applicant the City Clerk shall issue a catering permit following the requirements of any  
applications required by the City which shall contain at a minimum, but not limited to, the  
following information:  
  
(A) The name and address of the applicant and the number of his state liquor license.  
  
(B) The dates and hours during which the permit is to be effective, not to exceed three  
(3) consecutive days.  
  
(C) The names and addresses of the organizations, groups, or persons sponsoring the  
event.  
  
(D) The address at which the liquor is to be served, and if a public building, the rooms  
in which the liquor is to be served.  
  
The application shall be verified by the applicant and filed with the Clerk. A filing fee which  
shall be determined by a schedule of fees adopted by the City Council by resolution which  
may be amended from time to time shall be paid at the time the application is submitted.   
Fee shall be for each day the permit is to be effective and shall be nonrefundable  
irrespective of whether the party or convention is held.  
  
Catering permits issued under this section are issued pursuant to Idaho State Code 23- 
934A.  
  
  
4-2-18:  REPEALED  
  
  
4-2-19:  REPEALED  
  
  
4-2-20:  PENALTY:   Any violation of the provisions of this chapter shall be  
deemed a misdemeanor pursuant to Idaho State Code 23-947 and shall be subject to  
penalties prescribed for such violations under Idaho State Code 18-113 and section 1-4- 
1 of this City Code.  EXCEPTION:  Violation of the provisions of Title 4, Chapter 14 of  
the Ammon City Code shall be deemed an infraction and shall be subject to the  
penalties prescribed for such violations under section 1-4-2 of this code.  
  
  
  
Page 5 of 5    LIQUOR BY THE DRINK   Adopted 7-12-2018  

CHAPTER 3  
  
BEER  
  
  
SECTION:  
  
4-3-1:  Definitions  
4-3-2:  License Required  
4-3-3:  License Fees and Expiration  
4-3-4:  Application for License  
4-3-5:  Prohibited Licenses  
4-3-6:  License for Designated Address Only  
4-3-7:  Location Restrictions  
4-3-8:  Posting of License  
4-3-9:  Transfer of License; Transfer Fee  
4-3-10:  Right of Entry  
4-3-11:  Sale to Minors Prohibited  
4-3-12:  Conduct of Business  
4-3-13:  Hours of Sale  
4-3-14:  Penalty  
  
4-3-1:  DEFINITIONS:   Certain words and phrases used in this Chapter are  
defined as follows:  
  
BEER:     Any beverage obtained by the alcoholic fermentation of an infusion or decoction  
of barley, malt and/or other ingredients in drinkable water and which contains not more  
than six (6) percent alcohol by weight.  
  
BEER BY THE DRINK:     A license to sell beer by the individual glass or open bottle at a  
retail for consumption on the premise.  
  
DISTRIBUTOR:     A person who is employed by or is an agent of a retailer to sell, serve  
or dispense beer.  
  
LICENSE:     A license issued by the City Clerk authorizing a licensee to sell beer at retail.  
  
LICENSEE:     A qualified person to whom a license for the retail sale of beer is issued  
under the provisions of this chapter.  
  
PREMISES:     The building, room or place in which the retail sale of beer by a licensee  
is authorized under this chapter.  
  
RETAILER:     A person to whom a beer license has been issued.  
  
  
4-3-2:  LICENSE REQUIRED:   Except as otherwise provided in this Chapter, no  
person shall sell or dispense beer at retail within the City without first obtaining a license  
from the City as required by the Ammon City Code.    
  
Page 1 of 5 BEER Adopted 7-12-2018  
  

  Loading....
   
  
  
Any person, whether agent, servant, employee, or person acting in any other capacity,  
who dispenses beer by the drink upon any premise licensed to sell beer by the drink, in  
which said establishment also holds a liquor by the drink permit, pursuant to section 4-2- 
2 of the Ammon City Code, must hold a valid bartender’s license pursuant to section 4- 
14-2, of the Ammon City Code.    
  
A copy of all employees licensed as a bartender shall be kept and maintained in  
an orderly fashion.  All bartender’s licenses, names of persons acting as  
bartenders and hours worked shall be available upon request of any police or  
enforcement officer representing the City of Ammon.  It shall be the responsibility  
of the business to confirm and maintain required documentation for all persons  
acting as bartenders within the business.  Failure to maintain such documentation  
shall constitute a violation of this ordinance by the business.  Further, the City shall  
have the authority to revoke the business license and any City license issued  
authorizing the sale of liquor, beer or wine by the drink until compliance is  
established.  
  
All licenses issued under this chapter shall be pursuant to all requirements and  
regulations of the Idaho Code Title 23 and related Ammon City Codes as they may  
apply.    
  
EXCEPTION:  The State of Idaho Liquor Dispensary shall be exempt from the purchase  
a beer license.  
  
4-3-3:  LICENSE FEES AND EXPIRATION:   License fees for the retail sale of  
beer in the City shall be determined by a schedule of fees adopted by the City Council  
by resolution which may be amended from time to time.  All licenses issued under this  
chapter shall be paid in advance and shall expire one (1) year from the date of issue  
unless another date is endorsed on the license by the Clerk.   
  
4-3-4:  APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:  
  
(A) Each applicant for a license for the retail sale of beer shall file with the City Clerk  
an application on a form designated by the Clerk, stating the following:  
  
1. The name and residential address of the applicant.  
  
2. The street address of the premises where beer is to be sold.  
  
3. The name of the owner of the premises for which the license is sought.  
  
4. That the applicant, if an individual, is at least nineteen (19) years old.  
  
5. That the applicant has not been convicted of a felony or any crime involving  
moral turpitude.  
  
6. The names and addresses of four (4) references as to the good moral  
character of the applicant.  
  
Page 2 of 5 BEER Adopted 7-12-2018  
  

  Loading....
   
  
  
7. The application shall include a copy of a current license issued by  
Bonneville County allowing the retail sale of beer.  
  
8. The application shall include a copy of a current license issued by the State  
of Idaho allowing the retail sale of beer.    
  
9. That the applicant agrees to abide by the terms and conditions of this  
Chapter, and any laws, ordinances, rules, or regulations subsequently  
promulgated by the State of Idaho, Bonneville  County or the City regarding  
the retail sale of beer within the City.  
  
10. Any other information the Clerk requires to determine that the applicant  
possesses the qualifications and has none of the disqualifications for a  
license, as provided in this Chapter and in Sections 23-1010 and 23-1016,  
Idaho Code, as amended.  
  
(B) Upon receipt of an application for a license or for a transfer of a license under this  
Chapter, accompanied by the necessary license or transfer fee, the Clerk shall  
investigate all information stated in the application and if it is determined that the  
contents of the application are true, that the applicant is qualified to receive a  
license, that the premises are suitable for carrying on the intended business and  
that the requirements of this Chapter have been met, a license shall be issued or  
transferred. Otherwise, the application shall be denied and the license or transfer  
fee refunded.    
  
(C) All applications for a retail beer license or any transfer or renewal of a retail beer  
license shall be granted or denied within sixty (60) days from the date the  
application was delivered to the City Clerk.  
  
(D) If the City Clerk denies an application for a retail beer license, or any renewal or  
transfer of a retail beer license, the Clerk shall specify in writing:  
  
1. The statutes, ordinances, and standards used in evaluating the application;  
  
2. The reasons for denial; and  
  
3. The actions, if any, the applicant could take to obtain the license, transfer  
or renewal.  
  
4. Appeals of any denial of a license, transfer or renewal of a license shall be  
pursuant to Idaho Code 23-1016-4.   
  
  
4-3-5:  REPEALED  
  
4-3-6:  LICENSE FOR DESIGNATED ADDRESS ONLY:   A license for the retail  
sale of beer shall be granted only for the place designated in the application. The place of  
business shall not be changed or moved without the consent the Council.  
  
Page 3 of 5 BEER Adopted 7-12-2018  
  

  Loading....
   
  
  
4-3-7:  LOCATION RESTRICTIONS:  No license shall be issued that does not  
meet the requirements of Idaho Code 23-1011B.  Any license issued must meet the zoning  
requirements of the City of Ammon Code Title 10.  
  
4-3-8:  POSTING OF LICENSE:   All licenses for the sale of beer shall be posted  
in a place conspicuous to the public at the licensed premises at all times when the  
premises are open for business.  
  
4-3-9:  TRANSFER OF LICENSE; TRANSFER FEE:   No license may be  
transferred to another person, unless the transferee first obtains approval of the City upon  
application containing substantially the same information required by Section 4-3-4 of this  
Chapter. If the proposed transferee is qualified for the license, the City Clerk shall approve  
the transfer and shall reissue the license in the name of the transferee. The fee for each  
license transfer shall be determined by a schedule of fees adopted by the City Council by  
resolution which may be amended from time to time.   
  
4-3-10:  RIGHT OF ENTRY:   Any police officer shall have the right at any time to  
enter and examine the premises of any licensee or of any place where beer is sold at retail  
to ascertain the alcoholic content of any beer kept for sale on the premises or to ascertain  
compliance with the laws of the State and the City. It shall be unlawful to refuse any police  
officer admittance to the premises for such purposes.  
  
4-3-11:  RESTRICTIONS CONCERNING AGE:  Pursuant to Idaho Code 23-1013;  
Any person who is nineteen (19) years of age or older may sell, serve, possess or  
dispense beer in the course of his employment, otherwise it shall be unlawful for any  
person to sell, serve or dispense beer to or by any person under twenty-one (21) years of  
age, proof of which, shall be a validly issued state, district, territorial, possession,  
provincial, national or other equivalent government driver's license, identification card or  
military identification card bearing a photograph and date of birth, or a valid passport.  
  
4-3-12:  CONDUCT OF BUSINESS:   Every person licensed under this Title to sell  
beer at retail shall at all times conduct a quiet and well-lighted, orderly place of business.  
  
4-3-13:  HOURS OF SALE:   Pursuant to Idaho Code 23-1012, it shall be unlawful  
for any person in any place licensed to sell beer by the drink or beer for consumption on  
the premises, whether for pleasure or profit, to sell or dispense beer for consumption on  
the premises or to permit the consumption of beer on the premises between the following  
hours:  
  
(A) 1:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. of any day.  
  
(B) 1:00 a.m. on Christmas and 6:00 a.m. of the day following such holidays.  
  
It shall be unlawful for any person to dispense beer for consumption on the premises, in  
any place not licensed as an eating place under Title 4, Chapter 1 of the City of Ammon  
Code.  
  
4-3-14:  PENALTY: Any violation of the provisions of this chapter shall be  
deemed a misdemeanor pursuant to Idaho Code 23-1020 and shall be subject to  
penalties prescribed for such violations under Idaho Code 18-113 and section 1-4-1 of  
this City Code.  EXCEPTION:  Violation of the provisions of Title 4, Chapter 14 of the  
Page 4 of 5 BEER Adopted 7-12-2018  
  

  Loading....
   
  
  
Ammon City Code shall be deemed an infraction and shall be subject to the penalties  
prescribed for such violations under section 1-4-2 of this code.  
  
  
  
Page 5 of 5 BEER Adopted 7-12-2018  
  
CHAPTER 3  
  
BEER  
  
  
SECTION:  
  
4-3-1:  Definitions  
4-3-2:  License Required  
4-3-3:  License Fees and Expiration  
4-3-4:  Application for License  
4-3-5:  Prohibited Licenses  
4-3-6:  License for Designated Address Only  
4-3-7:  Location Restrictions  
4-3-8:  Posting of License  
4-3-9:  Transfer of License; Transfer Fee  
4-3-10:  Right of Entry  
4-3-11:  Sale to Minors Prohibited  
4-3-12:  Conduct of Business  
4-3-13:  Hours of Sale  
4-3-14:  Penalty  
  
4-3-1:  DEFINITIONS:   Certain words and phrases used in this Chapter are  
defined as follows:  
  
BEER:     Any beverage obtained by the alcoholic fermentation of an infusion or decoction  
of barley, malt and/or other ingredients in drinkable water and which contains not more  
than six (6) percent alcohol by weight.  
  
BEER BY THE DRINK:     A license to sell beer by the individual glass or open bottle at a  
retail for consumption on the premise.  
  
DISTRIBUTOR:     A person who is employed by or is an agent of a retailer to sell, serve  
or dispense beer.  
  
LICENSE:     A license issued by the City Clerk authorizing a licensee to sell beer at retail.  
  
LICENSEE:     A qualified person to whom a license for the retail sale of beer is issued  
under the provisions of this chapter.  
  
PREMISES:     The building, room or place in which the retail sale of beer by a licensee  
is authorized under this chapter.  
  
RETAILER:     A person to whom a beer license has been issued.  
  
  
4-3-2:  LICENSE REQUIRED:   Except as otherwise provided in this Chapter, no  
person shall sell or dispense beer at retail within the City without first obtaining a license  
from the City as required by the Ammon City Code.    
  
Page 1 of 5 BEER Adopted 7-12-2018  
  

  Loading....
   
  
  
Any person, whether agent, servant, employee, or person acting in any other capacity,  
who dispenses beer by the drink upon any premise licensed to sell beer by the drink, in  
which said establishment also holds a liquor by the drink permit, pursuant to section 4-2- 
2 of the Ammon City Code, must hold a valid bartender’s license pursuant to section 4- 
14-2, of the Ammon City Code.    
  
A copy of all employees licensed as a bartender shall be kept and maintained in  
an orderly fashion.  All bartender’s licenses, names of persons acting as  
bartenders and hours worked shall be available upon request of any police or  
enforcement officer representing the City of Ammon.  It shall be the responsibility  
of the business to confirm and maintain required documentation for all persons  
acting as bartenders within the business.  Failure to maintain such documentation  
shall constitute a violation of this ordinance by the business.  Further, the City shall  
have the authority to revoke the business license and any City license issued  
authorizing the sale of liquor, beer or wine by the drink until compliance is  
established.  
  
All licenses issued under this chapter shall be pursuant to all requirements and  
regulations of the Idaho Code Title 23 and related Ammon City Codes as they may  
apply.    
  
EXCEPTION:  The State of Idaho Liquor Dispensary shall be exempt from the purchase  
a beer license.  
  
4-3-3:  LICENSE FEES AND EXPIRATION:   License fees for the retail sale of  
beer in the City shall be determined by a schedule of fees adopted by the City Council  
by resolution which may be amended from time to time.  All licenses issued under this  
chapter shall be paid in advance and shall expire one (1) year from the date of issue  
unless another date is endorsed on the license by the Clerk.   
  
4-3-4:  APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:  
  
(A) Each applicant for a license for the retail sale of beer shall file with the City Clerk  
an application on a form designated by the Clerk, stating the following:  
  
1. The name and residential address of the applicant.  
  
2. The street address of the premises where beer is to be sold.  
  
3. The name of the owner of the premises for which the license is sought.  
  
4. That the applicant, if an individual, is at least nineteen (19) years old.  
  
5. That the applicant has not been convicted of a felony or any crime involving  
moral turpitude.  
  
6. The names and addresses of four (4) references as to the good moral  
character of the applicant.  
  
Page 2 of 5 BEER Adopted 7-12-2018  
  

  Loading....
   
  
  
7. The application shall include a copy of a current license issued by  
Bonneville County allowing the retail sale of beer.  
  
8. The application shall include a copy of a current license issued by the State  
of Idaho allowing the retail sale of beer.    
  
9. That the applicant agrees to abide by the terms and conditions of this  
Chapter, and any laws, ordinances, rules, or regulations subsequently  
promulgated by the State of Idaho, Bonneville  County or the City regarding  
the retail sale of beer within the City.  
  
10. Any other information the Clerk requires to determine that the applicant  
possesses the qualifications and has none of the disqualifications for a  
license, as provided in this Chapter and in Sections 23-1010 and 23-1016,  
Idaho Code, as amended.  
  
(B) Upon receipt of an application for a license or for a transfer of a license under this  
Chapter, accompanied by the necessary license or transfer fee, the Clerk shall  
investigate all information stated in the application and if it is determined that the  
contents of the application are true, that the applicant is qualified to receive a  
license, that the premises are suitable for carrying on the intended business and  
that the requirements of this Chapter have been met, a license shall be issued or  
transferred. Otherwise, the application shall be denied and the license or transfer  
fee refunded.    
  
(C) All applications for a retail beer license or any transfer or renewal of a retail beer  
license shall be granted or denied within sixty (60) days from the date the  
application was delivered to the City Clerk.  
  
(D) If the City Clerk denies an application for a retail beer license, or any renewal or  
transfer of a retail beer license, the Clerk shall specify in writing:  
  
1. The statutes, ordinances, and standards used in evaluating the application;  
  
2. The reasons for denial; and  
  
3. The actions, if any, the applicant could take to obtain the license, transfer  
or renewal.  
  
4. Appeals of any denial of a license, transfer or renewal of a license shall be  
pursuant to Idaho Code 23-1016-4.   
  
  
4-3-5:  REPEALED  
  
4-3-6:  LICENSE FOR DESIGNATED ADDRESS ONLY:   A license for the retail  
sale of beer shall be granted only for the place designated in the application. The place of  
business shall not be changed or moved without the consent the Council.  
  
Page 3 of 5 BEER Adopted 7-12-2018  
  

  Loading....
   
  
  
4-3-7:  LOCATION RESTRICTIONS:  No license shall be issued that does not  
meet the requirements of Idaho Code 23-1011B.  Any license issued must meet the zoning  
requirements of the City of Ammon Code Title 10.  
  
4-3-8:  POSTING OF LICENSE:   All licenses for the sale of beer shall be posted  
in a place conspicuous to the public at the licensed premises at all times when the  
premises are open for business.  
  
4-3-9:  TRANSFER OF LICENSE; TRANSFER FEE:   No license may be  
transferred to another person, unless the transferee first obtains approval of the City upon  
application containing substantially the same information required by Section 4-3-4 of this  
Chapter. If the proposed transferee is qualified for the license, the City Clerk shall approve  
the transfer and shall reissue the license in the name of the transferee. The fee for each  
license transfer shall be determined by a schedule of fees adopted by the City Council by  
resolution which may be amended from time to time.   
  
4-3-10:  RIGHT OF ENTRY:   Any police officer shall have the right at any time to  
enter and examine the premises of any licensee or of any place where beer is sold at retail  
to ascertain the alcoholic content of any beer kept for sale on the premises or to ascertain  
compliance with the laws of the State and the City. It shall be unlawful to refuse any police  
officer admittance to the premises for such purposes.  
  
4-3-11:  RESTRICTIONS CONCERNING AGE:  Pursuant to Idaho Code 23-1013;  
Any person who is nineteen (19) years of age or older may sell, serve, possess or  
dispense beer in the course of his employment, otherwise it shall be unlawful for any  
person to sell, serve or dispense beer to or by any person under twenty-one (21) years of  
age, proof of which, shall be a validly issued state, district, territorial, possession,  
provincial, national or other equivalent government driver's license, identification card or  
military identification card bearing a photograph and date of birth, or a valid passport.  
  
4-3-12:  CONDUCT OF BUSINESS:   Every person licensed under this Title to sell  
beer at retail shall at all times conduct a quiet and well-lighted, orderly place of business.  
  
4-3-13:  HOURS OF SALE:   Pursuant to Idaho Code 23-1012, it shall be unlawful  
for any person in any place licensed to sell beer by the drink or beer for consumption on  
the premises, whether for pleasure or profit, to sell or dispense beer for consumption on  
the premises or to permit the consumption of beer on the premises between the following  
hours:  
  
(A) 1:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. of any day.  
  
(B) 1:00 a.m. on Christmas and 6:00 a.m. of the day following such holidays.  
  
It shall be unlawful for any person to dispense beer for consumption on the premises, in  
any place not licensed as an eating place under Title 4, Chapter 1 of the City of Ammon  
Code.  
  
4-3-14:  PENALTY: Any violation of the provisions of this chapter shall be  
deemed a misdemeanor pursuant to Idaho Code 23-1020 and shall be subject to  
penalties prescribed for such violations under Idaho Code 18-113 and section 1-4-1 of  
this City Code.  EXCEPTION:  Violation of the provisions of Title 4, Chapter 14 of the  
Page 4 of 5 BEER Adopted 7-12-2018  
  

  
   
  
  
Ammon City Code shall be deemed an infraction and shall be subject to the penalties  
prescribed for such violations under section 1-4-2 of this code.  
  
  
  
Page 5 of 5 BEER Adopted 7-12-2018  

CHAPTER 4  
  
WINE  
  
  
SECTION:  
  
4-4-1:  Definitions  
4-4-2:  License Required  
4-4-3:  License Fees  
4-4-4:  Application for License  
4-4-5:  Qualifications  
4-4-6:  Issuance of License  
4-4-7:  Expiration; Transfer  
4-4-8:  Consumption on Premises  
4-4-9:  Location Restrictions; Schools or Churches  
4-4-10:  Age Restriction on Sale or Purchase  
4-4-11:  Hours of Sale  
4-4-12:  Penalty  
  
  
4-4-1:  DEFINITIONS:  Certain words and phrases used in this Chapter are  
defined as follows:  
   
BARTENDER:     Any person, whether agent, servant, employee, or person acting  
in any other capacity, who pours, mixes, or prepares any liquor by the drink, wine  
by the drink or beer by the drink upon any premise licensed to sell alcohol by the  
drink.   A bartender can only operate within the City of Ammon when employed  
by a business that holds a license as required by Title 4, Chapters 2, 3 and/or 4  
of the City Code.  
  
DIRECTOR:     The Director of the Idaho Department of Law Enforcement.  
             
DISTRIBUTOR:     A person who is employed by or is an agent of a retailer to sell, serve  
or dispense.      
  
LICENSE:     A license issued by the City Clerk authorizing a licensee to sell wine at retail.  
  
LICENSEE:     A qualified person to whom a license for the retail sale of wine is issued  
under the provisions of this chapter.  
  
PREMISE:     The building, room or place in which the retail sale of wine by a licensee is  
authorized under this chapter.  
  
RETAIL WINE LICENSE:     A license issued by the Director authorizing a person to sell  
wine at retail for consumption off the licensed premises.  The term also means a license  
issued by the City authorizing a person to sell wine at retail for consumption off the  
licensed premised only.  
  
Page 1 of 5   WINE   Adopted 7-12-2018  
  

  Loading....
   
  
  
RETAILER:     A person to whom a retail wine license or wine-by-the-drink license has  
been issued.  
  
WINE:     Any alcoholic beverage containing not more than fourteen (14) percent alcohol  
by volume obtained by the fermentation of the natural sugar content of fruits or other  
agricultural products containing sugar whether or not other ingredients are added.  
  
  
4-4-2:  LICENSE REQUIRED:   Except as otherwise provided by this Chapter, no  
person shall sell wine at retail for consumption off the premises or by the individual glass  
or open bottle for consumption on the premises within the City, without first obtaining a  
license under this Chapter.  A person who holds a valid current wine-by-the-drink license  
issued by the City may sell on the licensed premises wine at retail for consumption off the  
premises without obtaining a retail wine license from the City.   
  
Any person, whether agent, servant, employee, or person acting in any other capacity,  
who dispenses wine by the drink upon any premise licensed to sell wine by the drink, in  
which said establishment also holds a liquor by the drink permit, pursuant to section 4-2- 
2 of the Ammon City Code, must hold a valid bartender’s license pursuant to section 4- 
14-2, of  the Ammon City Code.    
  
A copy of all employees licensed as a bartender shall be kept and maintained in  
an orderly fashion.  All bartender’s licenses, names of persons acting as  
bartenders and hours worked shall be available upon request of any police or  
enforcement officer representing the City of Ammon.  It shall be the responsibility  
of the business to confirm and maintain required documentation for all persons  
acting as bartenders within the business. Failure to maintain the required  
documentation of bartender’s license shall constitute a violation of this ordinance  
by the business and deemed an infraction.  Further, the City shall have the  
authority to revoke the business license and any City license issued authorizing  
the sale of liquor, beer or wine by the drink until compliance is established.  
  
All licenses issued under this chapter shall be pursuant to all requirements and  
regulations of the Idaho Title 23 and related Ammon City Codes as they may apply.    
  
EXCEPTION:  The State of Idaho Liquor Dispensary shall be exempt from the purchase  
a wine license.  
  
  
4-4-3:  LICENSE FEES AND EXPIRATION:  License fees for the retail sale of  
wine in the City shall   be paid in advance as determined by a schedule of fees adopted  
by the City Council by resolution which may be amended from time to time.  All licenses  
issued under this chapter shall be paid in advance and shall expire one (1) year from the  
date of issue unless another date is endorsed on the license by the Clerk.   
  
   
  
4-4-4:  APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:  
  
Page 2 of 5   WINE   Adopted 7-12-2018  
  

  Loading....
   
  
  
(A) Each applicant for a license for the retail sale of wine shall file with the City Clerk  
an application on a form designated by the Clerk, stating the following:  
  
1. The name and residential address of the applicant.  
  
2. The street address of the premises where wine is to be sold.  
  
3. The name of the owner of the premises for which the license is sought.  
  
4. That the applicant, if an individual, is at least nineteen (19) years old.  
  
5. That the applicant has not been convicted of a felony or any crime involving  
moral turpitude.  
  
6. The application shall include a copy of a current license issued by  
Bonneville County allowing the retail sale of wine.  
  
7. The application shall include a copy of a current license issued by the State  
of Idaho allowing the retail sale of wine.    
  
8. That the applicant agrees to abide by the terms and conditions of this  
Chapter, and any laws, ordinances, rules, or regulations subsequently  
promulgated by the State of Idaho, Bonneville  County or the City regarding  
the retail sale of beer within the City.  
  
9. Any other information the Clerk requires to determine that the applicant  
possesses the qualifications and has none of the disqualifications for a  
license, as provided in this Chapter and in Title 23, Idaho Code, as  
amended.  
  
(B) Upon receipt of an application for a license or for a transfer of a license under this  
Chapter, accompanied by the necessary license or transfer fee, the Clerk shall  
investigate all information stated in the application and if it is determined that the  
contents of the application are true, that the applicant is qualified to receive a  
license, that the premises are suitable for carrying on the intended business and  
that the requirements of this Chapter have been met, a license shall be issued or  
transferred. Otherwise, the application shall be denied and the license or transfer  
fee refunded.    
  
(C) All applications for a retail wine license or any transfer or renewal of a retail wine  
license shall be granted or denied within sixty (60) days from the date the  
application was delivered to the City Clerk.  
  
(D) If the City Clerk denies an application for a retail wine license, or any renewal or  
transfer of a retail wine license, the Clerk  shall specify in writing:  
  
1. The statutes, ordinances, and standards used in evaluating the application;  
  
2. The reasons for denial; and  
  
Page 3 of 5   WINE   Adopted 7-12-2018  
  

  Loading....
   
  
  
3. The actions, if any, the applicant could take to obtain the license, transfer  
or renewal.  
  
  
4-4-5:  QUALIFICATIONS:   An applicant for a retail wine license or wine-by-the- 
drink license shall possess all qualifications necessary to obtain a license from the  
Director. Licensees shall maintain qualifications throughout the period for which their  
license is issued. Possession of licenses regularly issued by the Director and Bonneville  
County shall be prima facie evidence of the applicant's qualifications and shall be a  
requirement for the applicant to possess, prior to receiving a license under this Chapter.  
  
  
4-4-6:  ISSUANCE OF LICENSE:   When the applicant for a retail wine license or  
wine-by-the-drink license has produced evidence as required by Section 4-4-5 above and  
paid the required license fee, the City Clerk shall submit the application to the City Council  
within thirty (30) days after the application is filed. Upon approval of the Council, the Clerk  
shall issue the license to the applicant.  
  
  
4-4-7:  TRANSFER OF LICENSE:    
The procedure for the transfer of a retail wine license or a wine-by-the-drink license shall  
be the same as provided in Idaho Code Section 23-1317, as amended, upon application  
to the City Clerk. The fee for transfer of a retail wine license or wine-by-the-drink license  
shall be determined by a schedule of fees adopted by the City Council by resolution  
which may be amended from time to time.  The license of the transferring licensee shall  
be surrendered to the City Clerk before such transfer may be made.  
  
4-4-8:  CONSUMPTION ON PREMISES:   Retailers who do not possess a valid  
City license for the retail sale of liquor by the drink or wine-by-the-drink shall not permit  
consumption of wine on the licensed premises.  
  
  
4-4-9:  LOCATION RESTRICTIONS:  Pursuant to Idaho Code 23-1307A.  Any  
license issued must meet the zoning requirements of the City of Ammon Code Title 10.     
  
  
4-4-10:  AGE RESTRICTIONS:  Pursuant to the laws of the State of Idaho Title 23,   
any amendments and subsequent new regulations related to age shall apply to the  
regulations of the City of Ammon.  The following Idaho Code Title 23, chapters and  
sections are provided for easy reference:  
  
(A) 23-312, Persons Under Twenty-One and Intoxicated Persons – Inhibited Sales  
  
(B) 23-943, Persons Under Specified Ages Forbidden to Enter, Remain In or Loiter at  
Certain Licensed Places.  
  
(C) 23-944, Exceptions from Restriction on Entering or Remaining  
  
(D) 23-949, Persons Not Allowed to Purchase, Possess, Serve, Dispense, or  
Consume Beer, Wine or Other Alcoholic Liquor   
  
Page 4 of 5   WINE   Adopted 7-12-2018  
  

  Loading....
   
  
  
  
  
4-4-11:  HOURS OF SALE:   It shall be unlawful for any person in any place licensed  
to sell wine by the drink or wine for consumption on the premises, whether for pleasure or  
for profit, to sell or dispense wine for consumption on the premises or to permit the  
consumption of wine on the premises during the following hours:  
  
(A) 1:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. of any day.    
  
(B) 1:00 a.m. on Christmas and 6:00 a.m. of the day following such holidays.  
  
  
It shall be unlawful for any person to dispense wine for consumption on the premises, in  
any place not licensed as an eating place under Title 4, Chapter 1 of the City of Ammon  
Code.   
  
  
4-4-12:  PENALTY: Any violation of the provisions of this chapter shall be  
deemed a misdemeanor pursuant to Idaho Code 23-947 and shall be subject to  
penalties prescribed for such violations under Idaho Code 18-113 and as allowed by  
said Idaho Code, section 1-4-1 of this City Code.  EXCEPTION:  Violation of the  
provisions of Title 4, Chapter 14 of the Ammon City Code shall be deemed an infraction  
and shall be subject to the penalties prescribed for such violations under section 1-4-2 of  
this code.  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Page 5 of 5   WINE   Adopted 7-12-2018  
  

CHAPTER 5  
  
AMUSEMENTS – REPEALED IN ITS ENTIRETY    
  
ORDINANCE #605  
  
REPEAL – FITS UNDER OUR GENERAL BUSINESS LICENSE –  
THIS ORDINANCE WAS IN EFFECT BEFORE OUR BUSINESS  
LICENSING -ADDING TO IT MOBILE FOR THOSE THAT ARE NOT  
PERMANENT  
  
  
Title 4, Chapter 5 Page 1 of 1 REPEALED 7-12-2018  

CHAPTER 6  
DOOR TO DOOR SOLICITATION  
SECTION:  
  
4-6-1:  Purposes  
4-6-2:  Definitions   
4-6-3:  Door to Door Sales License Required   
4-6-4:  Door to Door License Fee   
4-6-5:  Door to Door License Applications  
4-6-6:  Background Investigation   
4-6-7:  Door to Door Sales Badge  
4-6-8:  Term of License    
4-6-9:  Door to Door Sales Prohibited on Posted Properties   
4-6-10:  Door to Door Sales – Grounds for Revocation of License   
4-6-11:  Hours of Door to Door Sales    
4-6-12:  License Nontransferable   
4-6-13:  Penalty  
4-6-1:  PURPOSE: The purpose of this Chapter is as follows:  
A. To protect the citizens from fraud, crime and unfair, deceptive or dishonest business  
practices by persons temporarily engaged in the business of selling goods, wares,  
merchandise and services within the City; and  
  
B. To protect the residents of the City from unwanted intrusions in the privacy of their homes.  
  
4-6-2:  DEFINITIONS:  The following words or phrases used in this Chapter are defined  
as follows:      
DOOR TO DOOR SALES PERSON:  Any person engaged in the soliciting of residents for order  
or donations of any goods, wares, merchandise or services.  
POSTED RESIDENCE OR BUSINESS:  For the purposes of this Chapter, a residence or  
business is "posted", if a "No Solicitors," or other similar sign, is prominently displayed at or near  
the primary entrance to the premises or at the entryway of the property.  
4-6-3:  DOOR TO DOOR SALES LICENSE REQUIRED:  No person shall engage in the  
solicitation of residences within the City without first obtaining a door to door sales license.   
EXCEPTIONS:  The door to door licensing requirements of this Chapter shall not apply to the  
following:  
A. The sale of goods, wares, merchandise or services by any student group or religious,  
philanthropic or charitable organization exempt from taxation under 26 U.S.C. Section  
501 and which has a local charter or sponsor located in the City;  
  
B. Dissemination of political campaign materials, the exercise of political franchise, or  
campaign activities, voter registration activities.  
Door to Door Solicitation Page 1 of 4  Adopted 7-12-2018  

  Loading....
  
C. Proselytizing or dissemination of religious faith or view point or the solicitation of  
contributions or donations by a religious faith organization qualified under 26 USC Section  
501.   
  
D. Advertisements left at or posted on the premise (door hangers).  
  
4-6-4:  DOOR TO DOOR LICENSE FEE: The door to door sales license fee shall be  
the fee for background investigations as determined by a schedule of fees adopted by the City  
Council by resolution which may be amended from time to time.      
4-6-5:  DOOR TO DOOR LICENSE APPLICATIONS: Applications for a door to door  
sales license shall be in writing on a form furnished by the City and shall be filed with the City  
Clerk. Applications shall contain the following information:  
A. The applicant/business name, physical and mailing addresses of the applicant/business;   
  
B. Name of business and business address of product or service supplier (where applicable);  
  
C. A copy of the applicant’s current driver’s or other official identification as determined  
acceptable by the City Clerk;   
  
D. A description of the goods or services to be sold;  
  
E. A statement of whether the applicant has had any business license revoked within the  
past five (5) years by any jurisdiction, and if so, where, when and why the revocation  
occurred;  
  
F. The applicant's social security, or state identification number;  
  
G. A statement of whether the applicant has been convicted of any crime other than a minor  
traffic violation, and if so, the nature, place and date of each such offense (within the past  
five (5) years);  
  
H. A statement of all locations in the City where the goods, wares, merchandise or services  
will be sold;  
  
I. Additional information required within the application provided to applicant by the City may  
include, but not be limited to, the applicant’s phone number, mobile number, email address  
and documentation for the required background check.  
  
4-6-6:  BACKGROUND INVESTIGATION:    
A. In order to determine the suitability of a prospective applicant for a door to door  
sales license, the City shall require a background history check of all persons upon  
submission of application, no applicant shall be issued a door to door sales license  
if the applicant has;  
1. Been convicted of any felony, in any jurisdiction, within five (5) years prior  
to the date of the application;  
2. Been granted a withheld judgment for any felony, within five (5) years prior  
Door to Door Solicitation Page 2 of 4  Adopted 7-12-2018  

  Loading....
to the date of the application;  
3. Has any business-related permit or license revoked by any jurisdiction  
within five (5) years prior to the date of the application;  
4. Been found to have made a false statement on the application;  
5. Been convicted or granted a withheld judgment for any felony or   
misdemeanor involving battery or domestic violence within ten (10) years  
prior to the date of the application;    
6. The applicant has been convicted or granted a withheld judgment for any  
crime involving the sale, possession, or use of a controlled substance or the  
unlawful use or possession of drug paraphernalia, within five years prior to  
the date of the application.  
  
  
B. The City Clerk or their authorized agent shall submit background check inquiries to the  
necessary agency.  
  
C. No temporary license shall be issued for door to door sales applicants.  Licenses shall  
only be granted after all required documentation and background information has been  
received and confirmed.  
  
4-6-7:  DOOR TO DOOR SALES BADGE:  
  
A. Upon completion and approval of the application, a door to door sales badge shall be  
issued to the applicant.  The sales badge shall contain the following:  
  
1. Picture of applicant.  
2. Name of applicant.  
3. Phone number of applicant.  
4. Date license issued.  
5. Date license expires.  
6. Type of product of service being sold.  
  
B. The door to door sales badge shall be on the person and in full view at all times  
during door to door solicitations.  Failure to wear the badge may result in  
revocation of the door to door sales license and badge.  
  
C. It shall be a violation of this chapter and code for any person licensed as a door to door  
sales person to refuse to provide a resident or business the information contained on the  
badge.  Failure to provide the information on request or failure to wear the badge may  
result in revocation of the door to door sales license and badge.    
4-6-8:  TERM OF LICENSE:  The door to door sales license shall expire one (1) year  
from the date of issue, unless another date is endorsed on the license (badge) by the Clerk.  
4-6-9:  DOOR TO DOOR SALES PROHIBITED ON POSTED PROPERTIES:  Any door  
to door sales person who sells or solicits orders for the sale of goods, services, food or  
beverage at any posted residence or business without prior invitation by the occupant thereof,  
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.   
  
Door to Door Solicitation Page 3 of 4  Adopted 7-12-2018  

  Loading....
4-6-10:   DOOR TO DOOR SALES GROUNDS FOR REVOCATION OF LICENSE:  The  
City Clerk may revoke a door to door sales license for any of the following reasons, subject to  
reinstatement by action of the City Council:  
  
A. The licensee engages in any fraudulent, deceptive or unlawful business practice in  
connection with licensee's business;  
  
B. False statements on the license application;  
  
C. The licensee violates any provision of this Chapter;  
  
D. Revocation by any jurisdiction of any other business related license or permit held by  
licensee;  
  
E. The licensee is convicted in any jurisdiction of any felony or crime of moral turpitude;  
  
F. Failure to comply with the provisions of this Chapter;  
  
G. Repeated documented complaints (either in written or oral) from citizens of the community  
about the actions of a person engaged in door to door sales;  
  
H. The City Enforcement Officer and/or any Bonneville County Sheriff’s Officer may suspend  
and make a recommendation to the City Council the revocation of any person found to be  
in violation of any of the above grounds for revocation.  
  
4-6-11:   HOURS OF DOOR TO DOOR SALES:  Door to door solicitation shall not be  
permitted prior to 9:00am or after 8:00pm on any day.  
  
4-6-12:  LICENSE NONTRANSFERABLE:  Licensees shall not allow their license to be  
used by any person.  Licenses issued under the regulations of this chapter shall be  
nontransferable and non-assignable.  
  
4-6-13:    PENALTY:  Any violation of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed an  
infraction and subject to section 1-4-2 of the Ammon City Code. Each day such violation  
continues, shall be a separate violation, which shall be deemed as a separate infraction and a  
citation may be issued therefore.    
  
Door to Door Solicitation Page 4 of 4  Adopted 7-12-2018  

CHAPTER 7  
  
ELECTRICIANS  
  
[RESERVED] 
   

  
CHAPTER 8  
  
PLUMBERS  
  
[RESERVED] 
  

4-9-6:  ITINERANT MERCHANT INVESTIGATION OF APPLICANT AND  
ISSUANCE OF LICENSE:    
  
A. On receipt of the application, the City Clerk shall forward the application to the  
appropriate Department Heads, who shall make an investigation to verify the  
information in the application and compliance with applicable City codes.   
Department Heads shall report their findings to the City Clerk as soon as  
reasonably possible, but no later than thirty (30) days after the application is filed  
with the City Clerk.    
  
 Department reviews shall include but not be limited to the following:  
  
1. Fire Department:     Shall determine compliance with all requirements of  
the International Fire Code.    
  
2. Planning Department:     Shall determine compliance with all requirement  
of Title 10 of the City Code, including but not limited to parking  
requirements.  
  
3. Building Department:   Shall determine compliance, if any with the  
International Building Code, Plumbing Code, Mechanical Code and  
Electrical Code.  Any required inspections shall be determined and  
performed prior to the issuance of any itinerant business license.  
  
4. Public Works:     Shall determine compliance, if any, including but not  
limited to waste water storage and placement of any temporary structure.   
   
B. Upon receipt of approvals by Department Heads, the City Clerk shall issue a  
license.    
  
C. It shall be a violation of this chapter and code for an employee of an itinerant  
business to do door to door sales within the City without first obtaining the  
licensing for door to door sales as required in Title 4, Chapter 6 of the City Code.    
  
  
4-9-7:  ITINERANT MERCHANT DISPLAY OF LICENSE:  The itinerant  
merchant’s license required by this Chapter shall be readily available at the request of  
any City Official.       
  
  
4-9-8:  Repealed:  ITINERANT MERCHANT UNINVITED DOOR-TO-DOOR  
SALES PROHIBITED (See Title 4, Chapter 6)    
  
4-9-9:  ITINERANT MERCHANT GROUNDS FOR REVOCATION OF  
LICENSE:  The City Council may revoke an itinerant merchant’s license for any of the  
following reasons:  
  
A. The licensee or any of licensee's agents or employees engages in any  
fraudulent, deceptive or unlawful business practice in connection with licensee's  
business;  
  
Title 4, Chapter 9 Page 4 of 8  Adopted 7-12-2018  

  Loading....
B. False statements on the license application;  
  
C. The licensee or any of licensee's agents or employees violates any provision of  
this Chapter;  
  
D. Revocation by any jurisdiction of any other business related license or permit  
held by licensee;  
  
E. The licensee is convicted in any jurisdiction of any felony or crime of moral  
turpitude;  
  
F. Failure to comply with the provisions of this Chapter.  
  
  
4-9-10:  Any temporary structure placed on a property within the City in  
conjunction with the issuance of an itinerant merchant license shall be removed from the  
property within thirty (30) days of the expiration of said itinerant merchant license.    
  
4-9-11:  MOBILE FOOD VENDOR LICENSE REQUIRED:  No person shall  
engage in the business of a mobile food vendor without first obtaining a mobile food  
vendor license from the City.  EXCEPTIONS:  The mobile food vendor licensing  
requirements of this Chapter shall not apply to the following:  
  
A. Fruit and Vegetable Sales performed from a vehicle/trailer that does not remain  
on any site(s) within the City, in excess of twelve (12) hours of a twenty-four (24)  
hour period.    
  
4-9-12:  MOBILE FOOD VENDOR LICENSE FEE:  The fee for a mobile food  
vendor license shall be determined by a schedule of fees adopted by the City Council by  
resolution which may be amended from time to time.    
  
  
4-9-13:  MOBILE FOOD VENDOR LICENSE APPLICATIONS:    
  
Applications for a mobile food vendor license shall be in writing on a form furnished by the  
City and shall be filed with the City Clerk. Applications shall contain the following  
information:  
  
A. The applicant/business name, physical and mailing addresses of the  
applicant/business, and   
1. If the applicant is a corporation, or partnership, association or other  
business entity, then also the names and residential addresses of all  
persons owning ten percent (10%) or more of the shares or assets of the  
entity;  
  
B. The names, drivers license number, and state of issuance of all persons who will  
sell or offer for sale any goods, wares, merchandise or services;  
  
C. A description of the type of food to be sold;  
  
Title 4, Chapter 9 Page 5 of 8  Adopted 7-12-2018  

  Loading....
D. A description and license or registration number of  each motor vehicle that will  
be used in connection with making sales, and the names of all persons who will  
be driving such motor vehicles, their driver's license numbers and the names of  
the states by which the licenses were issued;  
  
E. A statement of whether any business-related permit or license held by the  
applicant or any of the applicant's agents or employees has been revoked within  
the past five (5) years by any jurisdiction, and if so, where, when and why the  
revocation occurred;  
  
F. The business/applicant's social security or taxpayer identification number (EIN),  
state identification number and state sales tax number;  
  
G. A statement of whether the applicant has been convicted of any crime other than  
a minor traffic violation, and if so, the nature, place and date of each such  
offense (within the past five (5) years);  
  
H. A statement of all locations in the City where the goods, wares, merchandise or  
services will be sold;  
  
I. Additional information required within the application provided to applicant by the  
City may include, but not be limited to, the business/applicant’s phone number,  
mobile number, email address, business website and person of contact.  
  
  
4-9-14:  MOBILE FOOD VENDOR INVESTIGATION OF APPLICANT AND  
ISSUANCE OF LICENSE:    
  
A. On receipt of the application, the City Clerk shall forward the application to the  
appropriate Department Heads, who shall make an investigation to verify the  
information in the application and compliance with applicable City codes.   
Department Heads shall report their findings to the City Clerk as soon as  
reasonably possible, but no later than thirty (30) days after the application is filed  
with the City Clerk.      
  
B. Upon receipt of approvals by Department Heads, the City Clerk shall issue a  
license.    
  
  
4-9-15:  MOBILE FOOD VENDOR DISPLAY OF LICENSE:  The mobile food  
vendor license required by this Chapter shall be exhibited at all times in a place  
conspicuous to the public at any location where food is being sold from a vehicle  
licensed to dispense food under the rules of this chapter.    
  
  
4-9-16:  MOBILE FOOD VENDOR LOCATION RESTRICTIONS:  Mobile vendors  
making sales from vehicles operated on the City's public streets shall stop their vehicles  
at curbside before making any sales. Mobile vendors shall not make sales from vehicles  
parked, stopped or standing on public sidewalks of the City. Sales shall not be made to  
persons who are on public streets, but may be made to persons on public sidewalks.  
  
Title 4, Chapter 9 Page 6 of 8  Adopted 7-12-2018  

  Loading....
  
4-9-17:  MOBILE FOOD VENDING IN PUBLIC PLACES:  
  
A. Issuance of a mobile food vendor license shall not entitle the licensee to conduct  
business on any street, sidewalk or other location within any park owned or  
maintained by the City.  
  
B. No person shall conduct the business of a mobile food vendor within any park  
owned or maintained by the City except under a franchise contract approved by  
the City Council.  
  
  
4-9-18:  MOBILE FOOD VENDOR LOCATION TIME LIMITS:  No mobile food  
vendor shall make sales from any one location on a public street for more than two (2)  
consecutive hours.    
  
  
4-9-19:  MOBILE FOOD VENDOR LITTER CONTROL:  Any sales vehicles  
operated by a mobile food vendor shall be equipped a with suitable trash container  
readily accessible to the public, in which the vendor's customers may deposit any litter,  
trash or waste related to the vendor's sales. Prior to moving a sales vehicle from a sales  
location, a mobile food vendor shall pick up and remove all litter, trash and waste related  
to the vendor's sales within a one hundred foot (100') radius of the sales vehicle.  
  
  
4-9-20:  RESERVED   
  
  
4-9-21:  TERM OF LICENSE:   All licenses issued under the regulations of this  
chapter shall expire one (1) year from the date of issue, unless another date is endorsed  
on the license by the Clerk.     
  
  
4-9-22:  LICENSE NONTRANSFERABLE:  Licensees shall not allow their license  
to be used by any person other than their agents or employees for any purpose.   
Licenses issued under the regulations of this chapter shall be nontransferable and non- 
assignable.   
  
  
4-9-23:  SALES VEHICLE REGISTRATION:  Any vehicle from which a mobile  
food vendor or itinerant merchant makes sales shall be registered as required by State  
law.  
  
  
4-9-24:  SALES VEHICLE EQUIPMENT:  Mobile food vendors and itinerant  
merchants shall not operate, move, park, stop or stand any sales vehicle on the City  
streets unless the vehicle is equipped as required by State law.  
  
  
Title 4, Chapter 9 Page 7 of 8  Adopted 7-12-2018  

  Loading....
4-9-25:  TRAFFIC AND PARKING REGULATIONS:  Mobile food vendors and  
itinerant merchants shall comply with all State and City traffic and parking, stopping and  
standing laws, ordinances and regulations.  
  
  
4-9-26:  UNLAWFUL CONDUCT:  No mobile food vendor or itinerant merchant  
shall do any of the following:  
  
A. Engage in any fraudulent, deceptive or unlawful business practice;  
  
B. Make any materially false statement or representation concerning the nature,  
quality or durability of any goods, wares, merchandise or services sold or offered  
for sale, knowing the statement to be false; or  
  
Make any materially false or misleading statement on an application for a license under  
this Chapter  
  
  
4-9-27:  LICENSES, DENIAL, SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION:  The City Clerk  
may revoke or suspend any license issued under this chapter upon giving ten (10) days’  
notice to the license holder.  Appeals of the City Clerk’s decision must be filed no later  
than fourteen (14) days after the revocation or suspension and shall be heard at the next  
available City Council meeting.  Denials of licenses issued pursuant to this chapter shall  
be based on non-compliance to the stated provisions of this chapter or requirements of  
codes adopted by the City Council as they may apply to this chapter.  Appeals on  
denials shall be handled the same as revocations or suspensions.  Failure to appeal  
shall be deemed as a final decision of the City.  The ruling of the City Council shall be  
the final decision of the City.    
  
  
4-9-28:  REQUIRED INSPECTION:   Any mobile food vendor or itinerant merchant  
business licensed under the Ammon City Code shall be subject to the following  
inspections Fire, Building, Plumbing, Mechanical and/or Electrical.  The fee for said  
inspection shall be determined by a schedule of fees adopted by the City Council by  
resolution which may be amended from time to time.  
  
  
4-9-29:  PENALTY:  Any violation of the provisions of this chapter shall be  
deemed an infraction and shall be subject to penalties prescribed for such violations  
under section 1-4-2 of this code.  
Title 4, Chapter 9 Page 8 of 8  Adopted 7-12-2018  

CHAPTER 10  
  
PAWN BROKERS-,   
SECONDHAND PRECIOUS METALS DEALERS  
  
  
SECTION:  
  
4-10-1:  Definitions  
4-10-2:  License Required  
4-10-3:  License Application  
4-10-4:  Reserved  
4-10-5:  Reserved  
4-10-6:  Reserved  
4-10-7:  Reserved  
4-10-8:  Reserved  
4-10-9:  License Approval and Issuance  
4-10-10: License Fees and Expiration  
4-10-11: Records to Be Kept  
4-10-12 Records to Be Open for Inspection  
4-10-13: Retention of Records; Time  
4-10-14: Retention of Property  
4-10-15: Compliance with Law  
4-10-16: Prohibited Purchases  
4-10-17: Licenses, Denial, Suspension or Revocation  
4-10-18: Penalty  
  
  
4-10-1:  DEFINITIONS:  For the purpose of this chapter, certain words and terms  
are defined as follows:   
  
 PAWNBROKER DEFINED:   As used in this Chapter, "pawnbroker" is a  
person who engages in the business of lending or advancing money on the  
security of personal property pledged or deposited in his or her possession.  
  
 PRECIOUS METALS DEFINED:  As used in this Chapter, "precious  
metals" means gold, silver, platinum and their alloys.   
  
 SCRAP DEALER TYPES OF MERCHANDISE:  A scrap dealer shall be  
considered any person or business as defined in Idaho Code Title 54, Chapter 27.   
Scrap dealers shall meet and comply with all licensing and regulations within the  
afore mentioned Idaho Code Title 54 and Chapter 27. The City of Ammon requires  
no special licensing other than a general business license of those businesses  
operating as a scrap metal business.    
  
 SECONDHAND PRECIOUS METALS DEALER DEFINED;  
EXCEPTIONS:   
  
Title 4, Chapter 10 Page 1 of 4 Adopted 7-12-2018   

  Loading....
(A) Definition:  As used in this Chapter, a "secondhand precious metals  
dealer" is a person who engages in the business of buying, selling, exchanging or  
trading old or used precious metal or secondhand goods containing any precious  
metal.  
  
(B) Exceptions:   The following shall not be considered secondhand  
precious metals dealers:  
  
Persons who in the ordinary course of business buy or sell uncast precious  
metals primarily for use in any manufacturing or photographic developing process,  
jewelry manufacture or repair, or dental restoration or repair.  
  
Persons who in the ordinary course of business accept or receive  
secondhand goods containing precious metals as consideration for the sale of new  
merchandise and who subsequently dispose of such secondhand goods in the  
same form as they existed at the time of their receipt.  
  
  
4-10-2:  LICENSE REQUIRED:  No person shall engage in the business of a  
pawnbroker, or secondhand precious metals dealer without first obtaining a license issued  
by the City.  
  
  
4-10-3:  LICENSE APPLICATION:    
  
(A) Applications for pawnbrokers, and secondhand precious metals  
dealer’s licenses shall be made on a form provided by the City Clerk. The  
application shall state the applicant's name, residential address, business name,  
address of place of business, type of license applied for and a general  
description of the goods or materials to be purchased, sold, exchanged or traded.  
The relevant license fee shall accompany the application.  
  
(B) To determine the suitability of prospective applicants for a license,  
the City Clerk shall require a first time applicant to provide information and  
fingerprints necessary to obtain criminal history background check.  Fingerprinting  
shall not be required for a license renewal, unless fingerprints and criminal  
background history check have not been previously obtained or performed for the  
applicant.    
  
4-10-9:  LICENSE APPROVAL AND ISSUANCE:  On receipt of the application, the  
City Clerk shall forward the application to the appropriate Department Heads, who shall  
make an investigation to verify the information in the application and compliance with  
applicable City codes.  Department Heads shall report their findings to the City Clerk as  
soon as reasonably possible, but no later than thirty (30) days after the application is filed  
with the City Clerk.  No license shall be issued until the required background check has  
been returned to the City by the appropriate agency.  
  
  
  
4-10-10: LICENSE FEES AND EXPIRATION:  Fees for licenses issued under this  
Title 4, Chapter 10 Page 2 of 4 Adopted 7-12-2018   

  Loading....
Chapter shall be determined by a schedule of fees adopted by the City Council by  
resolution which may be amended from time to time.  All licenses issued under this  
chapter shall be paid in advance and shall expire one (1) year from the date of issue  
unless another date is endorsed on the license by the Clerk.   
  
  
4-10-11: RECORDS TO BE KEPT:    
     
(A) All pawnbrokers, and secondhand precious metals dealers shall  
keep and file with the Bonneville County Sheriff’s Department a digital copy of the  
following described records. All digital records shall be filed via the internet at a web site  
determined by the Bonneville County Sheriff’s Department using software as may be  
determined by the Police Division. Such digital records shall be filed within seventy-two  
(72) hours after the time and date of the transaction. The digital records required for  
filing shall consist of the following records:   
  
1. An accurate description of all precious metals and personal  
property purchased, acquired or received.  
2. The name, residence, driver's license number, or social  
security number of the person from whom any, precious metals or  
personal property is purchased, acquired or received.  
3. The date and place of the purchase, acquisition, or  
reception.  
4. The date when such property is disposed of and the name  
and address of the person receiving the same.  
5. Any other records required to be kept under Idaho law.  
  
(B) Notwithstanding the foregoing, records relating to the  
purchase or sale of used or secondhand clothing or audio or audio-visual media,  
computer software, gaming media or other electronic media in the form of used  
VCR tape recordings, CD-ROMS, DVDS or other.    
  
4-10-12: RECORDS TO BE OPEN FOR INSPECTION:  All records required to be  
kept under this Chapter shall be made available for inspection by any police officer  
representing the City of Ammon during normal business hours.  
  
  
4-10-13: RETENTION OF RECORDS; TIME:  All records required to be kept under  
this Chapter shall be kept for not less than three (3) years.  
  
  
4-10-14: RETENTION OF PROPERTY:  No person licensed under this Chapter  
shall sell, trade, rent or otherwise dispose of any property acquired for the purpose of  
resale or other conveyance for a period of fifteen (15) days from the date of receiving the  
property.  Nothing herein shall require the retention of any firearm bearing a legible serial  
number, unless such serial number appears to have been altered or unless there is good  
cause to believe the firearm has been stolen from its lawful owner.  
  
  
Title 4, Chapter 10 Page 3 of 4 Adopted 7-12-2018   

  Loading....
4-10-15: COMPLIANCE WITH LAW:  Persons licensed under this Chapter shall  
conduct their businesses in compliance with all applicable federal, state and City laws,  
ordinances and regulations.  
  
  
4-10-16: PROHIBITED PURCHASES:  No person licensed under this Chapter shall  
purchase, acquire, accept or receive in the ordinary course of business and for the  
purpose of resale or other conveyance any precious metals or personal property from any  
person who is under the age of eighteen (18) years or who is under the influence of  
alcohol, drugs or a controlled substance.  
  
  
4-10-17: REVOCATION OF LICENSE:  The City Clerk may revoke or suspend any  
license issued under this chapter upon giving ten (10) days’ notice to the license holder.   
Appeals of the City Clerk’s decision must be filed no later than fourteen (14) days after the  
revocation or suspension and shall be heard at the next available City Council meeting.   
Denials of licenses issued pursuant to this chapter shall be based on non-compliance to  
the stated provisions of this chapter.  Appeals on denials shall be handled the same as  
revocations or suspensions.  Failure to appeal shall be deemed as a final decision of the  
City.  The ruling of the City Council shall be the final decision of the City.    
  
  
4-10-18: PENALTY: Any violation of the provisions of this chapter shall be  
deemed an infraction and shall be subject to penalties prescribed for such violations  
under section 1-4-2 of this code.  
Title 4, Chapter 10 Page 4 of 4 Adopted 7-12-2018   

CHAPTER 11  
  
SCRAP DEALERS – REPEALED IN ITS ENTIRETY  
  
ORDINANCE #605  
REPEAL – SCRAP DEALERS REGULATED AT STATE LEVEL  
  
Title 4, Chapter 11  Page 1 of 1  Repealed 7-12-2018  
  

CHAPTER 12  
  
MASSAGE THERAPY – REPEALED IN ITS ENTIRETY  
  
ORDINANCE #605  
  
REPEAL COVERED BY IDAHO CODE  
  
  
Title 4, Chapter 12 Page 1 of 1 Repealed 7-12-2018  

CHAPTER 13  
  
HOME OCCUPATIONS  
  
  
SECTION:  
  
4-13-1:  Home Occupation Defined  
4-13-2:  License Required  
4-13-3:  License Fees and Expiration  
4-13-4:  Investigation Fees  
4-13-5:  Inspections Required  
4-13-6:  License Application  
4-13-7:  License Nontransferable  
4-13-8:  Allowed Zones  
4-13-9:  Requirements of Granting of Permit  
4-13-10 Licenses, Denial, Suspension or Revocation  
4-13-11 Violations and Penalties    
  
  
4-13-1:   HOME OCCUPATION DEFINED: The term “home occupation” shall  
mean any occupation or profession which may be conducted within a residential  
dwelling, or allowed appurtenant building, without in any way changing the appearance  
or condition of the structures and carried on by persons residing therein.    
  
  
4-13-2:  LICENSE REQUIRED:  Except as otherwise provided in this Chapter, no  
person shall conduct a home occupation business within the City without first obtaining a  
license from the City as required by this Chapter.    
  
4-13-3:  LICENSE FEES AND EXPIRATION:   License fees for the operation of a  
home occupation shall be determined by a schedule of fees adopted by the City Council  
by resolution which may be amended from time to time.  All licenses issued under this  
chapter shall be paid in advance and shall expire one (1) year from the date of issue  
unless another date is endorsed on the license by the Clerk. The relevant license fee  
shall accompany the application.  
  
  
4-13-4:   INVESTIGATION AND FEES: The following home occupation  
businesses shall be subject to a background investigation and related fees. Said fee  
shall be determined by a schedule of fees adopted by the City Council by resolution  
which may be amended from time to time.   Upon receipt of an application for a home  
occupation that requires a background investigation, the Clerk shall investigate all  
information stated in the application, conduct a background check and report the results  
of the investigation to the City Council. If during the course of the investigation it is  
determined that the contents of the application are true, that the applicant is qualified to  
receive a license and that the requirements of this Chapter have been met, a license  
shall be issued.    
  
(A) Day Cares   
Title 4, Chapter 13    Page 1 of 3     Adopted 7-12-2018  
  

  Loading....
(B) Preschools  
(C) Any business that involves physical contact of another person  
(D) Businesses as may be determined necessary by the City Council  
  
  
4-13-5:   INSPECTIONS REQUIRED:  The following home occupations  
shall be required to have an annual fire inspection:    
  
(A) Day Cares   
(B) Preschools  
(C) Businesses determined by the Fire Marshall to require a fire inspection shall be  
inspected prior to the issuance of the first annual license and shall then be  
inspected on a schedule to be determined by the Fire Marshall.    
  
  
4-13-6:  LICENSE APPLICATION:   Applications for home occupations shall be  
made at the City Office on a form furnished by the Clerk.   
  
  
4-13-7:  LICENSE NONTRANSFERABLE:   Home Occupation Licenses issued by  
the City shall not be assigned or transferred to any person other than the named holder.  
Issuance of a license by the City shall not authorize any person other than the person or  
entity named thereon to conduct such business; nor shall it authorize any business other  
than that named to be done or transacted. Issuance of a license shall not permit the  
named business to be conducted at any address other than the location described in the  
application.   All licenses shall state the location of the business upon the face thereof.  
  
  
4-13-8:  ALLOWED ZONES: Home occupations may be granted in any  
residential zoning area of the city.    
  
  
4-13-9:  REQUIREMENTS OF GRANTING OF PERMIT:  Before a license for a  
home occupation can be issued the following conditions must be met:  
  
(A) No employment of help, other than the members of the residing family.   
EXCEPTION:  Childcare/Preschools licensed to care for more than six (6)  
children, at one time, may be allowed to have one (1) person from outside the  
residence performing functions of the Childcare/Preschool.  This exception in no  
way exempts the provider from complying with Title 6, Chapter 3 of the Ammon  
City Code.    
  
(B) No more floor space than the equivalent of twenty-five (25) percent of the  
building shadow line (excluding garage and open patios etc.) area of the dwelling  
shall be used in the home occupation.  EXCEPTION:  Childcares/Preschools are  
approved based on the maximum children allowed in Title 6, Chapter 3 Section  
6-3-3-B & C.    
  
(C) The use shall not generate excessive pedestrian or vehicular traffic.  
  
Title 4, Chapter 13    Page 2 of 3     Adopted 7-12-2018  
  

  Loading....
(D) No storage of materials or supplies outdoors, and no use of commercial vehicles  
for delivery of materials to and from the premises.  
  
(E) No signs or advertising shall be permitted on the premises, except one name  
plate, not exceeding four hundred thirty-two (432) square inches.    
  
(F) In no way shall the appearance of the building be so altered, or the occupation  
conducted in such a manner, as to cause the premises to deviate from its  
residential character, either by color, materials or construction, or by lighting,  
signs, sound or noise vibrations, etc.   
  
(G) There shall be no use of utilities or community facilities beyond that reasonable  
to the use of the property for residential purposes.  
  
(H) The applicant shall sign a statement that he is aware of all requirements and  
conditions under which approval of the home occupation is given and that if any  
of said requirements or conditions are violated; approval shall become null and  
void.  Said statement shall become a part of the Certificate of Occupancy.  
  
  
4-13-10: LICENSES, DENIAL, SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION:   The City Clerk  
may revoke, deny or suspend any license issued under this chapter upon giving ten (10)  
days’ notice to the license holder.  Appeals of the City Clerk’s decision must be filed  
within fourteen (14) days after the revocation, denial or suspension and shall be heard at  
the next available City Council meeting.  Failure to appeal shall be deemed as a final  
decision of the City.  The ruling of the City Council shall be the final decision of the City.  
  
  
4-13-11: VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES:  Any violation of the provisions of this  
chapter shall be deemed an infraction and shall be subject to penalties prescribed for  
such violations under section 1-4-2 of this code, subject to the provisions of Idaho  
Code 18-111 and 18-113A.  Each day of the violation shall be considered a separate  
offense and shall be punishable by separate fines as provided for herein.  
  
  
  
  
  
Title 4, Chapter 13    Page 3 of 3     Adopted 7-12-2018  

CHAPTER 14  
  
BARTENDER’S LICENSE  
  
SECTION:  
  
4-14-1: Definitions  
4-14-2: License Required  
4-14-3: Application, Fees and Investigation  
4-14-4: License Requirement  
4-14-5: Expiration of Licenses  
4-14-6: Revocation by Clerk  
4-14-7: Penalty   
  
  
4-14-1:  DEFINITIONS:  Certain words and phrases used in this Chapter are defined as  
follows:  
  
BARTENDER:  Any person, whether agent, servant, employee, or person acting in any  
other capacity, who pours, mixes, or prepares any liquor by the drink, wine by the drink or beer  
by the drink upon any premise licensed to sell alcohol by the drink.   A bartender can only  
operate within the City of Ammon when employed by a business that holds a license as required  
by Chapters 2, 3 and/or 4 of the City Code.  
CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE:  A drug or other substance, or immediate precursor, included in  
schedule I, II, III, IV, or V, part B 21 USC 802 (term does not included distilled spirits, wine,  
malt beverages, or tobacco, as those terms are defined or used in subtitle E of the Internal  
Revenue Code of 1986) or a drug, substance, or immediate precursor as defined in Title 37,  
Chapter 27, Idaho Code, Uniform Controlled Substances, Schedules I through V.   
LICENSE: A license issued by the City Council to a qualified person, under which it shall be  
lawful for the licensee to perform the duties of bartender as defined by this chapter.  
  
LIQUOR: Any kind of hard liquor, wine or beer which may legally be dispensed according  
the Idaho State Code.    
  
4-14-2:  BARTENDER’S LICENSE REQUIRED:   No person shall act as a bartender in  
any premises licensed within the City to sell liquor by the drink, pursuant to section 4-2-2 of the  
Ammon City Code, beer by the drink, pursuant to section 4-3-2 of the Ammon City Code or wine  
by the drink, pursuant to section 4-4-2 of the Ammon City Code, unless that person holds a  
bartender's license issued by the City.  All bartender’s licenses, names of persons acting as  
bartenders and hours worked shall be available upon request of any police or enforcement  
officer representing the City of Ammon.  It shall be the responsibility of the business to confirm  
and maintain required documentation for all persons acting as bartenders within the business.  
Failure to maintain such documentation shall constitute a violation of this ordinance by the  
Page 1 of 3    BARTENDER’S LICENSE    Adopted 7-12-2018  
  

  Loading....
  
business.  Further, the City shall have the authority to revoke the business license until  
compliance is established.  
  
  
4-14-3:  BARTENDER APPLICATIONS, FEES AND INVESTIGATION:    
 Applications for bartender's a license shall be made on forms furnished by the Clerk and  
shall be accompanied by a license and investigation fee for new or renewal of any bartender’s  
license that has not been revoked or terminated for cause.  Said fee shall be determined by a  
schedule of fees adopted by the City Council by resolution which may be amended from time to  
time. No liquor by the drink licensee shall employ any person, allow the employment of any  
person, or license any person to perform the services of a bartender unless that person holds a  
valid bartender's license issued by the City.  Upon receipt of an application for a bartender’s  
license, the Clerk shall require an applicant to provide information and fingerprints necessary to  
obtain criminal history information from the Idaho State Police and the Federal Bureau of  
Investigation.  Pursuant to section 67-3008, Idaho Code, and congressional enactment Public  
Law 92-544, the City Clerk shall submit a set of fingerprints obtained from the applicant and the  
required fees to the Idaho State Police, Bureau of Criminal Identification, for a criminal records  
check of state and national databases.  The submission of fingerprints and information required  
by this section shall be on forms prescribed by the Idaho State Police.  The City Clerk is  
authorized to receive criminal history information from the Idaho State Police and from the  
Federal Bureau of Investigation for the purpose of evaluating the fitness of applicants for a  
bartender’s license.  As required by state and federal law, further dissemination or other use of  
the criminal history information is prohibited.  If during the course of the investigation it is  
determined that the contents of the application are true, that the applicant is qualified to receive  
a license and that the requirements of this Chapter have been met, a license shall be issued.    
  
4-14-4:  BARTENDER LICENSE REQUIREMENTS:  The City Council shall approve  
issuance of bartender's licenses only to persons who satisfy the following conditions:  
  
(A) The person must be at least nineteen (19) years of age and of good moral character.  
  
(B) The person shall not have, within five (5) years prior to the date of making application  
been found guilty of or received a withheld judgment or deferred sentence for a  
misdemeanor violation relating to any sex related offense, aiding or abating in sex  
related offense, or battery against a child or other related offense against a child, or  
any stalking or harassment of another person whether directly or indirectly through a  
third party.  
  
(C) The person shall not have, within five (5) years prior to the date of making application  
been found guilty of or received a withheld judgment or deferred sentence for a  
misdemeanor violation involving any controlled substance.  
  
(D) The person shall not have been convicted of, been placed on probation, received a  
deferred sentence, received a withheld judgment, or completed any sentence for any  
felony within five (5) years prior to the date of applying for a license.    
  
Page 2 of 3    BARTENDER’S LICENSE    Adopted 7-12-2018  
  

  Loading....
  
(E) The person shall not have been a licensee under Title 23, Chapter 9, Idaho Code or  
under this Chapter, who has had a license revoked within five (5) years prior to the  
date of applying for a bartender's license.  
  
(F) The person shall not have been a member of a partnership or association or an  
officer, member of the governing board or one (1) of the ten (10) principal  
stockholders of a corporation which was licensed under Title 23, Chapter 9, Idaho  
Code, or under this Chapter and whose license was revoked within five (5) years  
prior to the date of applying for a bartender's license.  
  
(G) The person shall not have had a bartender's license issued by the City revoked  
within five (5) years prior to the date of applying for a subsequent bartender's  
license.    
  
(H) If a criminal history check reveals that there is a pending criminal investigation or  
criminal charge that would result in the revocation or denial of a bartender’s license if  
there is a conviction or withheld judgment entered for the charge, the City Clerk shall  
deny the application.  An applicant would then be allowed the opportunity to reapply  
after being cleared of said investigation or criminal charge.  
  
(I) Upon application approval or denial, a copy or letter of denial shall be mailed to the  
designated employer.  
  
4-14-5:  EXPIRATION:   Bartender's licenses shall expire one (1) year from the date  
issued.  
  
4-14-6:  REVOCATION BY CLERK:   Upon receipt of a certified copy of a judgment of  
conviction by any court of competent jurisdiction, the City Clerk immediately shall revoke a  
bartender's license issued to any person convicted of any violation of this Chapter which would  
disqualify the person from holding the license. Nothing herein shall prevent the Council from  
revoking a bartender’s license prior to the entry of such judgment.  
  
4-14-7:  PENALTY:   Any violation of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed an  
infraction and shall be subject to penalties prescribed for such violations under section 1-4-2 of  
this code.  Each day such violation continues, shall be a separate violation, which shall be  
deemed as a separate infraction and a citation may be issued therefore.  Violations shall be  
assessed on a per violation per day basis.  
  
  
  
Page 3 of 3    BARTENDER’S LICENSE    Adopted 7-12-2018  
  

CHAPTER 15  
  
SPRINKLER SERVICE AND SNOW REMOVAL PERMIT  
  
SECTION:  
  
4-14-1: Definitions  
4-14-2:  Permit Required  
4-14-3: Application and Fees   
4-14-4: Training  
4-14-5: Identification Card  
4-14-6: Expiration of Permit  
4-14-7: Revocation by Clerk  
4-14-8: Penalty  
  
4-14-1:  DEFINITIONS:  Certain words and phrases used in this Chapter are defined as  
follows:  
  
LANDSCAPE SPRINKLER IRRIGATION SYSTEM (UNDERGROUND): Underground  
landscape irrigation is the method in which a controlled amount of water is supplied to plants  
and grass at regular intervals by a hand control valve or by an automatic timer and valves.  
  
SPRINKLER REPAIR/INSTALLATION TECHNICIAN:  A person that repairs, connects or  
maintains sprinkler equipment at the point where the sprinkler system manifold or main line is  
connected to the potable water connection to the building or property being served by the  
sprinkler system.  
  
RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY:  A building approved and used as a dwelling unit.   
  
SNOW REMOVAL (PRIVATE):  The removal of snow from private property whether by the  
property owner or by a private individual or company.  
  
4-14-2:  SPRINKLER SERVICE/SNOW REMOVAL PREMIT REQUIRED:   
   
1. No person or company paid by an individual or organization within the City  
shall install or provide sprinkler services on a landscape sprinkler irrigation  
system within the City prior to obtaining a Sprinkler Service/Snow Removal  
permit.  It shall be the responsibility of any business providing said services to  
confirm and maintain required documentation for all persons performing services  
at locations within the City of Ammon.  Failure to obtain such documentation shall  
constitute a violation of this ordinance by the business and/or person performing  
said function.    
  
2. No person or company paid by an individual or organization within the City  
shall remove snow from private residential property within the City prior to  
obtaining a Sprinkler Service/Snow Removal permit.  It shall be the responsibility  
of any business providing said service to confirm and maintain required  
Page 1 of 2  SPRINKLER SERVICE/SNOW REVMOVAL PERMIT                   ADOPTED 4-6-17  
  

  Loading....
  
documentation for all persons removing snow as part of a paid service.  Failure  
to obtain such documentation shall constitute a violation of this ordinance by the  
business and/or person performing said function.    
  
EXCEPTIONS:    
a. Persons providing a service within a neighborhood at no charge  
where snow removal does not involve the moving of snow across or  
into a dedicated public right of way (roadway/street) are exempt  
from the requirements of this chapter.  
b. Persons under the age of eighteen (18) providing snow removal at  
a nominal fee (equal to or less than minimum wage) and not  
involving the moving of snow across or into a dedicated public right  
of way (roadway/street) are exempt from the requirements of this  
chapter.  
c. Persons removing snow for a neighbor when the same is not a  
regular part of any regular business function and does not involve  
snow across or into a dedicated public right of way (roadway/street)  
are exempt from the requirements of this chapter.  
  
4-14-3:  SPRINKLER SERVICE/SNOW REMOVAL APPLICATIONS AND FEES:  There  
shall be no fee for permits required under this chapter.  Attendance of the offered training and  
certification of attendance by the Public Works Department along with the application provided at  
trainings shall be the requirements for obtaining a permit.   
  
4-14-4:  SPRINKLER SERVICE/SNOW REMOVAL TRAINING: The City of Ammon  
Public Works Department will schedule a minimum of four (4) meetings per year for training  
required by this chapter.    
  
4-14-5:  SPRINKLER SERVICE/SNOW REMOVAL IDENTIFICATION CARD:  All persons  
attending and completing the required training will receive a Photo ID name badge for proof of  
completion which shall be made available at all times while performing services in the City of  
Ammon. Badges required by this chapter shall be issued upon completion of a training class  
performed by an authorized City of Ammon trainer.  Badges will be available for pick up at the  
City of Ammon City Building at completion of the class.  Notification of attendance and completion  
of the training must be provided by the City of Ammon Public Works Department prior to issuance  
of a photo ID badge on a form provided by the City Clerk.    
  
4-14-6:  EXPIRATION:   Sprinkler Service/Snow Removal permit/badge shall expire one  
(1) year from the date issued.  
  
4-14-7:  REVOCATION BY CLERK:   Person(s) found to be in violation of the requirements  
of licensing or failure to follow the requirements specified within the training required by this  
chapter may have said permit/badge revoked by the City Clerk upon receipt by an Enforcement  
Officer designated by the City of Ammon or by the City Clerk after notification of a violation of  
procedures required.    
  
4-14-8:  PENALTY:   Any violation of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed an  
infraction and shall be subject to penalties prescribed for such violations under section 1-4-2 of  
this code.  
Page 2 of 2  SPRINKLER SERVICE/SNOW REVMOVAL PERMIT                   ADOPTED 4-6-17  
  

Title 05 Criminal Code

CHAPTER 1  
  
PROSECUTION AND PUNISHMENT OF CRIMES  
  
  
  
SECTION:  
  
5-1-1:  Legislative Purpose  
5-1-2:  Definitions  
5-1-3:  Punishment for Crimes  
5-1-4:  Prosecutions Against Corporations  
5-1-5:  Union of Act and Intent  
5-1-6:  Manifestation of Intent  
5-1-7:  Territorial Jurisdiction  
5-1-8:  Procedures Under Idaho State Code  
5-1-9:  Penalty  
  
  
5-1-1:  LEGISLATIVE PURPOSE:   This title is called the Criminal Code. All  
words and phrases used herein shall have the same meaning as ascribed in Title 18 of  
the Idaho Code, except as expressly defined herein. All provisions herein shall be  
applied in the same manner and construed consistently with the provisions of the  
Criminal Code for the State of Idaho.  
  
  
5-1-2:  DEFINITIONS:  
  
(A) Crime:   A crime or public offense is an act committed or omitted in violation of a  
law forbidding or commanding it.  
  
(B) Felony:   A felony is a crime which is punishable by death or by imprisonment in  
the state prison.  
  
(C) Misdemeanor:   Every other crime which is not a felony and which is not  
specifically designated in the Ordinance to be an infraction shall be deemed to be  
a misdemeanor.  
  
(D) Infraction:   An infraction is a civil public offense, not constituting a crime, which is  
punishable only by a penalty not exceeding one hundred dollars ($100) and for  
which no period of incarceration may be imposed.  
  
  
5-1-3:  PUNISHMENT FOR CRIMES:  
  
(A) Felonies:   All felonies are prosecuted and punishable pursuant to the provisions  
of the Idaho Code, subject to the provisions of Idaho Code 18-111.  
  
Title 5, Chapter 1 Page 1 of 2  Revised 7-12-2018  
  

  Loading....
   
  
(B) Misdemeanors:  Any crime constituting a misdemeanor shall be subject to  
penalties prescribed for such violations under section 1-4-1 of this code, subject  
to the provisions of Idaho Code 18-113.  
  
(C) Infraction:   Any person committing an infraction shall be subject to penalties  
prescribed for such violations under section 1-4-2 of this code, subject to the  
provisions of Idaho Code 18-113A.    
  
  
5-1-4:  PROSECUTIONS AGAINST CORPORATIONS:   The City may  
prosecute any corporation for violation of this Criminal Code. In any such prosecution, it  
shall be sufficient to make the corporation in its corporate name a defendant and service  
may be procured against the corporation in the same manner as permitted under the  
Criminal Code of the State of Idaho. Any judgment imposed by the Court against a  
corporation shall have the force and effect of a judgment in a civil action, and execution  
against a corporation may issue in the same manner as in civil actions.  
  
Any summons served upon a defendant corporation shall contain a statement that the  
corporation shall appear forthwith and defend said action, and in the event of its failure  
to do so, a plea of not guilty will be entered by the court and the trial will proceed as if  
the corporation had appeared. A copy of the Complaint shall be attached to and served  
with the Summons.  
  
  
5-1-5:  UNION OF ACT AND INTENT:   In every crime there must exist a union,  
or joint operation, of act and intent, or criminal negligence.  
  
  
5-1-6:  MANIFESTATION OF INTENT:   The intent to commit a crime is  
manifested by the circumstances connected with the crime and the sound mind and  
discretion of the accused.  
  
  
5-1-7:  TERRITORIAL JURISDICTION:   Any person who commits a crime within  
the City is punishable as set forth in this Criminal Code. A crime is committed for the  
purposes thereof when all elements of the crime have occurred; however, a person is  
punishable under this Code whenever any element of the crime is committed within the  
City.  
  
  
5-1-8:  PROCEDURES UNDER IDAHO PENAL CODE:    All provisions of this  
Code shall be enforced, interpreted and administered in accordance with the Penal  
Code of the State of Idaho, as set forth in Title 18 Idaho Code. Without limiting the  
foregoing, all arrests, prosecution and enforcement of this Code shall be in accordance  
with Chapters 1 through 7, and 16, 17 and 20, Title 18, Idaho Code.  
  
  
5-1-9:  PENALTY:  Any person violating any of the provisions of City Code of the  
City of Ammon, shall be guilty of an infraction or misdemeanor and, upon conviction  
thereof, shall be subject to the penalties as provided for in section 1-4-1 or 1-4-2 of this  
code and as provided for in this Code, subject to the provisions of Idaho Code.    
Title 5, Chapter 1 Page 2 of 2  Revised 7-12-2018  
  
1. To regulate and prohibit children from remaining in public places during  
curfew hours of the day;  
  
2. To protect children from each other and other adult perpetrators of  
crimes;  
  
3. To reduce nocturnal juvenile crime and juvenile delinquency;  
  
4. To promote family responsibility and parental control over their children;  
and  
  
5. To protect and promote the public health, peace, safety, welfare and  
tranquility of the inhabitants of the City of Ammon, Bonneville County,  
Idaho..  
  
Each violation of this Ordinance shall constitute a separate offense.  
  
(B) DEFINITIONS: Certain words and phrases used in this Ordinance are defined as  
follows:  
  
"Curfew Hours" shall mean the hours between 1:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m., every  
day of the week.  
  
"Emergency" is the unforeseen combination of circumstances or the resulting  
state that calls for immediate action to prevent, control, or minimize serious  
bodily injury, death, or significant loss of property.  
  
"Employment activity" shall mean the performance of any responsibilities of  
duties expressly or impliedly required as a condition of employment of a minor.  
  
"Establishment" shall mean any privately owned place of business operated for  
a profit to which the public is invited, including, but not limited to, any place of  
amusement or entertainment.  
  
"Guardian" is:  
  
6. a person who, under court order, is the guardian of the person of  
a minor;  
  
7. a public or private agency with whom a minor has been placed  
by order of a court; or   
  
8. a person to whom a parent or guardian has delegated any of his  
or her powers with respect to a minor pursuant to Section 15-5-104 of  
the Idaho Code.  
  
"Child/juvenile" shall mean any unemancipated person, male or female, under  
the age of eighteen (18) years.  
  
"Emancipated" shall mean any person either eighteen (18) years or age or  
older, or if under the age of eighteen (18), any person who is married or has  
been married; or any person who is in active military service; or any person who  
is both self-supporting and neither resides with nor is subject to parental  
control.  
Title 5, Chapter 2    Page 9 of 13    Revised 7-12-2018   
    

  Loading....
  
"Operator" shall mean any individual, firm, association, partnership, or  
corporation operating, managing, or conducting any establishment. The term  
includes the members or partners of an association or partnership and the  
officers of a corporation which owns or operates an establishment.  
  
"Parent" shall mean any person who is a natural parent, adopted parent, or  
step-parent, whether the mother, father, step-mother, step-father, or both, being  
referred to in the singular as "parent", guardian, or any other person having the  
legal care, custody, or control of a child/juvenile.  
  
"Public place" shall mean any place to which the general public has access  
including, but not limited to, streets, highways, alleys, sidewalks, and the  
common areas of schools, hospitals, apartment houses, office buildings,  
transportation facilities, shopping malls, public parking lots, and commercial  
businesses.  
  
"Remain" shall mean to linger or stay or to fail to leave premises when  
requested to do so by a police officer or the owner, operator or other person in  
control of an establishment.  
  
(C) CHILD/JUVENILE CURFEW:  It shall be unlawful for any child/juvenile to be, or  
remain, in or upon any street, alley, public ground, public place, or any place open to  
the public, place of amusement or entertainment, vacant lot, or other unsupervised  
place, playgrounds, parks, highways, road, public streets, or exposed to public use in  
the City of Ammon, County of Bonneville, during curfew hours. It shall be unlawful for  
any parent, guardian, or other person having the care and custody of any child/juvenile  
to allow the child/juvenile to be or remain in or upon any street, alley, public ground,  
public place, or any place open to the public, place of amusement or entertainment,  
vacant lot, or other unsupervised place, playgrounds, parks, highways, road, public  
streets, or exposed to public use within the City of Ammon, County of Bonneville,  
during the curfew hours. Violation of this section shall be deemed an infraction,  
pursuant to Ammon Code 1-4-2.  
  
(D) PARENTAL VIOLATION OF CURFEW  HOURS:  Allows any child/juvenile to loiter,  
idle, wander, stroll, or play in or upon any street, alley, public ground, public place or  
any place open to the public, place of amusement or entertainment, vacant lot, or other  
unsupervised place, playgrounds, parks, highways, road, public streets, or exposed to  
public use in the City of Ammon, County of Bonneville, during curfew hours shall be  
guilty of an infraction; provided, however, that the provisions of this Ordinance do not  
apply when a child/juvenile is accompanied by his or her parent, guardian, or other  
adult person having the care and custody of the child/juvenile, or where the  
child/juvenile is upon an emergency errand or legitimate business directed by his or her  
parent, guardian, or other adult person  having care and custody of the child/juvenile.  
Each violation of the provisions of this section shall constitute a separate offense.   
  
(E) VIOLATION OF CURFEW HOURS BY BUSINESS ESTABLISHMENT:  Any owner or  
operator of or any employee or other person in control of an establishment is guilty of a  
violation of this section if he or she knowingly or willingly allows a child/juvenile to be  
upon the premises of the establishment during the curfew hours.  Any violation of the  
provisions of this section shall be deemed an infraction, subject to section 1-4-2 of the  
Ammon City Code.  
  
Title 5, Chapter 2    Page 10 of 13    Revised 7-12-2018   
    

  Loading....
(F) JURISDICTION:  The violation of this Ordinance by a child/juvenile shall be enforced  
by the Idaho Juvenile Corrections Act (Idaho Code 20-549), and the Juvenile Courts of  
the State of Idaho shall have exclusive and original jurisdiction as provided for by the  
Idaho Juvenile Corrections Act.   
  
9. Citations to children/juveniles may be issued by any law  
enforcement officer of the State of Idaho, County, City, or any other law  
enforcement official which said citation should be issued in the form of a  
police report or juvenile violation report. However, failure to cite on either  
a police report or juvenile violation report shall not make such citation  
defective.  
  
10. Any parent, guardian, or other adult person having care and  
custody of a child/juvenile violating this Ordinance shall be subject to  
jurisdiction in the District Court of the State of Idaho.  
  
(G) AUTHORITY TO STOP AND DETAIN:  Any law enforcement officer shall have  
the authority to stop and temporarily detain a child/juvenile, or one who appears to be a  
child/juvenile as herein defined, during the hours of curfew to obtain the child/juvenile's  
name, address, age, and parents’ names, whenever said officer has reasonable  
suspicion that the child/juvenile and/or his or her parents are in violation of this  
Ordinance. Upon determining that the child/juvenile and/or his or her parents are in  
violation herein, the officer shall direct or deliver him or her to the residence of his or  
her parents; in addition, the officer may use warnings, violations, petitions, and  
citations as appear under this Ordinance. Warnings issued shall clearly state the  
possible penalties which may be imposed for subsequent violations.  
  
  
(H) ENCOURAGING DELINQUENCY:    Any person who by any act or neglect  
encourages, aids, or causes a child/juvenile to come within the purview of the Idaho  
Juvenile Corrections Act, or who after notice that a driver’s license of any such  
child/juvenile has been suspended or revoked knowingly permits or encourages the  
child/juvenile to operate a motor vehicle during the period that such driver’s license is  
suspended or revoked, shall be guilty of an infraction pursuant to Ammon Code 1-4-2.   
  
  
(I) DEFENSES:  It is a defense to prosecution under this Ordinance if the  
offending child/juvenile does prove and establish any of the following, the burden of  
proof for establishing the defense being upon the child/juvenile:  
  
11. Accompanied by the child/juvenile's parent or guardian;  
  
12. On an errand at the express direction of the child/juvenile's  
parent or guardian, without any detour or stop;  
  
13. In a motor vehicle involved in interstate travel;  
  
14. Engaged in employment activity, going to an employment  
activity, or returning to the child/juvenile's place of residence, without  
any detour or stop;  
  
15. Involved in an emergency;  
  
Title 5, Chapter 2    Page 11 of 13    Revised 7-12-2018   
    

  Loading....
16. Within the yard or upon the sidewalk abutting the child/juvenile's  
residence or abutting the residence of another adult with whom the  
parent or guardian of such child/juvenile has expressly placed  
temporary custody of the child/juvenile;  
  
17. Attending an officially-sponsored school, religious, or other  
recreational, cultural, or educational activity supervised by adults and  
sponsored by a public entity or a religious, charitable, civil, or other  
similar organization organized by adults, or going to or returning home  
from such activities, without any detour or stop;  
  
18. Exercising First Amendment Rights protected by the United  
States Constitution or rights protected by Article I Section 9 of the  
Constitution of the State of Idaho;  
  
19. Is married or has had the disabilities of minority removed in the  
manner provided by law.  
  
  
It is a defense to the prosecution of this Ordinance that the owner, operator, or  
employee of an establishment asks the child/juvenile to leave the premises and  
promptly notifies the law enforcement officials that a child/juvenile is present on  
the premises of the establishment during curfew hours and refuses to leave.  
  
  
5-2- 38: INJURY TO PROPERTY:  
  
(A) It shall be unlawful for any person willfully and maliciously to injure, deface,  
mutilate, remove, pull down, break, or in any manner interfere with or molest or  
secrete or destroy or deface any real or personal property, either public or  
private, within the City.  
  
(B) No person shall place or put, by any means, any drawing, writing, inscription,  
figure, symbol, or mark of any type on any surface or any public or private  
property without the permission of the owner of the premises on which the  
surface is located or on any natural surface such as rocks, tress, or any other  
surfaces. This conduct shall be deemed malicious destruction of property.  
  
 Any violation of this section shall be deemed a misdemeanor, subject to section 1-4-1  
of the Ammon City Code.  
  
  
5-2- 39: PENALTY:     
  
  
(A) Any violation of the provisions of this chapter deemed a misdemeanor shall be  
subject to penalties prescribed for such violations under section 1-4-1 of this  
code. Any violation of the provisions of this chapter deemed an infraction shall  
be subject to penalties prescribed for such violations under section 1-4-2 of this  
code. Any section of this chapter with no violation prescribed shall be deemed  
an infraction.  
  
Title 5, Chapter 2    Page 12 of 13    Revised 7-12-2018   
    

  
(B) Any child/juvenile who violates any provision of this Ordinance shall be  
punishable by any means provided for under the Idaho Juvenile Corrections Act  
(Idaho Code 20-549).  
  
  
Title 5, Chapter 2    Page 13 of 13    Revised 7-12-2018   
    

  
5-3-16:  SLAUGHTERHOUSE REGULATIONS:  Every owner, lessee, tenant, or  
occupant of any slaughterhouse, stable, building, structure, or stall in which any animal or fowl  
is killed or in which any animal or fowl is kept, or of any place in which offal, manure, or any  
liquid discharge of any animal or fowl collects or accumulates shall promptly remove such offal,  
liquid, or manure to a proper place and shall at all times keep such slaughterhouse, stable,  
building, structure, or stall in a clean and wholesome condition and reasonably free from  
offensive smells.   
  
Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor.   
  
5-3-15:  DEFINITIONS:  Certain words and terms used in this chapter shall be as defined  
below and shall also apply, as applicable to the definitions for Title 5, Criminal Code, Chapter 4,  
Dogs of this City Code.  
  
ABANDON:  To completely forsake and desert an animal previously under the custody or  
possession of a person without making reasonable arrangements for its proper care,  
sustenance and shelter.    
  
ADEQUATE CARE:  Care of animal to include, but not be limited to, a clean, safe shelter that  
provides protection from the weather, sufficient heat and ventilation, wholesome food and water,  
proper veterinary care and exercise consistent with the normal requirements and feeding habits  
of the animal’s size, species, and breed.  
  
ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER:  Any duly appointed and acting officer of the Bonneville County  
Sheriff’s Office or the City of Ammon or any person designated by the Bonneville County  
Sheriff’s Office or the City of Ammon to carry out provisions of this chapter.  
  
ANIMAL CONTROL SHELTER:  Any premise, lot, or building designated by the City for the  
purpose of impounding and caring for animals held under authority of the Chapter or Title.    
  
ANIMAL SERVICES MANAGER:  The person, official or their designee, in charge of operating  
and maintaining the Animal Control Shelter.  
  
AT LARGE:  An animal shall be deemed to be at large when found to be located off the property  
of the owner and not under restraint or control.  
  
CONFINEMENT:  An animal shall be considered confined when the animal is in a secure and/or  
enclosed boundary.  An animal shall be considered to be confined when it is shut or locked inside  
a vehicle, dog run, garage or other enclosed area.  
  
CRUEL OR CRUELTY:  Any of all of the following:   
  
(A) Intentional and malicious infliction of pain, physical suffering, injury or death upon an  
animal;  
(B) To maliciously kill, maim, wound, overdrive, overload, drive when overloaded, overwork,  
torture, torment, deprive of necessary sustenance, drink or shelter, cruelly beat, mutilate  
or cruelly kill an animal;   
  
Title 5, Chapter 3  Page 9 of 13  Revised 7-12-2018  
  

  Loading....
(C) To subject an animal to needless suffering, inflict unnecessary cruelty, drive, ride, or  
otherwise use an animal when same is unfit;  
(D) To abandon an animal;  
(E) To negligently confine an animal in unsanitary conditions or to negligently house an animal  
in inadequate facilities; to negligently fail to provide sustenance, water, medical care or  
shelter to an animal.  
DOG: AT RISK:   Any dog that menaces, chases, displays threatening or aggressive behavior or  
otherwise threatens or endangers the safety of any person or causes physical injury to any  
domestic animal while at large or repeatedly runs at large.    
  
DOG: DANGEROUS:  Any dog that has previously been classified as at risk and exhibits  
escalating aggressive behaviors that result in further complaints, or a dog that, without  
provocation, inflicts injury on a human being or menaces, maims or kills domestic animals when  
off its owner’s property or is used in the commission of a crime, including but not limited to animal  
fighting or guarding illegal operations.    
  
DOG:  OF LICENSING AGE:  Any dog which has attained the age of three (3) months that is  
kept as a household pet.  
  
DOMESTIC ANIMAL:  An animal, other than livestock or equines, that is owned or possessed  
by a person.  
   
ENCLOSURE:  A fence or structure suitable to prevent the escape of the animal or the entry of  
young children.  
  
FOOD (ADEQUATE):  Food that is not spoiled or contaminated and is of sufficient quantity and  
quality to meet the normal daily requirements for the condition and size of the animal and the  
environment in which it is kept. An animal shall be fed or have food available at least once each  
day, unless a licensed veterinarian instructs otherwise, or withholding food is in accordance with  
accepted agricultural or veterinarian practices.  
  
HARBORING:  The keeping of any dog. The occupant of any premises on which a dog remains,  
or to which it customarily returns for food and care, for seven (7) consecutive days or more, is  
presumed to be harboring or keeping the dog within the meaning of this Chapter.  
  
HEALTH OFFICER:  An official of the Department of Health, State of Idaho.  
  
HEN, DOMESTIC:  A common domestic hen (domesticus gallus gallus) for the purpose of  
domestic egg production or as a domestic pet.  
  
IMPOUNDED:   Having been received into custody of the Municipal Pound or into the custody of  
the Animal Control Officer, Police Department, or any authorized agent or representative  
thereof.  
  
KENNEL:  Any place other than a veterinary hospital where three (3) or more dogs over three (3)  
months of age are kept for any purpose, or where dogs are received for boarding and care.  
  
  
Title 5, Chapter 3  Page 10 of 13  Revised 7-12-2018  
  

  Loading....
LEASH:  A cord, thong, leash, or chain not more than eight (8) feet in length by which a dog is  
controlled by the person accompanying it.  
  
LIVESTOCK:  Includes but is not limited to horses, mules, jackasses, cattle, llamas, alpacas,  
sheep, goats, swine, domesticated fowl and any fur-bearing animal bred and maintained  
commercially or otherwise, within pens, cages and hutches  
  
MINIMUM CARE:  The care sufficient to preserve the health and well-being of an animal and  
except for emergencies or circumstances beyond the reasonable control of the owner includes,  
but is not limited to, the following requirements:  
  
(A) Food of sufficient quantity and quality to allow for normal growth or maintenance of body  
weight and health.  
(B) Open or adequate access to potable water in sufficient quantity and cleanliness to satisfy  
the animal’s needs.  Snow or ice or rain is not an adequate water source.  All containers  
used to provide food and water should be designed to prevent spillage.    
(C) Adequate shelter as defined in this section, and as appropriate adequate dry bedding to  
protect against cold and dampness.  Some portion of a shelter provided for a dog shall  
include a floor appropriate for the size of the dog, and also a barrier or door at the  
opening which will protect the dog from severe wind, snow and rain.  
  
(D) Professional/Ferrier/Veterinary care necessary to relieve distress from injury, neglect or  
disease.  
(E) Pet or domestic animals shall not be confined to an area without adequate space for  
exercise necessary for the health of the animal or which does not allow access to a dry  
place for the animal to rest.  Confinement areas must be kept reasonably clean and free  
from excrement or other contaminant which could affect the animal’s health.  
(F) Grooming when lack thereof would adversely affect the health of the animal.  
NECESSARY VETERINARY CARE:  Necessary medical attention shall include but not be  
limited to medical treatment for illness, injury, disease, excessive parasitism, or malformed or  
overgrown hoof.  
  
NEUTERED/SPAYED DOG:  Male or female dog rendered incapable of reproducing offspring.  
Proof of such sterilization must be evidenced by the certificate of a licensed veterinarian.  
  
NUISANCE ANIMAL:  A nuisance animal is one that:  
  
(A) Frequently runs at large.  
  
(B) Damages, soils, or defecates on private property other than property owned or controlled  
by the animal owner or on public walks and recreation areas unless such waste is  
immediately removed and properly disposed of by the animal owner or handler.  
  
(C) Causes a disturbance by excessive barking or other noise making.  
  
  
Title 5, Chapter 3  Page 11 of 13  Revised 7-12-2018  
  

  Loading....
(D) Chases vehicles, or molests, attacks or interferes with persons or other domestic  
animals on public property or private property not owned or in control of the animal or  
handler.  
  
OFFICER:  As used in this Chapter, any police officer or any person designated by the Bonneville  
County Sheriff or the City of Ammon as an Animal Control Officer.  
  
OWNER, CUSTODIAN, OR KEEPER:  A person, including any firm, association, partnership,  
or corporation, or their agents, having the right of property or custody of an animal or who keeps  
or harbors an animal or knowingly permits an animal to remain on or about any premises  
occupies, owned, or controlled by that person.  
  
POUND:  The Animal Control Shelter  
  
PRIMARY LIVING AREA: An area where an animal is housed for twelve (12) hours or more  
during a twenty-four (24) hour period.    
RESTRAINT: Used with respect to a dog or a cat means:  
  
(A) Kept in a secure enclosure;  
(B) Kept under the direct physical control of the animals owner or handler by a leash, cord,  
chain, or similar direct physical control;  
(C) Confined within the real property limits of its owner by use of a leash, cord, chain, or similar  
device, fence, or vehicle in a manner that prevents escape.  
SHELTER (ADEQUATE):  A structure, which protects the animal from injury and environmental  
hazards including but not limited to rain, snow, sun and wind.  Said structure should include an  
enclosure of at least three (3) sides, and a roof, be accessible by the animal and of sufficient  
size and nature so as to provide the animal with reasonable protection.  
  
Examples of inadequate shelter includes, but are not limited to the following:  
  
1. Underneath outside steps, decks and stoops  
2. Underneath houses  
3. Inside or underneath motor vehicles  
4. Inside metal or plastic barrels  
5. Inside cardboard boxes  
6. Inside temporary animal carriers or crates  
   
  
SPAYED/NEUTERED DOG:  Male or female dog rendered incapable of reproducing offspring.  
Proof of such sterilization must be evidenced by the certificate of a licensed veterinarian.  
  
TETHER/TETHERING: The practice of securing a dog to a stationary object by means of a  
rope, metal chain, coated steel cable or any other device used to keep an animal restrained.  This  
does not refer to periods when animals are being walked on a leash or for temporary grooming  
or other professional service.   
  
  
Title 5, Chapter 3  Page 12 of 13  Revised 7-12-2018  
  

  Loading....
TORTURE:  Every act, omission or commission whereby the willful and malicious infliction of pain  
or suffering is caused, permitted or allowed to continue when there is a reasonable remedy or  
relief.  The term torture shall not include normal or legal practices as defined in section 25-3514  
Idaho Code.  
  
UNDER CONTROL:  Restrained, by means of a leash, to the owner or other person’s immediate  
proximity; preventing a dog from trespassing upon the property of others or annoying or chasing  
other persons, animals, or vehicles.  
  
UNLICENSED DOG:  Any dog for which a Ammon City license has not been issued for the  
current year as required by Chapter 4 Section 2 of the City Code, or to which the tag provided  
for in Chapter 4 Section 5, is not attached.  
  
VACCINATION:  The inoculation of a dog for rabies as required in Title 5, Chapter 4, Section 9  
(E)  of the City Code.      
  
VETERINARY CLINIC OR HOSPITAL: Any establishment maintained and operated by a  
licensed veterinarian for the boarding of animals or the diagnosis, treatment, and care of diseased  
or injured animals.  
  
WATER (ADEQUATE):  Fresh, potable water provided at suitable intervals for the species, and  
which, in no event, shall exceed 24 hours at any interval.   
  
  
5-3-16: PENALTY:   
  
(A) INFRACTION:  Any violation of the provisions of this chapter deemed to be an  
infraction shall be subject to penalties prescribed for such violations under section 1-4-2  
of this code, subject to the provisions of Idaho Code 18-111.  Each day of the violation  
shall be considered a separate offense and shall be punishable by separate fines and  
imprisonment as provided for herein.   
   
(B) MISDEMEANOR:   Any violation of the provisions of this chapter deemed to be  
a misdemeanor shall be subject to penalties prescribed for such violations under section  
1-4-1 of this code, subject to the provisions of Idaho Code 18-111 and shall, upon  
conviction, be punished in accordance with section 25-3520A, Idaho Code.   
  
  
Title 5, Chapter 3  Page 13 of 13  Revised 7-12-2018  

suffering is severe and it appears to be permanent, the Animal Control Officer or the shelter has  
the authority to dispose of the dog in a humane manner.  
  
  
5-4-20:   
NOTICE OF IMPOUNDING: Not later than forty eight (48) hours after the  
impounding of any dog, the owner, if known, shall be notified, either personally or by first class  
mail addressed to the owner at his last known address, of said impoundment, describing the  
animal and the place and time of taking and the place and time the animal may be redeemed.  
  
  
5-4-21:  
 REDEMPTION OF IMPOUNDED DOGS: The owner, keeper, or lawful custodian  
of any dog impounded under the provisions of this Chapter may reclaim such dog within three  
(3) days after receiving personal notice, or five (5) days after the mailing of notice; provided, that  
said dog shall be released to the owner or custodian only upon payment of the dog license fee,  
if unpaid, and all impoundment charges and costs of maintaining said animal, which charges  
shall be as determined by the City Council by duly adopted resolution from time to time.  In  
addition, any animal that has been impounded at the shelter must comply with the rules,  
regulation and fees as set by the designated shelter of the City.  No dog shall be released from  
impoundment until a current license for the dog has been obtained and all fees have been paid.  
  
  
5-4-22: 
  DISPOSITION OF UNCLAIMED DOGS: Any dog unclaimed or not redeemed  
within the period of time as herein stated may be sold by the Animal Services Manager to any  
person for the best price obtainable.  
  
  
5-4-23: 
  RABIES AND QUARANTINE: If a dog has bitten, scratched, or otherwise  
attacked a person, the owner of such dog or any person having knowledge of such incident  
shall immediately notify the police department and the health officer. The Animal Control Officer  
shall have authority to require the owner of any dog which has bitten any person so as to cause  
an abrasion of the skin, or showing of rabies, to subject such dog to impoundment at the regular  
daily fee, or to a practicing veterinarian for quarantine, or in an enclosure approved by an  
Animal Control Officer from which it cannot escape and which is not accessible to the public,  
and shall be kept for a minimum period of ten (10) days, and if such dog shall be determined  
free of rabies, the dog shall be returned to the owner. If the impoundment fee is not paid, the  
dog will be subject to disposal as herein provided.  
  
Further, it shall be the duty of all practicing veterinarians to report to the health officer all cases  
of rabies or suspected rabies with which he comes into contact or to which his attention has  
been directed.  
  
No person shall kill or cause to be killed any rabid dog, any dog suspected of having been  
exposed to rabies or any dog biting a human, except as herein provided, nor remove same from  
the City limits without written permission of the health officer.  
  
  
5-4-24: 
  DISPOSAL OF DOGS: In case any dog is not redeemed or sold as herein  
provided for, the dog shall be destroyed by euthanasia and the carcass disposed of in any  
lawful manner.  
  
  
Title 5, Chapter 4  Page 10 of 14  Adopted 10-15-2015  

  Loading....
5-4-25:  
 CITATION AND APPEARANCE: Any violation of the provisions of this Chapter  
may result in a citation issued by any duly authorized officer or Animal Control Officer. Such  
owner, custodian,  or keeper of any dog or dogs that have been determined by the officer to  
have violated any provisions of this Chapter shall be subject to a written citation and such officer  
shall have prepared and served upon such owner, custodian,  or keeper a written citation  
containing a notice to appear in court, the name and address of the person charged, the offense  
charged, the time and place when and where the offense charged occurred, and the time when  
the person charged shall appear in court and such other pertinent information as may be  
necessary or desirable. Provided further, that said owner, custodian, or keeper of such dog or  
dogs shall appear in court within fifteen (15) days after such citation is issued. Complaint may  
be filed for any violation or refusal to appear in court on any citation as in any proceeding for the  
violation of ordinances. It shall be unlawful for any person issued a citation to fail to appear in  
response to such citation as required thereby.  
  
  
5-4-26: 
  RIGHT OF ENTRY:  In the enforcement of any provision of this Chapter, any duly  
authorized officer or Animal Control Officer is authorized to enter the premises of any person to  
take possession of any fierce, stray, or dangerous, dog, dogs at large, dogs which have  
committed an act prohibited by city ordinance, or other animals when in fresh pursuit of such  
dog at the time the dog goes onto private property, whether licensed or unlicensed, and as  
otherwise provided in this title and by law.  
  
(A) Badges: Each Animal Control Officer, while performing such person’s respective duties,  
shall wear a metallic badge of a size and design to be determined by the supervisor.  
Such badge remains the property of the City and shall be returned to the City  
immediately upon cessation of employment.  
  
  
5-4-27: 
   AT RISK DOGS.   
  
(A)  An at risk dog is one that:   
  
1.  Menaces, chases, displays threatening or aggressive behavior or otherwise  
threatens or endangers the safety of any person or   
  
2.  Causes physical injury to any domestic animal while at large or  
  
3.  Repeatedly runs at large   
  
(B)  Procedure for classifying a dog as at risk:   
  
1. The Animal Enforcement Officer shall investigate the circumstances of any  
complaint filed against a dog alleged to be at risk and notify the dog owner of  
the charge. The results of the investigation will be reported to the dog owner.    
  
2. Notwithstanding the above, the Animal Control Officer or their designee shall  
have discretionary authority to refrain from classifying a dog as at risk  
(potentially dangerous), even if the dog has engaged in the specified  
behaviors, if it can be determined that the behavior was:   
(i) The result of the victim abusing or tormenting the dog;   
(ii)   Was directed towards a trespasser or a person committing or  
Title 5, Chapter 4  Page 11 of 14  Adopted 10-15-2015  

  Loading....
attempting to commit a crime; or  
(ii)  Involved other similar mitigating or extenuating circumstances.   
  
 (C)  Sanctions for owning an at risk dog:  
  
 1.  The owner must provide secure fencing to keep the dog confined on his own  
property. When off the owner's property, the dog must be kept on a secure  
leash of no more than four feet (4’) in length and under control of a legally  
responsible person. The owner must also place photos of the dog on file with  
Animal Services, microchip the dog for identification and provide proof of  
liability insurance that covers injuries.  
  
(D)  Repeated violations of Section 5-4-27 (A), 1 or 2 will result in classifications of the  
dog as dangerous.   
  
(E)  If there have been no further incidents for a period of eighteen (18) months and the  
owner can provide proof of obedience training at a reputable club or business, he  
may appeal to Animal Control for removal of the designation.   
  
  
5-4-28: 
   DANGEROUS DOGS.  
  
(A) A dangerous dog is one that:   
  
1. Has previously been classified as at-risk and exhibits escalating aggressive  
behaviors that result in further complaint or  
  
2. A dog that, without provocation, inflicts injury on a human being or  
  
3. Menaces, maims, or kills domestic animals when off its owner's property or  
  
4. Is used in the commission of a crime, including but not limited to animal  
fighting or guarding illegal operations.   
  
(B) Procedure for classifying a dog as dangerous:  
  
1. The Animal Control Officer shall investigate the circumstances of any  
complaint filed against a dog alleged to be at risk and notify the dog owner of  
the charge. The results of the investigation will be reported to the dog owner.   
Depending on the circumstances, the dog may be impounded pending  
disposition of the case.   
  
2. Notwithstanding the above, the Animal Control Officer or their designee shall  
have discretionary authority to refrain from classifying a dog as dangerous,  
even if the dog has engaged in the specified behaviors, if it can be  
determined that the behavior was:   
i. The result of the victim abusing or tormenting the dog.   
ii. Was directed towards a trespasser or a person committing or  
attempting to commit a crime.   
iii. Involved other similar mitigating or extenuating circumstances   
  
Title 5, Chapter 4  Page 12 of 14  Adopted 10-15-2015  

  Loading....
(C) Sanctions for Owning a Dangerous Dog: A dangerous dog may be returned to the  
owner or may be destroyed depending on the outcome of the investigation. If the dog is  
returned to the owner, it must be microchipped and restricted by a sturdy leash no longer  
than four feet long when in public. Photos of the dog must be filed with the Animal  
Control Officer and the owner must provide proof of at least five hundred thousand  
dollars ($500,000) in liability insurance.   
  
(D) Confinement of Dangerous Dogs: Dogs that have been classified as dangerous must  
be confined behind a locked fence of sufficient height and materials to securely contain  
the dog and prevent trespass. Confinement must be sufficient to prevent children from  
coming into contact with the dog. When off the owner's property, a dangerous dog must  
be restricted by a leash of no more than four (4) feet in length, must be under the control  
of a legally responsible person, and may be required to wear a muzzle. This section in  
no way prohibits the dog owner from allowing the dog within their own private residence,  
additionally this section does not release the dog owner of liability and/or sanctions by  
the City in the case of an attack on their own private property.  
  
(E) Transporting Dangerous Dogs: Dogs that have been classified as dangerous must  
be confined in a crate in a closed, locked vehicle to prevent opportunities for escape and  
in a manner sufficient to prevent children from coming into contact with the dog through  
an open window in a vehicle.   
  
(F) Additional Incidents: Additional incidents sufficient to identify the dog as  
dangerous and will result in destruction of the dog.   
  
(G) Any dog deemed a vicious dog by the City prior to the adoption of ordinance 561  
of the City of Ammon shall be and hereby is deemed a Dangerous Dog and subject to  
the regulations pursuant to this chapter.  
  
(H) Penalties for Dangerous Dogs Running at Large:   
  
1.  If an owner is allowed to keep the dangerous dog as set forth in subsections  
(C), (D) and (E) above, if that dangerous dog then runs at large and repeats  
the behavior that earned the designation will be impounded and euthanized.   
  
2. Dangerous dogs that run at large without repeating the behavior may be  
returned to their owners at the discretion of Animal Control after reviewing the  
case and inspection of the confinement facility.   
  
3. It shall be unlawful for any person to fail to confine their dangerous dogs out  
of carelessness or neglect.  
  
Any violation of the provisions of this section shall be deemed a misdemeanor. Impoundment,  
redemption and disposal of any dangerous dog shall be subject to the provisions of           
Section 5-4-18.    
  
  
5-4-29: 
  PENALTIES:    
  
INFRACTION:  Any violation of the provisions of this chapter deemed to be an infraction  
shall be subject to penalties prescribed for such violations under section 1-4-2 of this code,  
Title 5, Chapter 4  Page 13 of 14  Adopted 10-15-2015  

  Loading....
subject to the provisions of Idaho Code 18-113A.  Each day such violation continues, shall  
be a separate violation, which shall be deemed as a separate infraction and a citation may  
be issued therefore.  Each day of the violation shall be considered a separate offense and  
shall be punishable by separate fines and imprisonment as provided for herein.   
  
MISDEMEANOR:   Any violation of the provisions of this chapter deemed to be a  
misdemeanor shall be subject to penalties prescribed for such violations under section 1-4-1  
of this code, subject to the provisions of Idaho Code 18-113 and 18-303 and upon  
conviction, as applicable, be punished in accordance with section 25-3520A, Idaho Code.   
  
  
5-4-30: 
  ADDITIONAL REMEDIES:   
  
(A) Any violation of this Chapter which continues for more than twenty four (24) hours is  
hereby declared to be a nuisance, and, in addition to any other civil or criminal remedies,  
the City may cause such condition to be abated in the manner provided by law or  
  
(B) Any offender of this chapter shall be deemed habitual at the issuance of the fifth citation  
and may be subject to section 5-3-10 of the City Code.     
  
Title 5, Chapter 4  Page 14 of 14  Adopted 10-15-2015  

CHAPTER 5  
  
PUBLIC STREETS  
  
  
  
SECTION:  
  
5-5-1:  Placing Debris on Streets  
5-5-2:  Obstruction of Highways  
5-5-3:  Flooding Public Streets  
5-5-4:  Injurious Materials on Streets  
5-5-5:  Damage to Public Streets  
5-5-6:  Games in Streets  
  
  
5-5-1:  PLACING DEBRIS ON STREETS:   Any person who willfully or  
negligently throws from any vehicle, or who places, deposits, or permits to be deposited  
upon or alongside any highway, street, alley, or easement used by the public for public  
travel, any debris, paper, litter, glass bottle, glass, nails, tacks, hoops, cans, barbed wire,  
boards, trash or garbage, lighted material, or other waste substance is guilty of a  
misdemeanor as provided for in section 1-4-1, of the Ammon City Code.  The terms  
"highway," "street," "alley," or easement" shall be construed to include the entire right of  
way of such highway, street, alley, or easement.  
  
  
5-5-2:  OBSTRUCTION OF HIGHWAYS:   Any person who obstructs, injures, or  
damages any public road, street, alley, highway, or sidewalk is guilty of a misdemeanor.  
  
  
5-5-3:  FLOODING PUBLIC STREETS:   Any person who runs water across any  
public highway, road, or street, without first constructing a good and sufficient ditch or  
ditches to convey the same, or who fails to bridge such ditch or ditches, or to keep such  
bridge or ditches in good repair, or who places any obstruction in a culvert or ditch, and  
all persons, companies, or corporations who suffer any water used by them for the  
purpose of irrigation or any other purposes to flow into or upon any public highway, road,  
alley, or street, in any other manner than that authorized by law, are guilty of a violation  
of this section.  Any violation of the provisions of this section shall be deemed an  
infraction, subject to section 1-4-2 of the Ammon City Code.    
  
  
5-5-4:  INJURIOUS MATERIALS ON STREETS:   Any person who deposits,  
places, or causes any hazardous or explosive substance or material of any kind which  
creates a risk of harm or injury to person or property upon any public street, alley,  
sidewalk, or thoroughfare is guilty of a violation of this section.  Any violation of the  
provisions of this section shall be deemed a misdemeanor, subject to section 1-4-1 of  
the Ammon City Code.    
  
  
Title 5, Chapter 5 Page 1 of 2 Revised 7-12-2018    
  

  Loading....
5-5-5:  DAMAGE TO PUBLIC STREET:   Any person who drives a tractor or  
vehicle with lug wheels upon a public street or who drives or operates any vehicle in a  
manner which damages or destroys any surface of any street or sidewalk, or who drives  
or operates a vehicle in excess of the gross vehicle weights permitted under the laws of  
the State of Idaho, upon any public street in the City, is guilty of a violation of this  
section.  Any violation of the provisions of this section shall be deemed an infraction,  
subject to section 1-4-2 of the Ammon City Code.    
  
  
5-5-6:  GAMES IN STREETS:   It shall be a violation of this section for any  
person to who playball or any game in a public street, or to encourage, permit, or allow  
any minor to engage in such activities.  Any violation of the provisions of this section  
shall be deemed an infraction, subject to section 1-4-2 of the Ammon City Code.   
  
  
Title 5, Chapter 5 Page 2 of 2 Revised 7-12-2018    
  
CHAPTER 6  
  
IRRIGATION WORKS  
  
  
  
SECTION:  
  
5-6-1:  Interference With Ditches  
5-6-2:  Obstruction of Overflow, Gauge, or Waterway in Dam  
5-6-3:  Wrongful Diversion of Water  
5-6-4:  Interference With Headgate--Cutting Banks of Stream  
5-6-5:  Injuries to Ditches and Appurtenances  
5-6-6:  Injury to Measuring Devices  
5-6-7:  Enclosed Headgate  
5-6-8:  Penalty  
  
  
5-6-1:  INTERFERENCE WITH DITCHES, CANALS, OR RESERVOIRS:   Every  
person who shall, without authority of the owner or managing agent, and with intent to  
defraud, take water from any canal, ditch, flume, or reservoir, used for the purpose of  
holding or conveying water for manufacturing, agricultural, or domestic uses, or who  
shall, without like authority, raise, lower, or otherwise disturb, any gate or other  
appurtenance thereof used for the control or measurement of water, or who shall empty  
or place or cause to be emptied or placed, into any such canal, ditch, flume, or reservoir,  
any rubbish, filth, or obstruction to the free flow of water, is guilty of a misdemeanor.  
  
  
5-6-2:  OBSTRUCTION OF OVERFLOW, GAUGE, OR WATERWAY IN DAM:    
Any person or persons who obstructs any overflow, gauge or waterway placed in any  
dam by order of any water master so as to impede the flow of water over such dam as  
regulated by the water master, is guilty of a misdemeanor.  
  
  
5-6-3:  WRONGFUL DIVERSION OF WATER:   Any person who, without the  
consent of the water master of the district, diverts any water from a ditch or channel  
where it has been placed, caused, or left to run by the water master or his deputies, or  
who shuts or opens any ditch, gate, or dam, or in any way impedes or increases the flow  
of water in any stream or ditch diverting water from a stream while the same is under the  
charge of a water master, or who cuts away any embankment of a stream whereby the  
water of such stream is diverted, or who breaks, injures, or removes any gate, flume, or  
other device used for the equitable distribution of the water of such stream by the water  
master, is guilty of a misdemeanor.  
  
  
5-6-4:  INTERFERENCE WITH HEADGATE--CUTTING BANKS OF STREAM:    
Any person who willfully and maliciously places any obstruction on any overflow gauge  
in any stream of water which is used for irrigation and is under control of a water master,  
Title 5, Chapter 6 Page 1 of 2 Revised 7-12-2018  
  

  Loading....
and such obstruction retards or impedes the free overflow of the water of such stream,  
thereby increasing the pressure against a headgate through which water is diverted by  
means of such dam, or who removes, breaks, injures, or interferes with any headgate  
regulated by a water master so as to disturb the distribution of the water therein, or who  
cuts away any bank of the natural stream, the water of which is being used for irrigation  
and is being distributed by a water master, so as to decrease the flow of water from such  
stream, thereby interfering with the distribution of the water thereof, is guilty of a  
misdemeanor.  
  
  
5-6-5:  INJURIES TO DITCHES AND APPURTENANCES:   Any person who  
cuts, breaks, damages, or in any way interferes with any ditch, canal, headgate, or any  
other works in or appurtenant thereto, the property of another person, corporation, or  
association of persons, and whereby water is conducted to any place for beneficial use  
or purposes and when said canal, headgate, ditch, dam, or appurtenance is being used  
or is to be used for said conduct of water, is guilty of a misdemeanor.  
  
  
5-6-6:  INJURY TO MEASURING DEVICES:   Any person who cuts, breaks,  
injures, destroys, enlarges, changes, or alters any headgate, sluiceway, weir, water box,  
or other measuring device, the property of any irrigation district, corporation, or  
association of persons, or in the possession of or in the use of said irrigation district,  
corporation, or association, or the property of another, is guilty of a misdemeanor.  
  
  
5-6-7:  ENCLOSED HEADGATE:   Enclosed headgates and boxes for the  
diversion of irrigation waters with openings at the top are recognized and declared to be  
attractive and dangerous to small children who are likely to play about the same and on  
occasion to fall into the water therein contained. Any person who uses, maintains, or  
operates an enclosed headgate or diversion box having an opening of a width of at least  
twelve inches (12") and a length of at least twelve inches (12") and for which no locked  
cover is placed thereon, is guilty of a misdemeanor.  
  
5-6-8:  PENALTY: Any violation of the provisions of this chapter deemed to  
be a misdemeanor shall be subject to penalties prescribed for such violations under  
section 1-4-1 of this code, subject to the provisions of Idaho Code 18-113 and 18-303.   
    
Title 5, Chapter 6 Page 2 of 2 Revised 7-12-2018  

CHAPTER 7   
  
PUBLIC SAFETY – REPEALED IN ITS ENTIRETY  
  
ORDINANCE #611  
  
  
  
  REPEALED 7-12-2018  

CHAPTER 8  
  
NUISANCES, PUBLIC SMOKING, AND INTOXICATION  
  
  
SECTION:  
  
5-8-1:  Public Nuisance Defined  
5-8-2:  Public Nuisance--Unequal Damage  
5-8-3:  Punishment for Public Nuisance  
5-8-4:  Public Intoxication  
5-8-5:  Abatement of Nuisances  
5-8-6:  Violations and Penalties  
5-8-7:  Reserved  
5-8-8:  Reserved  
  
  
5-8-1:  PUBLIC NUISANCE DEFINED:   Anything which is injurious to health and  
morals, or is indecent or offensive to the senses, or obstructs the free use of property,  
interferes with the comfortable enjoyment of life or property, or unlawfully obstructs the  
free passage or use, in the customary manner, of any navigable lake, river, stream,  
canal, or basin, or any public park, square, street, or highway, is a public nuisance.  
  
5-8-2:  PUBLIC NUISANCE--UNEQUAL DAMAGE:   An act which affects an  
entire community or neighborhood, or any substantial number of persons, as specified in  
the preceding section, is not less a nuisance because the extent of the annoyance or  
damage inflicted upon individuals is unequal.  
  
5-8-3:  PUNISHMENT FOR NUISANCE:   Every person who maintains or  
commits any public nuisance, or who willfully omits to perform any legal duty relating to  
the removal of a public nuisance, is guilty of an infraction.  
  
5-8-4:  PUBLIC INTOXICATION:   Any person who is intoxicated in or upon any  
public street, alley, park, or other public place is guilty of an infraction.  
  
5-8-5:  ABATEMENT OF NUISANCES:   Notwithstanding the foregoing penalties  
for permitting a nuisance and, in addition thereto, the City may declare what is deemed a  
nuisance and shall be empowered to prevent, remove, and abate nuisances at the  
expense of the parties committing, causing, or maintaining the same, as provided in  
Idaho Code Section 50-334.  
  
5-8-6:  VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES:  Any violation of the provisions of this  
chapter shall be deemed an infraction and shall be subject to penalties prescribed for  
such violations under section 1-4-2 of this code.  Each day such violation continues,  
shall be a separate violation, which shall be deemed as a separate infraction and a  
citation may be issued therefore. Violations shall be assessed on a per violation per day  
basis.    
  
  
Title 5, Chapter 8 Page 1 of 1 Revised 7-12-2018  
  
   
  
5-9-11:  ACCUMULATION OF LITTER UPON PRIVATE PROPERTY:   It shall be  
unlawful for any person owning or having control of private property within the City to  
deposit, store or allow the accumulation of litter upon such property, except:  
  
(A) The temporary storage or accumulation of construction debris or materials in a  
manner which prevents the same from being blown upon adjoining property,  
while a building or structure is being constructed upon the premises or during  
remodeling or reconstruction thereof.  
  
(B) Upon any property owned or operated by any recycler, salvage dealer, or junk  
yard dealer licensed by the City, subject to all provisions and restrictions  
contained in any ordinance or statute governing the operation of such licensed  
business.   
  
Any violation of the provisions of this section shall be deemed an infraction and subject  
to section 1-4-2 of the Ammon City Code.    
  
  
5-9-12:  REMOVAL OF WEEDS:   It shall be unlawful for any owner or occupant  
of any real property within the City to allow weeds to grow, exist or accumulate upon  
such real property. The existence of such weeds is declared to constitute a public  
nuisance. The owner or person in control of such property shall destroy and remove  
such weeds or plants.  It shall be the duty and responsibility of the landowner/occupant  
to keep and maintain all weeds below the height as specified in the definitions of this  
chapter.  
  
Weeds Not Classified as Noxious:  
  
(A) It shall be the duty and responsibility of all landowners/occupants to control             
weeds on their land and property, in accordance with this chapter and/or  
Bonneville County ordinances or the State of Idaho Statutes.  
  
(B) The cost of controlling weeds shall be the obligation of the landowner.  
  
(C) Subject to section 5-9-17 of this chapter, the landowner shall reimburse the city  
for work done because of failure to comply with a five (5) day notice.    
  
Noxious Weeds:  
  
(A) It shall be the duty and responsibility of all landowners/occupants to control             
noxious weeds on their land and property, in accordance with this chapter and/or  
Bonneville County Code or the State of Idaho Statutes.  
  
(B) The cost of controlling noxious weeds shall be the obligation of the landowner.  
  
(C) Noxious weed control must be for prevention, eradication, rehabilitation, control  
or containment efforts. However, areas may be modified from the eradication  
requirement if the landowner is a participant in a county-approved weed  
management plan or county-approved cooperative weed management area.  
  
(D) The landowner shall reimburse the city and/or county control authority for work  
Title 5, Chapter 9    Page 5 of 9   ADOPTED 2-15-2018   
  

  Loading....
   
  
done because of failure to comply with a five (5) day notice, as outlined in section  
22-2405, Idaho Code.    
  
(E) If an article is infested with noxious weeds, it shall not be moved from designated  
premises until it is treated in accordance with the applicable rules, or in  
accordance with the written permission of a control authority.  
  
Any violation of the provisions of this section shall be deemed an infraction and subject  
to section 1-4-2 of the Ammon City Code.    
  
  
5-9-13:  DUMPING REFUSE UNLAWFUL:   No person shall dump, place, or  
deposit any trash, refuse, matter, filth, waste, rags, paper, tin or aluminum cans, or any  
substance likely to produce disease or infection on any lot, street, alley, or public right- 
of-way within the City.    
  
Any violation of the provisions of this section shall be deemed an infraction and subject  
to section 1-4-2 of the Ammon City Code.    
  
  
5-9-14:  ACCUMULATION OF REFUSE:  It shall be unlawful for any occupant to  
accumulate or allow the accumulation of refuse upon property under his control in a  
manner which is markedly offensive or unsightly, attracts insects or rodents, is  
unsanitary, unsafe or unhealthy or which otherwise causes a public nuisance.    
  
Any violation of the provisions of this section shall be deemed an infraction and subject  
to section 1-4-2 of the Ammon City Code.    
  
  
5-9-15:  CANALS, RIGHT-OF-WAYS, VACANT LOTS AND FIELDS: It shall be  
unlawful for the owner or the person in control of any land within the City, whether within  
a subdivision or outside a subdivision, to allow, permit, or suffer weeds to grow or exist  
on, or in, canals, right-of-ways including parking strips, sidewalks, and curbing, or upon  
vacant lots and fields.    
  
Any violation of the provisions of this section shall be deemed an infraction and subject  
to section 1-4-2 of the Ammon City Code.    
  
  
5-9-16:  CIVIL REMEDY TO ABATE: The City Enforcement Officer may notify the  
owner or person in control of land where litter or weeds exist, to remove the litter or to  
cut, remove and destroy the weeds. The notice shall specify the time limited for the  
removal of said litter and weeds. Said notice shall be served personally upon such  
owner/person in control or by mail.  
  
  
5-9-17:   FAILURE TO COMPLY WITH NOTICE: If the owner or person in control  
of such premises fails to comply with the notice to abate, the Enforcement Officer shall  
mail a certified notice to the property owner stating that non-compliance may result in the  
City ordering the work to be done at the expense of the City and the same shall be  
charged against and be a lien against the property until paid. Said lien shall be filed in  
Title 5, Chapter 9    Page 6 of 9   ADOPTED 2-15-2018   
  

  Loading....
   
  
the same manner as is provided herein for the filing of special assessments against  
property.  
  
  
5-9-18:  CITATION TO APPEAR:  Whenever it is determined by any enforcement  
officer that any person has violated any provision of this Ordinance, the said officer may  
serve upon the owner or person in control of the land where the violation exists, a written  
citation containing a notice to appear in the Magistrate Court, the name and address of  
the person charged, the offense charged, the time and place when and where the  
offense charged occurred, the time when the person charged shall appear in Magistrate  
Court, and such other pertinent information as may be necessary or advisable. The  
issuance of such citation shall not be the exclusive method for enforcement of this  
chapter.  
  
  
5-9-19:  FAILURE TO APPEAR:  It shall be unlawful for any person to fail or  
neglect to appear, in response to and as required by such citation, regardless of the  
disposition of the charge upon which such citation was originally issued. Appearance in  
Magistrate Court shall be deemed complied with by an appearance by the person  
charged or by his attorney.  
  
  
5-9-20:  SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS:  Notwithstanding the imposition of any  
criminal fine, penalty, or imprisonment, the City may, subject to the provisions of this  
section, remove any litter and/or weeds from any private property within the City and  
levy a special assessment against such property for the reasonable costs of such  
removal. Prior to the removal of such litter and/or weeds, the City shall give notice in  
writing to the owner of such property, which notice shall state the street address of the  
property where the litter and/or weeds exists and shall describe the nature and general  
location of the litter and/or weeds to be removed. Such notice shall state that if such litter  
and/or weeds is not removed within fifteen (15) days from the date the notice is  
delivered, the City may cause the same to be removed and a special assessment made  
against such property for the costs of such removal. Such notice shall be served upon  
any occupant, if any, of the property wherein the litter and/or weeds is located, by mail or  
by delivery of the Enforcement Officer, and shall be mailed by certified mail, return  
receipt requested, postage prepaid, to the owner of the property at the address listed  
upon the real property assessment rolls of Bonneville County. Such notice shall be  
deemed to be delivered upon its physical delivery and deposit into the United States  
mail, as set forth above. If the owner or occupant fails to remove the litter and/or weeds  
within the time specified in the notice, the City may order the removal of the litter and/or  
weeds and cause a Notice of Special Assessment to be mailed to the owner of the  
property in the manner set forth above. The Notice of Special Assessment shall state the  
amount to be assessed on account of the costs of removing the litter and/or weeds, the  
name and record address of the owner of the property to be assessed, and the legal  
description of such property. Such notice shall also state that if the assessment is not  
paid within thirty (30) days, the assessment will be placed on the real property tax rolls  
and will become a lien against such property. If the assessment is not paid within thirty  
(30) days after mailing of the Notice of Assessment, the same shall be declared  
delinquent and may be certified to the Bonneville County Tax Collector by the City Clerk,  
not later than the 1st day of August of each year. Upon such certification, the  
assessment shall be placed upon the tax roll and shall thereafter become a lien against  
Title 5, Chapter 9    Page 7 of 9   ADOPTED 2-15-2018   
  

  Loading....
   
  
the property described in the notice and shall be collected in the same manner and  
subject to the same penalties as are lawfully allowed for other real property taxes. All  
monies received on account of such special assessment shall be held by the City  
Treasurer in a special fund to be applied to the payment of the costs of such removal  
and the money shall be used for no other purpose except to reimburse the City for all  
amounts expended in removing such litter and/or weeds or weeds.  
  
  
5-9-21:  JUNK, KEEPING AND STORAGE OF RESTRICTED:  
  
(A) NUISANCE:   Unsheltered storage of old, unused, stripped, junked,  
inoperable or unregistered, and other automobiles not in good and safe  
operating condition, and any other vehicles, machinery, implements,  
and/or equipment and personal property of any kind which is no longer  
safely useable for the purposes for which it was manufactured, which are  
hereinafter collectively described as "said personalty," for a period of thirty  
(30) days or more (except in licensed junk yards) within the corporate  
limits of the City, is hereby declared to be a nuisance and dangerous to  
the public safety.  
  
(B) ABATEMENT OF NUISANCE BY OWNERS:   The owner, owners,  
tenants, lessees, and/or occupants of any lot within the corporate limits of  
the City upon which such storage is made, and also the owner, owners,  
and/or lessees of said personalty involved in such storage (all of whom  
are hereinafter referred to collectively as "owners"), shall jointly and  
severally abate said nuisance by the prompt removal of said personalty  
into completely enclosed buildings authorized to be used for such storage  
purposes, if within the corporate limits of the City, or otherwise to remove  
it to a location without said corporate limits.  
  
(C) PENALTY FOR FAILURE OF OWNER TO ABATE SUCH NUISANCE:    
Any violation of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed an  
infraction and shall be subject to penalties prescribed for such violations  
under section 1-4-2 of this code.  
  
(D) ABATEMENT BY CITY:   Whenever said owners fail to abate said  
nuisance, then the City shall remove said personalty to a location of its  
selection, the expenses therefore to be billed to said owners, jointly and  
severally, said bill to be recoverable in a suit of law.  
  
When said personalty has been removed and place in storage by the  
City, as provided for herein, said personalty shall be sold by the City after  
a lapse of time of not less than thirty (30) days. If the proceeds of such  
sale are insufficient to pay the costs of abatement, said owners shall be  
liable to the City for the balance of the costs, jointly and severally, to be  
recoverable in a suit at law. If the proceeds are in excess of costs, the  
balance shall be paid to said owners or deposited in the City Treasury for  
their use.  
  
  
Title 5, Chapter 9    Page 8 of 9   ADOPTED 2-15-2018   
  

  Loading....
   
  
5-9-22:  CIVIL AND CRIMINAL REMEDIES:  The prosecution of any civil remedy  
in this Ordinance set forth shall not bar the prosecution of any criminal proceedings  
herein provided.  
  
  
5-9-23:  VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES:  Any violation of the provisions of this  
chapter deemed to be an infraction shall be subject to penalties prescribed for such  
violations under section 1-4-2 of this code and Idaho Code 18-113A.  Each day such  
violation continues, shall be a separate violation, which shall be deemed as a separate  
infraction and a citation may be issued therefore. Violations shall be assessed on a per  
violation per day basis and may be assessed at increasing levels of infractions pursuant  
to section 1-4-2 of this code.  
  
Any violation of the provisions of this chapter deemed a misdemeanor shall be subject to  
penalties prescribed for such violations under section 1-4-1 of this code and Idaho  
Codes 18-113 and 18-303.  Each day such violation continues, shall be a separate  
violation, which shall be deemed as a separate misdemeanor and a citation may be  
issued therefore. Violations shall be assessed on a per violation per day basis.  
  
  
  
  
Title 5, Chapter 9    Page 9 of 9   ADOPTED 2-15-2018   

CHAPTER 10  
  
OPEN BURNING – REPEALED IN ITS ENTIRETY   
  
ORDINANCE #611  
  
Title 5, Chapter 10 Page 1 of 1 Repealed 7-12-2018  
  

CHAPTER 11  
  
AIR GUNS, FIREARMS  
  
  
SECTION:  
  
5-11-1:  Definitions  
5-11-2:  Repealed   
5-11-3:  Discharge of Firearms Prohibited  
5-11-4:  Exceptions; Permits  
5-11-5:  Penalty  
  
  
5-11-1:  DEFINITIONS:   Whenever the term “firearms” is used in this Chapter, the term  
shall mean any instrument used in the propulsion of shot, shell, or bullets or other harmful  
objects by the action of gunpowder exploded within it or the by the action of compressed air  
within it, or by the power of chemicals, springs, bowstrings, rubber bands, or other applied force,  
including guns, air rifles, B-B guns, bow and arrows, crossbows, slings, flippers, and similar  
devices capable of inflicting serious bodily injury or death.  
  
  
5-11-2:  CONCEALED WEAPONS:   REPEALED – See Idaho Code, 18-3302.   
  
  
5-11-3:  DISCHARGE OF FIREARMS PROHIBITED:   It shall be unlawful for any person  
to discharge firearms of any kind or description within the city limits except in the lawful defense  
of person or property; provided, however, that this section shall not apply to police officers in the  
lawful discharge of their duties.  Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be  
deemed guilty of a misdemeanor.   
  
  
5-11-4:  EXCEPTIONS; PERMITS:   Any time the City Council may, upon application,  
grant permits to shooting galleries, gun clubs, and others for shooting within the city limits in  
fixed localities and under fixed rules. Such permits shall be in writing attested by the Clerk  
conforming to such requirements as the City Council shall demand, and the permit thus issued  
shall be subject to revocation at any time by action of the City Council.  
  
  
5-11-5:  PENALTY: Persons violating the provisions of this Chapter shall be subject to  
penalties set by the State of Idaho by Statute or as stated by provision of this chapter.   
Title 5, Chapter 11 Page 1 of 1 Revised 7-12-2018  
  
 CHAPTER 12  
  
BURGLAR/ROBBERY ALARMS  
SECTION:  
5-12-1:     Purpose  
5-12-2:     Definitions  
5-12-3:     Alarm Users Permits Required  
5-12-4:     Automatic Dialing Device Certain Interconnections Prohibited  
5-12-5:     False Alarms and Permit Revocation  
5-12-6:     Confidentiality and Statistics  
5-12-7:     Notification  
5-12-8:      Fees  
5-12-9:      Penalties  
  
  
5-12-1:     PURPOSE:   The purposes of this Ordinance are: (a) to govern burglary and robbery  
alarm systems, require permits, establish fees, provide for revocation of permits, provide for  
punishment of violations and establish a system of administration. (b) to regulate and minimize  
the number of false burglar alarms occurring within the City. (c) to protect citizens against the  
increased cost of enforcement (d) to protect and promote the public health, peace, safety,  
welfare and tranquility of the inhabitants of the City of Ammon, Bonneville County, Idaho.  
  
  
5-12-2:   DEFINITIONS:   Certain words and phrases used in this Ordinance are defined as  
follows:  
  
Alarm Business:  The business by an individual, partnership, corporation, or other entity of  
selling, leasing, maintaining, servicing, repairing, altering, replacing, moving or installing any  
alarm system or causing to be sold, leased, maintained, serviced, repaired, altered, replaced,  
moved or installed any alarm system in or on any building, structure or facility.  
  
Alarm System:   Any assembly of equipment, mechanical or electrical, arranged to signal the  
occurrence of an illegal entry or other activity requiring urgent attention and to which police are  
expected to respond.  
  
Alarm User:  The person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or organization  
of any kind in control of any building, structure or facility wherein an alarm system is maintained.  
  
Automatic Dialing Device:   A device which is interconnected to a telephone line and is  
programmed to select a predetermined telephone number and transmit by voice message or  
code signal an emergency message indicating a need for emergency response.  
  
Burglary Alarm System:   An alarm system signaling an entry or attempted entry into the area  
protected by the system.  
  
False Alarm:  An alarm signal, eliciting a response by a law enforcement officer when a  
situation requiring a response by a law enforcement officer does not in fact exist, but does not  
Title 5, Chapter 12 Page 1 of 5 Revised 7-12-2018  
  

  Loading....
include an alarm signal caused by violent conditions or nature or other extraordinary  
circumstances not reasonably subject to control by the alarm business operator or alarm user.  
  
Interconnect:  To connect an alarm system including an automatic dialing device to a  
telephone line, either directly or through a mechanical device that utilize a telephone, for the  
purpose of using the telephone line to transmit a message upon the activation of the alarm  
system.  
  
Primary Trunk Line:  A telephone line serving the Public Safety Communications that is  
designated to receive emergency calls.  
  
Public Safety Communications:  The City/County facility used to receive emergency and  
general information from the public to be dispatched to the respective police departments  
utilizing communications.  
  
Robbery Alarm System:  An alarm system signaling a robbery of attempted robbery.  
  
  
5-12-3:   ALARM USERS PERMITS REQUIRED:    
   
(A) Every alarm user shall obtain an alarm user’s permit for each system from the Ammon  
City Building upon the effective date of this ordinance or prior to use of an alarm  
system. Users of systems using robbery and burglary alarm capabilities shall obtain  
permits. Application for a burglary or robbery alarm user’s permit and a fee shall be  
filed with the Ammon City Building each year. Each permit shall bear the signature of  
the City Clerk and shall expire one (1) year from the date of issue, unless another date  
is endorsed on the license by the Clerk. The permit shall be physically upon the  
premises using the alarm system and shall be available for inspection by the  
Enforcement Officer or Bonneville County law enforcement official.  Commercial alarm  
user permits shall expire on the same date as the business license issued to the  
business.  The first year’s alarm user permit issued after adoption of this Chapter, shall  
be prorated in cost to the month of expiration of the current business license.  
  
(B) If a residential alarm user is over the age of sixty-five (65) and is the primary resident  
of the residence and if no business is conducted in the residence, a user’s permit may  
be obtained from the Ammon City Building according to Section 5-12-3 (A) without the  
payment of a fee.  
  
(C) An additional fee shall be charged in addition to the fee provided in Section 5-12-3 (A)  
to a user who fails to obtain a permit within sixty (60) days after the effective date of  
this ordinance, or who is more than fifteen (15) days delinquent in renewing a permit,  
or any new   operating without first obtaining a permit after the effective date of this  
ordinance.  
  
(D) An alarm user required by federal, state, county or municipal statute, regulation, rule or  
ordinance to install, maintain and operate an alarm system shall be subject to this  
ordinance; provided:  
  
1. A permit shall be designated a special alarm user’s permit;  
2. A special alarm user’s permit for a system which has four (4) or more false  
alarms in a permit year shall not be subject to revocation under Section 5-12-5,  
Title 5, Chapter 12 Page 2 of 5 Revised 7-12-2018  
  

  Loading....
but the holder of the permit shall pay a fee with the submission of the report  
required by Section 5-12-5 (B),1;   
3. For each false alarm over four (4) in a permit year, upon written demand by the  
Enforcement Officer, the holder of a special user’s permit shall pay a fee;  
4. The payment of any fee provided for in subsections 2 and 3 of this section shall  
not be deemed to extend the terms of the permit.  
  
(E) An alarm user which is a governmental political unit shall be subject to this ordinance;  
but a permit shall be issued without payment of a fee and shall not be subject to  
revocation, payment of additional fees or the imposition of any penalty provided herein.  
  
  
5-12-4:   AUTOMATIC DIALING DEVICE. CERTAIN INTERCONNECTIONS PROHIBITED:     
  
(A) It is unlawful for any person to program an automatic dialing device to select a primary  
trunk line; and it is unlawful for an alarm user to fail to disconnect or reprogram an  
automatic dialing device which is programmed to select a primary trunk line within  
twelve (12) hours of receipt of written notice from the City that it is so programmed.  
  
(B) Within sixty (60) days after the effective date of this ordinance, all existing automatic  
dialing devices programmed to select a primary trunk line shall be reprogrammed or  
disconnected.  
  
(C) It is unlawful for any person to program an automatic dialing device to select any  
telephone line assigned to the City and/or County other than one so authorized; and it  
is unlawful for an alarm user to fail to disconnect or reprogram such device within  
twelve (12) hours of receipt of written notice from the City and/or County that an  
automatic dialing device is so programmed.  
  
  
5-12-5:   FALSE ALARMS AND PERMIT REVOCATION:  
  
(A) Any alarm system which has four (4) or more false alarms within a permit year shall be  
subject to permit revocation as provided herein.  
  
(B) If Bonneville County records four (4) or more false alarms within a permit year for any  
alarm system:  
  
1. The City shall notify the alarm user by certified mail of such fact and direct that  
the user submit a report to the Enforcement Officer within ten (10) days of receipt  
of the notice describing actions taken or to be taken to discover and eliminate the  
cause of the false alarms.  
2. If the alarm user submits a report as directed, the Enforcement Officer and the  
City Clerk shall determine if the actions taken or to be taken will prevent the  
occurrence of false alarms; if they determine that the action will prevent the  
occurrence of false alarms, they shall notify the alarm user, in writing, that the  
permit will not be revoked at that time and that if one (1) more false alarm occurs  
within the permit year, the permit will be summarily revoked.  
3. If no report is submitted, or if the Enforcement Officer and City Clerk determines  
that the actions taken or to be taken will not prevent the occurrence of false  
alarms, the City shall give notice by certified mail to the user that the permit will  
Title 5, Chapter 12 Page 3 of 5 Revised 7-12-2018  
  

  Loading....
be revoked without further notice on the tenth (10) day after the date of the notice  
if the user does not file within that period a written request for a hearing.  
4. If a hearing is requested, written notice of the time and place of the hearing shall  
be served on the user by the City by certified mail at least ten (10) days prior to  
the date set for the hearing, which date shall not be more than twenty-one (21)  
nor less than ten (10) days after the filing of the request for hearing.  
5. The hearing shall be held before a Hearing Board from the City which shall  
consist of, the City Clerk, City Enforcement Officer and a representative from the  
Ammon Division of the Bonneville County Sherriff’s Office.  The alarm user shall  
have the right to present written or oral evidence, subject to the right of cross- 
examination.  If the Hearing Board determines that four (4) or more false alarms  
have occurred in a permit year, and that the user has not taken actions which will  
prevent the occurrence of false alarms, the Hearing Board shall issue written  
findings to that effect and the City Clerk shall revoke the user’s permit.  
6. Decisions of the Hearing Board may be appealed to the City Council within  
twenty (20) days of said revocation.  Said action of appeal shall be placed on the  
next available City Council meeting after a decision to revoke a user permit has  
been issued by the Hearing Board.  
7. An alarm user shall immediately discontinue use of the alarm system upon being  
notified by certified mail of the revocation of a permit pursuant to Section 5-12-5  
(3) or 5-12-5 (5).  
8. An alarm user whose permit has been revoked may apply for a revoked user’s  
permit as provided in Section 5-12-3 (B). The City Clerk shall not be required to  
issue a revoked user’s permit, unless satisfied that the user’s system has been  
properly serviced and its deficiencies corrected. The City may impose reasonable  
restrictions and conditions upon the user, before issuing a revoked user’s permit,  
which restrictions and conditions shall be written on the permit and shall provide  
for summary revocation on the occurrence of four (4) false more false alarms in  
the permit year.  
9. In situations permitting summary revocation under Section 5-12-5 (B) 2 and 5-12- 
rd 
5 (B) (7), revocation shall be effective on the third (3) day following the mailing  
by certified mail by the City of a notice of revocation. There shall be no appeal of  
a summary revocation.  
10. A revoked user’s permit shall be obtained from the Ammon City Building by filing  
an application and paying the applicable fee. The payment of any revoked user  
permit fee shall not extend the term of the original permit period. Each permit  
shall bear the signature of the City Clerk and shall bear the same expiration date  
as the revoked permit. The permit shall be physically upon the premises using  
the alarm system and shall be available for inspection by the Enforcement Officer  
or Bonneville County law enforcement official.  
  
  
5-12-6:   CONFIDENTIALITY AND STATISTICS:  
  
(A) All information submitted in compliance with this ordinance shall be held in the strictest  
confidence and shall be deemed a public record exempt from disclosure pursuant to  
state statute; and any violation of confidentiality shall be deemed a violation of this  
ordinance. The City shall be charged with the sole responsibility for the maintenance of  
all records of any kind whatsoever under this ordinance.  
  
Title 5, Chapter 12 Page 4 of 5 Revised 7-12-2018  
  

  Loading....
(B) Subject to the requirements of confidentiality, the City shall develop and maintain  
statistics having the purpose of assisting alarm system evaluation for use by members  
of the public.  
  
5-12-7:  NOTIFICATION:  The City shall send a copy via email to the law enforcement agency  
providing emergency response.  Copies shall be sent via mail as requested by the responding  
agency.  
  
  
5-12-8:  FEES:  All fees associated with this Chapter, shall be determined by a schedule of fees  
adopted by the City Council by resolution which may be amended from time to time.  
  
EXCEPTION:  Offices or businesses operated by the State of Idaho or the Federal Government  
shall be exempt from the Burglar Alarm fee.  These offices or businesses shall continue to be  
licensed and provide all information required of a burglar alarm license to the City Clerk.  
  
5-12-9:      VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES:  Any violation of the provisions of this chapter shall  
be deemed an infraction and shall be subject to penalties prescribed for such violations under  
section 1-4-2 of this code and Idaho Code 18-113A.  Each day such violation continues, shall be  
a separate violation, which shall be deemed as a separate infraction and a citation may be issued  
therefore.   
  
  
  
  
       
  
       
Title 5, Chapter 12 Page 5 of 5 Revised 7-12-2018  


Title 06 Health and Public Safety

 GENERAL HEALTH REGULATIONS  
  
CHAPTER 1  
  
GENERAL HEALTH REGULATIONS  
  
  
SECTION:  
  
6-1-1:  Outdoor Restroom Facilities  
6-1-2:  Unsanitary Premises    
6-1-3:  Unclean Barns and Enclosures  
6-1-4:  Depositing of Manure Prohibited  
6-1-5:  Noxious Trade  
6-1-6:  Penalty  
  
  
6-1-1:  OUTDOOR RESTROOM FACILITIES:  
  
(A) Outdoor Restroom Facilities Prohibited:  No person shall erect, place, maintain or  
keep, or allow to be erected, placed, maintained or kept, any water closet, privy,  
outhouse, portable outdoor toilet facility, or similar restroom facility not connected  
to the public sewer on any public or private property within the City.     
  
(B) Exceptions:  The prohibition set forth in this Section shall not apply to:  (1)  
temporary portable toilet facilities used by contractors engaged on work within  
the City for use of their employees if required by federal or state law or  
regulation, or, (2) temporary portable toilet facilities used for outdoor public air  
shows, parades, or exhibitions for a period of not longer than three (3)  
consecutive days and occurring no more than once in any calendar year or toilets  
placed in public areas by the City for servicing events and/or parks.  
  
(C) State Health Regulations:  All temporary outdoor restroom facilities allowed  
under the preceding section shall comply with all applicable regulations of the  
State of Idaho, Department of Health and Welfare or the United States  
Department of Labor.        
  
Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be deemed guilty of a  
misdemeanor.   
  
6-1-2:  UNSANITARY PREMISES:   No owner or occupant of any premises  
within the City shall cause or allow any portion of the premises or any structure on the  
premises to become nauseous, foul, offensive, or injurious to the public health, or  
grossly unpleasant or disagreeable to the senses of adjacent residents or persons  
passing the premises.   
  
Any violation of this section shall be deemed an infraction and subject to section 1-4-2 of  
the Ammon City Code.    
  
6-1-3:  UNCLEAN BARNS AND ENCLOSURES:   No person shall maintain any  
barn enclosure, stable, building, or yard for cattle, horses, or any other animals or fowl  
Title 6, Chapter 1 Page 1 of 2 Revised 7-12-2018  
  

  Loading....
 GENERAL HEALTH REGULATIONS  
  
within the City in such a condition as to be grossly offensive to neighbors or passers-by  
or injurious to the public health.  
  
Any violation of this section shall be deemed an infraction and subject to section 1-4-2 of  
the Ammon City Code.    
  
  
6-1-4:  DEPOSITING OF MANURE PROHIBITED:   No person shall deposit  
upon or allow any manure to be placed upon any City street, alley, sidewalk, or right-of- 
way; provided however, this section shall not apply to persons in control of animals  
exhibited in any public parade or circus, provided adequate arrangements are made to  
remove and dispose of manure deposited upon such streets, ways, or sidewalks by  
animals exhibited in the parade or circus, during or immediately following the conclusion  
thereof.  
  
Any violation of this section shall be deemed an infraction and subject to section 1-4-2 of  
the Ammon City Code.    
  
  
6-1-5:  NOXIOUS TRADE:   No owner or occupant of any premises within the  
City shall conduct or engage in any trade, business or occupation that is dangerous,  
detrimental to the life, health, or property of members of the public or which is grossly  
offensive to the public or otherwise constitutes a nuisance.   
  
Any violation of this section shall be deemed an infraction and subject to section 1-4-2 of  
the Ammon City Code.    
  
6-1-6:  PENALTY:   
  
INFRACTION:  Any violation of the provisions of this chapter deemed to be an infraction  
shall be subject to penalties prescribed for such violations under section 1-4-2 of this  
code, subject to the provisions of Idaho Code 18-111 and 18-113A.    
   
MISDEMEANOR:   Any violation of the provisions of this chapter deemed to be a  
misdemeanor shall be subject to penalties prescribed for such violations under section  
1-4-1 of this code, subject to the provisions of Idaho Code 18-111 and 18-113.  
Title 6, Chapter 1 Page 2 of 2 Revised 7-12-2018  
  
6-2-13: 
   CONSUMER FIREWORKS —DISCHARGE OF FIREWORKS IN  
PUBLIC AREA:  It shall be unlawful for any person to ignite or discharge any fireworks  
during the time periods set forth below and within fifty feet (50') of the curb line along any  
parade route or within any area of public gathering designated by the Chief of Police  
and/or Fire Code Official or to cause any ignited fireworks to be thrown or propelled into  
such area.  Such time period shall commence one hour prior to the commencement of  
such parade and shall conclude one hour after the conclusion of the designated parade  
times, and with regard to other areas of public gathering designated by the Chief of  
Police and/or Fire Code Official, said time frame shall likewise be designated by the  
Chief of Police and/or Fire Code Official,.  In areas of public gathering designated by the  
Chief of Police and/or Fire Code Official, a public notice of such designation shall be  
posted in a conspicuous place at least once in every City block contained within said  
public area, which notice shall specifically describe the area and times within which this  
section shall apply. Any person violating this provision shall be guilty of an infraction.  
  
  
6-2-14: 
  CONSUMER FIREWORKS — SEIZURE OF FIREWORKS:  Whenever  
there is probable cause to believe that any person is selling fireworks without a permit  
required by this chapter, or that any person has sold or conveyed any fireworks contrary  
to the provisions of this chapter, then the Chief of Police or Fire Code Official may order  
any police officer or officer of the Fire and Public Safety Division to seize as evidence all  
fireworks offered for sale at the premises where such violation is alleged to have taken  
place.  The Police Division or Fire and Public Safety Division shall hold the fireworks so  
seized pending trial or conviction of the person selling or offering the same for sale.  In  
the event such person is convicted of selling fireworks contrary to this ordinance, then all  
rights to the fireworks shall be forfeited and the Chief of Police shall forthwith destroy the  
same.   
  
  
6-2-15:  
 CONSUMER FIREWORKS — PERMIT FOR SALE OF FIREWORKS AT  
WHOLESALE:  It shall be unlawful for any person, association, corporation or any  
responsible person associated with an association or a corporation, to sell, convey or  
offer for sale at wholesale, or cause any other person to sell, convey or offer for sale at  
wholesale, any fireworks within the City, unless such person is the holder of a valid  
permit for wholesale sale of fireworks.  For the purposes of this section, the term  
"responsible person" shall mean any person who owns at least ten percent (10%) of the  
capital assets or interest in profits and losses of an unincorporated association, or any  
person who holds or owns at least ten percent (10%) of the issued shares of the  
corporation.  
  
  
6-2-16:  
 CONSUMER FIREWORKS — APPLICATION FOR WHOLESALE  
PERMIT:  Any person, association or corporation desiring to sell fireworks at wholesale  
within the City, shall make application to the City Clerk for a permit for sale of fireworks  
at wholesale.  Permits shall be granted only by the City Council after investigation and  
recommendation by the Fire Code Official. No permit shall be granted for sale on  
premises or under any conditions which would violate any State law or any ordinance of  
the City.  If the application be denied, the permit fee shall be refunded forthwith.  Each  
permit shall be valid only for one location designated in the permit.  A permit shall not be  
transferable, assignable or renewable and shall be valid only for the year of its issue.    
  
Title 6, Chapter 2 Page 6 of 10 Revised 6-6-2013  

  Loading....
6-2-17:  
 CONSUMER FIREWORKS — INFORMATION FURNISHED FOR  
PERMIT:  Each applicant for a permit for sale of fireworks at wholesale shall provide the  
following information on his, her or its application:  
  
(A)  The name and address of applicant or principal place of business.  
  
(B) The age of the applicant if not a business entity.  
  
(C) The names and addresses of the officers of the applicant, if a corporation;  
  
(D) The names and addresses of any person owning at least ten percent (10%)  
of the capital assets or profits and losses, if an association.  
  
(E) The names and addresses of any person owning or holding ten percent  
(10%) or more of the issued shares of the corporation, if a corporation;  
  
(F) The applicant's state sales tax permit.  
  
  
6-2-18:  
 DISPLAY FIREWORKS — PERMIT FOR PUBLIC DISPLAY REQUIRED:   
It shall be unlawful for any person to possess, keep store, use or discharge within the  
City any dangerous fireworks unless such person be the holder of a valid "Fireworks  
Permit for Public Display” reviewed by the Fire Code Official and approved by the Mayor  
and/or City Council and the Fire Chief.  
  
  
6-2-19: 
  DISPLAY FIREWORKS — SALE OF "DANGEROUS FIREWORKS"  
PROHIBITED:  It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, convey or offer for sale any  
dangerous fireworks to any person who is not a holder of a valid fireworks permit for  
public display, or who is not employed by a corporation or association who is a holder of  
such permit.  
  
  
6-2-20:  
 DISPLAY FIREWORKS — PERMIT APPLICATION:  Any person desiring  
to conduct a public display of fireworks within the City shall apply to the City Clerk for a  
permit. Prior to issuing permits for a fireworks display, plans for the display, inspection of  
the display site and demonstrations of the display operations shall be approved by the  
Fire Code Official. A plan establishing procedures to follow and actions to be taken in the  
event that a shell fails to ignite in, or discharge from, a mortar or fails to function over the  
fall-out area or other malfunctions shall be provided to the Fire Code Official.   
  
  
6-2-21:  
 DISPLAY FIREWORKS — PERMIT INFORMATION:  An applicant for a  
"Fireworks Permit for Public Display" shall furnish the following information to the Clerk:  
  
(A) The name, address, email address, and phone number of the individual,  
group, or organization sponsoring the outdoor fireworks display.   
  
(B) Age of the applicant if not a business entity (No permit shall be issued to a  
person under the age of twenty one (21).  
  
Title 6, Chapter 2 Page 7 of 10 Revised 6-6-2013  

  Loading....
(C) Names and addresses of officers, if an association or corporation.  
  
(D) The date and time of day at which the outdoor fireworks display is to be  
held, with a proposed rain/wind date and time in the event the display is  
postponed.   
  
(E) The name, address, email address, and phone number of the supplier of  
the fireworks, if different from that of the operator.   
  
(F) The exact location planned for the outdoor fireworks display.   
  
(G) Evidence of financial responsibility by the sponsor of the event or festival  
and by the operator of the fireworks display. A copy of a valid certificate of  
public liability insurance issued by a company licensed to issue insurance  
policies within the State of Idaho, providing a combined single limit of not  
less than one million dollars ($1,000,000) for personal injury and one- 
hundred thousand dollars ($100,000) for property damage from a public  
display of special fireworks.  A copy of said policy shall be furnished at the  
time of the application.   
   
(H) Confirmation of the Operator or “Shooter” is trained in pyrotechnic displays  
and the number of assistants who are to be present.   
  
(I) The approximate number and kinds of fireworks to be discharged.   
  
(J) The manner and place of storage of such fireworks prior to delivery to the  
outdoor fireworks display site.   
  
(K) A diagram of the grounds on which the outdoor fireworks display is to be  
held showing the point at which the fireworks are to be discharged; the  
location of all buildings, highways, and other lines of communication; the  
lines behind which the audience is to be restrained; and the location of  
other possible overhead obstructions.   
  
(L) Upon receipt of such application 10 days in advance of the date set for this  
outdoor fireworks display, the Fire Code Official should make or initiate an  
investigation of the site of the proposed display for the purpose of  
determining compliance with these regulations in the case of the particular  
display.   
  
  
  
6-2-22: 
  DISPLAY FIREWORKS — PERMIT APPROVAL:  The Council shall have  
the power to grant or deny such application after investigation and recommendation by  
the Fire Code Official. No fee shall be charged for a "Fireworks Permit for Public  
Display." Such permit, if granted, shall authorize the permittee to purchase, transport,  
keep and use fireworks for the purposes of the public display, but shall not authorize the  
permittee to sell, distribute or give away any fireworks, except to the wholesaler or  
distributor from which they were obtained.  The permit shall be valid only for the public  
display for which applied.    
  
Title 6, Chapter 2 Page 8 of 10 Revised 6-6-2013  

  Loading....
6-2-23: 
  DISPLAY FIREWORKS — APPROVED DISPLAYS:  Approved displays  
shall include only the approved Division 1.3G, Division 1.4G, and Division 1.4S  
fireworks; shall be handled by an approved competent operator, and the fireworks shall  
be arranged, located, discharged and fired in a manner that will not pose a hazard to  
property or endanger any person.  
  
Outdoor displays shall be in compliance with the adopted Fire Code, NFPA 1123, and  
NFPA 1126, State and local laws and this ordinance, and are subject to the review and  
recommendation of the Fire Code Official.  
  
Proximate audience displays shall be in compliance with the adopted Fire Code, NFPA  
1123, and NFPA 1126, State and local laws and this ordinance, and shall include plans  
for indicating the required clearances for spectators and combustibles, crowd control  
measures, smoke control measures, and requirements for standby personnel and  
equipment when provision of such personnel or equipment is required by the Fire Code  
Official.  
  
  
6-2-24:  
GENERAL PROHIBITIONS: It shall be unlawful for any person to;   
  
(A) Alter any fireworks;  
  
(B) Throw any fireworks from, into, or at a moving vehicle or at any person;  
  
(C) Sell or use any fireworks at any time not permitted under this chapter;  
  
(D) Use fireworks in any area that constitutes a severe fire threat based on the  
vegetative conditions during the current fire season as determined by the City  
of Ammon Fire Chief or his designee.  
  
   
(E) Or otherwise use fireworks not allowed in this chapter.  
  
  
6-2-25:   
EXCEPTIONS: The provisions of this chapter do not apply to and shall  
not prohibit:  
  
(A) The use of flares, noisemakers, or signals designed and used for the purpose  
of protecting the public;  
  
(B) The use of blank cartridges;  
  
(C) The use of flares or noisemakers designed and labeled specifically for pest  
control purposes and approved by the Idaho department of fish and game;  
  
(D) The continued use of existing facilities for long-term storage of fireworks by  
wholesalers  
  
(E) Manufacturing of fireworks in this state; and  
  
(F) The importation, storage, and sale of fireworks for export from this state, or  
interstate commerce in fireworks.  
Title 6, Chapter 2 Page 9 of 10 Revised 6-6-2013  

  Loading....
6-2-26:   
LIABILITY OF PARENTS OR GUARDIANS: The parents, guardians, or  
other persons having custody or control of a minor shall be liable for damage caused by  
the use of fireworks by the minor.  
  
  
6-2-27:   
ENFORCEMENT: This chapter shall be enforced by the City in conjunc- 
tion with the department and the Bonneville County Sheriff’s office.   
  
  
6-2-28:   
PENALTIES--INJUNCTIONS: Unless otherwise specified, any violation of  
the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed to be a misdemeanor and shall be subject  
to penalties prescribed for such violations under section 1-4-1 of this code. Any violation  
of the provisions of section 6-2-13 of this chapter shall be deemed an infraction and shall  
be subject to the penalties as provided for in section 1-4-2.   
  
Title 6, Chapter 2 Page 10 of 10 Revised 6-6-2013  

after the expiration date, for persons or facilities continuously in operation, will be subject to  
double the amount of the license fee to the City.    
  
  
6-3-14: LICENSE ISSUANCE: If after all inspections and investigations, the  
applicant is found to be in compliance with the requirements of this Chapter, the City Clerk shall  
present the license for approval by the City Council.  Upon application approval or denial, a  
copy or letter of denial shall be mailed to the designated employer.  
  
All licenses issued under this Chapter shall contain the following information.  
  
(A) Name of Applicant or Business Name.  
  
(B) Address license is issued to.  
  
(C) Date of expiration.  
  
(D) Maximum number of children facility is authorized to have in the facility at one  
time.  
  
6-3-15:  LICENSES, DENIAL, SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION:  
(A) A license may be denied, suspended or revoked by the City, if it is determined  
that the applicant or licensee does not comply with the provisions of this chapter.  
  
(B) No person who pleads guilty to, has been found guilty of or received a withheld  
judgment for any offense involving neglect or any physical injury to, or other  
abuse of a child including the offenses listed in item (C) of this section or a  
similar provision in another jurisdiction, shall be eligible for a license under the  
provisions of this chapter.     
  
(C) Examples of conduct or events, but not limited to the following, which can pose a  
risk to children and are therefore grounds for denial, suspension or revocation  
include but not be limited to:   
  
1. The use of any tobacco product, or the use or under the influence of a  
alcoholic beverage or other controlled substance that has not been  
prescribed by a licensed physician of the state of Idaho, on the premises  
of any Child Care facility while Child Care is being provided.  
2. Knowingly keeping or storing firearms at a Child Care Facility while Child  
Care is being provided, unless such firearms are placed in a securely  
locked cabinet or storage area.  
3. Having been found guilty of, pled guilty to, or admitted to conduct  
constituting a violation of a criminal law, regardless of the form of  
judgment (excluding infractions),  involving moral turpitude or violence  
against a minor, any stalking or harassment of another person whether  
directly or indirectly or through a third party within the past ten (10) years;   
Having been found guilty of, pled guilty to, or admitted to conduct  
constituting a violation of a criminal law, regardless of the form of  
Title 6 Chapter 3    Page 16 of 20    Revised 7-12-2018  
     
    
   

  Loading....
judgment (excluding infractions),  involving moral turpitude or violence  
against an adult, any stalking or harassment of another person whether  
directly or indirectly or through a third party within the past five (5) years.  
4. Conduct which indicates that the applicant may suffer from homicidal or  
suicidal tendencies or ideas, unless the individual has been examined, at  
his own expense, by an Idaho licensed psychologist or Idaho licensed  
psychiatrist who certifies that the applicant does not pose a risk to  
children;   
5. Felony injury of a child, section 18-1501, Idaho Code.   
6. The sexual abuse of a child under sixteen years of age, section 18-1506,  
Idaho Code.   
7. The ritualized abuse of a child under eighteen years of age, section 18- 
1506A, Idaho Code.   
8. The sexual exploitation of a child, section 18-1507 or 18-1507A, Idaho  
Code.   
9. Sexual abuse of a child under the age of sixteen years, section 18-1506,  
Idaho Code.   
10. Lewd conduct with a child under the age of sixteen years, section 18- 
1508, Idaho Code.   
11. The sale or barter of a child for adoption or other purposes, section 18- 
1511, Idaho Code.   
12. Murder in any degree, section 18-4001 or 18-4003, Idaho Code.   
13. Assault with intent to murder, section 18-4015, Idaho Code.   
14. Voluntary manslaughter, section 18-4006, Idaho Code.   
15. Rape, section 18-6101 or 18-6108, Idaho Code.   
16. Incest, section 18-6602, Idaho Code.   
17. Forcible sexual penetration by use of foreign object, section 18-6608,  
Idaho Code.   
18. Abuse, neglect or exploitation of a vulnerable adult, section 18-1505,  
Idaho Code.   
19. Aggravated, first degree, second degree and third degree arson, sections  
18-801 through 18-805, Idaho Code.   
20. Crimes against nature, section 18-6605, Idaho Code.   
21. Kidnapping, sections 18-4501 through 18-4503, Idaho Code.   
22. Mayhem, section 18-5001, Idaho Code.   
23. Poisoning, section 18-4014 or 18-5501, Idaho Code.   
24. Possession of sexually exploitative material, section 18-1507A, Idaho  
Code.   
25. Robbery, section 18-6501, Idaho Code.   
26. Stalking in the first degree, section 18-7905, Idaho Code.   
27. Video voyeurism, section 18-6609, Idaho Code  
28. Enticing of children, section 18-1509 or 18-1509A, Idaho Code.   
29. Inducing individuals under eighteen years of age into prostitution, section  
18-5609, Idaho Code.   
Title 6 Chapter 3    Page 17 of 20    Revised 7-12-2018  
     
    
   

  Loading....
30. Inducing person under eighteen years of age to patronize a prostitute,  
section 18-5611, Idaho Code.   
31. Any felony punishable by death or life imprisonment.   
32. Attempt, section 18-306, Idaho Code, conspiracy, section 18-1701, Idaho  
Code, or accessory after the fact, section 18-205, Idaho Code, to commit  
any of the crimes designated in this subsection.   
33. Having been found guilty of or received a withheld judgment for a  
misdemeanor including but not limited to the following; a drug or other  
substance, or immediate precursor, included in schedule I, II, III, IV, or V,  
part B 21 USC 802 (term does not included distilled spirits, wine, malt  
beverages, or tobacco, as those terms are defined or used in subtitle E of  
the Internal Revenue Code of 1986) or a drug, substance, or immediate  
precursor as defined in Title 37, Chapter 27, Idaho Code, Uniform  
Controlled Substances, Schedules I through V, or similar provisions in  
another jurisdiction, in the past five (5) years or at such time as all  
penalties and sentences imposed by the court system have been  
completed, whichever is greater.    
34. Having been found guilty of or received a withheld judgment for a felony  
including but not limited to the following; a drug or other substance, or  
immediate precursor, included in schedule I, II, III, IV, or V, part B 21 USC  
802 (term does not included distilled spirits, wine, malt beverages, or  
tobacco, as those terms are defined or used in subtitle E of the Internal  
Revenue Code of 1986) or a drug, substance, or immediate precursor as  
defined in Title 37, Chapter 27, Idaho Code, Uniform Controlled  
Substances, Schedules I through V, or similar provisions in another  
jurisdiction, in the past ten (10) years or at such time as all penalties and  
sentences imposed by the court system have been completed, whichever  
is greater.    
  
(D) No person who has pleaded guilty to, been found guilty of or received a withheld  
judgment for any offense involving neglect or any physical injury to, or other  
abuse of a child, including the following offenses or a similar provision in another  
jurisdiction shall be eligible for a license for a period of five (5) years under the  
provisions of this chapter.  
  
1. Aggravated assault, section 18-905, Idaho Code.  
2. Aggravated battery, section 18-907(1), Idaho Code.  
3. Burglary, section 18-1401, Idaho Code.  
4. Felony domestic violence, section 18–918, Idaho Code.  
5. Felony theft, sections 18-2403 and 18-2407(1), Idaho Code.  
6. Forgery of a financial transaction card, section 18-3123, Idaho Code.  
7. Fraudulent use of a financial transaction card or number, section 18- 
3124, Idaho Code.  
8. Forgery or counterfeiting, chapter 36, title 18, Idaho Code.  
9. Grand theft, section 18–2407(1), Idaho Code.  
10. Misappropriation of personal identifying information, section 18-3126,  
Idaho Code.  
11. Insurance fraud, section 41-293, Idaho Code.  
Title 6 Chapter 3    Page 18 of 20    Revised 7-12-2018  
     
    
   

  Loading....
12. Damage to or destruction of insured property, section 41-294, Idaho               
Code.  
13. Public assistance fraud, section 56-227, Idaho Code.  
14. Provider fraud, section 56-227A, Idaho Code.  
15. Attempted strangulation, section 18-923, Idaho Code.  
16. Attempt, section 18-306, Idaho Code, conspiracy, section 18-1701, Idaho  
Code, or accessory after the fact, section 18-205, Idaho Code, to commit  
any of the crimes designated in this subsection.  
17. Misdemeanor injury to a child, section 18-1501(2), Idaho Code.  
  
  
(E) A child care facility license or privilege to operate a family child care or  
group child care facility shall be denied or revoked if a registered sex  
offender resides on the premises where child care services are provided.  
  
(F) In the event there is good cause to believe that a Child Care Facility, Child Care  
Worker or On-Site Non-Provider has knowingly violated the provisions of this  
chapter, the affected licensee or applicant shall be notified by the City Clerk of  
the nature of the alleged violation, giving said person the ability to rectify or clear  
the alleged violation.  In the event the reviewing department heads or their  
designee determines the license shall be denied or revoked, the applicant or  
licensee shall be given the opportunity to appear before the City Council to  
consider whether or not the determination of the reviewing department heads  
shall be final.  The reviewing Department Heads shall be the City Clerk, Fire  
Chief, Building Official and Planning Director.  The decision of the Department  
Heads shall be controlling until overruled by the City Council.  Any appeal of the  
Department Heads decision shall be filed within 15 days of said decision.    
  
(G) The denial, suspension or revocation of a license under this chapter may be  
appealed to the City Council of Ammon.  
  
  
6-3-16:  REPORTING OF ABUSE, ABANDONMENT OR NEGLECT: Pursuant to   
Section 16-1605, Idaho Code any Child Care personnel or other person having reason to  
believe that a child under the age of eighteen (18) years has been abused, abandoned or  
neglected or who observes the child being subjected to conditions or circumstances which  
would reasonably result in abuse, abandonment or neglect shall report or cause to be reported  
within twenty-four (24) hours such conditions or circumstances to the proper law enforcement  
agency or the Idaho Department of Health and Welfare.  Any employee of a Child Care facility  
shall also report any incident to their manager/owner.  
  
  
6-3-17: VISITATION:  Any parent of guardian shall have the absolute right to enter  
the premises of any facility during the period of care for the parents or guardian’s child or  
children.  Any failure or refusal to allow entry to a parent or guardian may be grounds for  
suspension or revocation of the license, pursuant to Section 39-1113, Idaho Code.  If a parent  
or guardian has been granted limited or has been denied visitation rights by a court of  
competent jurisdiction, this section shall not confer a right to visitation.   
  
  
Title 6 Chapter 3    Page 19 of 20    Revised 7-12-2018  
     
    
   

  Loading....
6-3-18:  LIABILITY:  Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed as imposing upon the  
City, its officials or employees, any special or private duty to any person to inspect a Child Care  
Facility, or to make an adequate or reasonable inspection of such facility, or to enforce the  
provisions of this Chapter. This Chapter is not intended to create any liability or cause of action  
against the City, its agents, officials or employees for any loss or damage based upon the failure  
of any Child Care Facility, or the owner or operator thereof, to meet the standards contained in  
this Chapter.  The primary responsibility for evaluation and selection of Child Care services  
remains with the parents.    
  
  
6-3-19:  PENALTY:   
  
INFRACTION:  Any violation of the provisions of this chapter deemed an infraction shall be  
subject to penalties prescribed for such violations under section   1-4-2 of this code, subject to  
the provisions of Idaho Code 18-111 and 18-113A.  Each day of the violation shall be  
considered a separate offense and shall be punishable by separate fines as provided for herein.   
Any violation not deemed either an infraction or a misdemeanor shall be deemed an infraction.  
  
MISDEMEANOR:   Any violation of the provisions of this chapter deemed to be a  
misdemeanor shall be subject to penalties prescribed for such violations under section 1-4-1 of  
this code, subject to the provisions of Idaho Code 18-111 and 18-113  
  
  
6-3-20:  PROVISIONS SEVERABLE:  The provisions of this Chapter are severable.  If  
any provision of this Chapter or the application thereof to any person or circumstance is held  
invalid, such invalidity shall not affect the validity of other provisions or applications of this  
Ordinance which can be given effect without the invalid provisions or application.  
  
  
Title 6 Chapter 3    Page 20 of 20    Revised 7-12-2018  
     
  
CHAPTER 4   
  
FIRE PITS AND OPEN FIRE REGULATIONS – REPEALED IN ITS  
ENTIRETY  
  
ORDINANCE #608  
  
Title 6, Chapter 4    Page 1 of 1                  Repealed 7-12-2018  
  
CHAPTER 5  
  
EMS REQUIREMENTS FOR SYSTEM REGULATION  
  
  
SECTION:  
  
6-5-1:  Purpose  
6-5-2:  General  
6-5-3:  Testing Procedures  
6-5-4:  Amplification Systems Allowed  
6-5-5:  Field Testing  
6-5-6:  Required Installations  
6-5-7:  Exemptions  
6-5-8:  Penalty  
  
  
  
  
6-5-1:  PURPOSE:     It is the intent of the City Council to provide for and require  
adequate radio coverage for emergency services throughout the City whenever possible.  This  
service is a vital part of the health and safety of the citizens of the City and shall include  
commercial and industrial buildings throughout the City.    
  
  
6-5-2:  GENERAL:     Except as otherwise provided, no person shall maintain, occupy,  
erect or construct any commercial building or structure or any part thereof or cause the same to  
be done which fails to support adequate radio coverage for City emergency service workers,  
including but not limited to firefighters, police and EMS personnel. For purposes of this section,  
adequate radio coverage shall include all of the following:    
  
(A) All installations shall meet FCC regulations pertaining to such applications  
  
(B) A minimum signal strength of one (1) microvolts ( - 107 dBm) available in 85% of  
the area of each floor of the building when transmitted from the City of  
Ammon/700MHz;   
  
(C) A minimum signal strength of one (1) microvolts ( -107dBm) received at the City  
of Ammon/700MHz  when transmitted from 85% of the area of each floor of the  
building;   
  
(D) The frequency range shall support the applicable system.  Ammon City Fire  
Department shall provide the specific frequency to the approved  
contractor/developer upon request.    
  
(E) A 90% system operation reliability factor. If necessary a battery backup or  
emergency power system may be necessary to accomplish this.  
  
  
  
  
6-5-3:  TESTING PROCEDURES:  
TITLE 6, CHAPTER 5 PAGE 1 of 3 Revised 7-12-2018  

  Loading....
  
(A) Initial Acceptance Tests:  Ammon City Fire Department representatives will  
perform initial acceptance tests. A representative from the owner contractor shall  
be present for the occupancy certification. Operational evaluations of the system  
will be made from pre-determined grids of approximately 5000 square feet of  
aggregate floor space. During the evaluations access to the host site will be  
made by actual radio transmissions. A Certificate of Occupancy shall not be  
issued to any structure if the building fails to comply with this section.  
  
(B) Periodical Tests:  The City Fire Department in conjunction with inspection  
procedures will conduct periodical tests/evaluations. These inspections may be  
as often as each year depending upon the occupancy.   
  
(C) Signage:  The main frequency boosting equipment must have an easily readable  
sign with 2” letters that states, (Ammon City Fire Department requires this  
Emergency Equipment to remain operational at all times).  
  
(D) Occupancy Changes:  When modifications are made to any of the afore  
mentioned buildings that require a building permit, the original amplification  
system shall be re-certified for the entire structure in question by the  
owner/contractor as stated in Section (A) Initial Test.  The owner of the building  
shall contact Ammon City Fire Department to request a re-certification.  
  
  
6-5-4:  AMPLIFICATION SYSTEMS ALLOWED:     Buildings and structures which  
cannot support the required level of radio coverage shall be equipped with any of the following  
in order to achieve the required adequate radio coverage: a radiating cable system or an  
internal multiple antenna system with or without FCC accepted bi-directional UHF amplifiers as  
needed. If any part of the installed system or systems contains an electrically powered  
component, the system shall be capable of operating on an independent battery and/or  
generator system for a period of at least twelve (12) hours without external power input. The  
battery system shall automatically charge in the presence of an external power input.  
  
  
6-5-5:  FIELD TESTING:      Police and Fire Personnel, after providing reasonable notice  
to the owner or his representative shall have the right to enter onto the property to conduct field  
testing to be certain the required level of radio coverage is present.   
  
  
6-5-6:  REQUIRED INSTALLATIONS:     An amplification system shall be installed in  
any newly constructed commercial building having an aggregate floor space of more than  
25,000 square feet with the exception of those listed below in (F) Exemptions.   
  
  
6-5-7:  EXEMPTIONS:      This Chapter shall not apply to: buildings constructed of wood  
frame; any building less than twenty five feet high; as long as none of the aforementioned  
buildings make use of any metal or masonry constructed walls or any underground storage or  
parking areas. For purposes of this section, parking structures and stairwells are included in the  
definition of “building" and stair shafts are included in the definition of "all parts of a building" but  
elevators may be excluded.   
  
  
TITLE 6, CHAPTER 5 PAGE 2 of 3 Revised 7-12-2018  

  Loading....
6-5-8:  PENALTY:     Any violation of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed  
an infraction and shall be subject to penalties prescribed for such violations under section 1- 
4-2 of this code, subject to the provisions of Idaho Code 18-111 and 18-113A.  Each day of  
the violation shall be considered a separate offense and shall be punishable by separate fines  
as provided for herein.   
  
  
TITLE 6, CHAPTER 5 PAGE 3 of 3 Revised 7-12-2018  

Title 07 Building Regulations

CHAPTER 1  
INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE  
  
SECTION:  
  
  
7-1-1:  2015 International Building Code Adopted  
7-1-2:  Fees    
 7-1-3:  Penalty   
   
  
7-1-1:   INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE ADOPTED:    
  
  
(A) The approved edition of the 2015 International Building Code as adopted by the  
State of Idaho or the Idaho Building Code Board, together with any amendments  
or revisions to the International Building Code made by the Idaho Building Code  
Board through the negotiated rulemaking process, is adopted as the official  
building code of the City of Ammon:  
  
(B) Code on File:  One (1) copy of the International Building Code, 2015 Edition,  
shall be duly certified and retained by the City Clerk.  
  
  
7-1-2: FEES:     Fees for building permits and services related to this chapter shall be  
established by resolution of the City Council, which may be amended and modified from  
time to time by resolution.  
  
   
7-1- 3: PENALTY: Any violation of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed a  
misdemeanor and shall be subject to penalties prescribed for such violations under  
section 1-4-1 of this code.  In addition, a fine and daily fee shall be charged for failure to  
obtain a certificate of occupancy as required by this code and the International Building  
Code.  Said fine shall be as adopted by resolution of the City Council as provided for by  
ordinance.    
  
Page 1 of 1         Adopted 12-21-17  
  

CHAPTER 2  
  
 ABATEMENT OF DANGEROUS BUILDINGS  
  
  
SECTION:  
  
7-2-1:  Purpose  
7-2-2:  Adoption of Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings  
7-2-3:  Definitions  
7-2-4:  Enforcement  
7-2-5:  Amendments to the Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous  
Buildings  
7-2-6:  Violations and Penalties  
  
  
7-2-1:  PURPOSE:   The purpose of this Chapter is to provide a just, equitable,  
and practicable method, cumulative with and in addition to any other remedy provided by  
the International Building Code, International Fire Code, or otherwise available at law, for  
requiring buildings or structures that endanger the life, limb, health, property, safety, or  
welfare of the general public to be repaired, vacated, or demolished.  
  
  
7-2-2:  ADOPTION OF UNIFORM CODE FOR THE ABATEMENT OF  
DANGEROUS BUILDINGS:  Chapters 4 through 7 of the Uniform Code for the  
Abatement of Dangerous Buildings, 1994 Edition, published by the International  
Conference of Building Officials, are adopted as an official code of the City,  
except those portions that are deleted, modified, or amended by this Chapter.   
One (1) copy of the Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings,  
1994 Edition, shall be duly certified and retained by the City Clerk.  
  
  
7-2-3:  DEFINITIONS:  As used in this Chapter, certain words and terms are  
defined as follows:  
   
AUTHORIZED The Fire Marshal, the Building Official, and their  
REPRESENTATIVE: designated representatives.  
   
The regularly and duly constituted City Council of the  
BOARD OF APPEALS:  
City.  
   
BUILDING OFFICIAL: The Director of the Planning and Building Division of the  
City of Ammon, and his or her designated representative.  
  
Title 7, Chapter 2 Page 1 of 3 Revised 7-12-2018  
  

  Loading....
   
  
  
DANGEROUS BUILDING:  
Any building or structure which is structurally unsafe or  
  
lacks adequate egress, or which constitutes a fire hazard  
 or is otherwise dangerous to human life, or which in  
relation to existing use constitutes a hazard to public  
  
safety, health, or welfare by reason of defective  
  
construction, inadequate maintenance, dilapidation,  
  
obsolescence, fire hazard, disaster, damage, or  
  
abandonment as provided in the Uniform Building Code  
or the International Fire Code or any other effective  
  
ordinance. The term has the same meaning as "unsafe  
  
building."  
  
  
INTERNATIONAL  
The International Building Code of the City as adopted  
BUILDING CODE:  
and amended or modified by ordinance.  
INNNNN  
   
JURISDICTION: The City of Ammon, Idaho.  
   
LEGISLATIVE BODY: The Mayor and City Council of the City.  
   
SECRETARY: The City Clerk.  
   
UNIFORM BUILDING CODE: The Uniform Building Code of the City as adopted and  
amended or modified by ordinance.    
   
UNIFORM FIRE CODE: The Uniform Fire Code of the City as used by the City  
has been replaced by the International Fire Code.     
  
7-2-4:  ENFORCEMENT:  
  
(A) Administration:  The Building Official and Fire Marshal are authorized to enforce  
the provisions of this Chapter.  
  
(B) Inspection:  The Fire Marshal and the Building Official and their designated  
representative may make inspections and take actions necessary to enforce the  
provisions of this Chapter.  
  
(C) Right of Entry:  Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce any  
provision of this Code, or whenever the Building Official, Fire Marshal or their designated  
representatives have reasonable cause to believe that there exists in any building or  
upon any premises any condition or Code violation which makes the building or  
premises unsafe, dangerous, or hazardous, the Building Official, Fire Marshal, or their  
designated representatives may enter the building or premises at all reasonable times to  
inspect the same or to perform any duty imposed upon the Building Official or Fire  
Marshal by this Code; provided, that if such building or premises are occupied, they shall  
first present proper credentials and request entry; and if such building or premises are  
unoccupied, they shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other  
persons having charge or control of the building or premises and request entry. If entry is  
refused, the Building Official, Fire Marshal, or their designated representatives may use  
any remedy provided by law to secure entry.  
Title 7, Chapter 2 Page 2 of 3 Revised 7-12-2018  
  

  Loading....
   
  
  
(D) Refusal to Permit Entry:  When the Building Official, Fire Marshal, or their  
designated representatives have obtained a proper inspection warrant or other remedy  
provided by law to secure entry, no owner or occupant or any other person having  
charge, care, or control of any building or premises shall fail or neglect, after proper  
request made as provided in this Section, to promptly permit entry therein by the  
Building Official, Fire Marshal, or their designated representatives for the purpose of  
inspection and examination pursuant to this Code.  
  
  
7-2-5:  AMENDMENTS TO THE UNIFORM CODE FOR THE ABATEMENT OF  
DANGEROUS BUILDINGS:  The Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous  
Buildings, 1994 Edition, is amended and modified as follows:  
  
(A) Section 401(b)(2) shall read: "A statement that the Building Official or Fire  
Marshal has found the building to be dangerous with a brief and concise description of  
the condition found to render the building dangerous or unsafe under the provisions of  
the International Building Code or the Uniform Fire Code."  
  
(B) Section 601(b) is deleted.  
  
(C) Section 601(c) read: "Upon written request of a party in interest, a record of the  
entire proceedings shall be made by tape recording, stenographic reporter or by any  
other means of permanent recording determined appropriate by the Board. A transcript  
of the proceedings shall be made available to any party upon written request and upon  
payment of the fees prescribed therefore. Such fees may be established by the Board,  
but shall in no event be greater than the cost involved."  
  
(D) Section 605(a) shall read: "Hearing before Board Itself. No decision may be  
rendered without a majority of the City Council present, and all appeals hereunder shall  
be decided by a majority of the members of the Council present; provided that if the vote  
of the City Council is equally divided, the Mayor shall have a vote. Where a contested  
case is heard before the Board itself, no member of the Board who did not hear the  
evidence shall vote on or take part in the decision."  
  
(E) Section 701(c)(3) shall read: "The Building Official or Fire Marshal may, in  
addition to any other remedy in this Chapter, cause the building to be demolished and  
the materials, rubble and debris there from removed and the lot cleaned."  
  
  
7-2-6: VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES: Any person who shall violate any of the  
provisions of the Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings as adopted by  
the City of Ammon or the Ammon City Code as it relates to the Uniform Code for the  
Abatement of Dangerous Buildings shall severally for each and every such violation and  
noncompliance respectively, be guilty of a misdemeanor as allowed in the Uniform Code  
for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings and shall be charged as adopted in section   
1-4-1 of the City Code. The imposition of one penalty for any violation shall not excuse  
the violation or permit it to continue and all such persons shall be required to correct or  
remedy such violations or defects within a reasonable time and when not otherwise  
specified.  Each day that a violation continues after due notice has been served shall be  
deemed a separate offense.    
Title 7, Chapter 2 Page 3 of 3 Revised 7-12-2018  
  

CHAPTER 3  
  
INTERNATIONAL RESIDENTIAL CODE  
  
  
SECTION:  
  
7-3-1:  2015 International Residential Code Adopted  
7-3-2:  Amendments  
7-3-3  Fees  
 7-3-4:  Penalty   
   
  
7-3-1:   INTERNATIONAL RESIDENTIAL CODE ADOPTED:  The  
approved edition of the 2015 International Residential Code as amended by the  
City, is adopted as the official international residential code of the City of Ammon,  
with exceptions as listed in 7-3-2 of this Chapter.  
  
  
7-3-2:  AMENDMENTS:   
  
a. Delete exception No. 1 contained under IRC section R101.2 - Scope.  
  
b. Delete exception No. 2 contained under IRC section R101.2 - Scope, and  
replace with the following: Owner-occupied lodging houses with five (5) or  
fewer guestrooms shall be permitted to be constructed in accordance with  
the International Residential Code for One- and Two-family Dwellings.   
  
c.   
R105.2 - Work exempt from permit, and replace with the following:  
Prefabricated swimming pools that are not greater than four (4) feet (one  
thousand, two hundred nineteen (1219) mm) deep.  
  
d.  
section R105.2 - Work exempt from permit: Flag poles.  
  
e. Delete IRC section R109.1.3 and replace with the following: Floodplain  
inspections. For construction in areas prone to flooding as established by  
Table R301.2(1), upon placement of the lowest floor, including basement,  
the building official is authorized to require submission of documentation of  
the elevation of the lowest floor, including basement, required in section  
R322.  
  
f. Table R301.2(1) of the International Residential Code, 2015 Edition, shall be  
amended to read as follows:  
  
  
  

  Loading....
  
TABLE R301.2 (1)  
CLIMATIC AND GEOGRAPHIC DESIGN CRITERIA  
g. IRC Table R302.1 (1) Exterior Walls -- delete the figures contained in the  
last column of the table under the heading Minimum Fire Separation  
following:    
  
h. Delete the items 1 & 2 contained under IRC section R302.2 -- Townhouses,  
and replace with the following: Exception: A common two hour or two (2)  
one-hour fire resistance rated wall assembly tested in accordance with  
ASTM E 119 or UL 263 is permitted for townhouses if such walls do not  
contain plumbing or mechanical equipment, ducts or vents in the cavity of  
the common wall. The wall shall be rated for fire exposure from both sides  
and shall extend to and be tight against the exterior walls and the underside  
of the roof sheathing. Penetrations of electrical outlet boxes shall be in  
accordance with section R302.4.  
  
i. Delete IRC section R302.13 Fire Protection of floors and its exceptions,  
pursuant to the State of Idaho deletion within the 2012 Code.  
  
j. Delete IRC section R303.4 and replace with the following: R303.4  
Mechanical Ventilation. Dwelling units shall be provided with whole-house  
mechanical ventilation in accordance with Section M1507.3  
  
k. Delete the exception contained under IRC section R313.1 -- Townhouse  
automatic fire sprinkler systems, and replace with the following: Exception:  
Automatic residential fire sprinkler systems shall not be required in  
townhouses where a two-hour fire-resistance rated wall, as specified in  
section R302.2, is installed between dwelling units or when additions or  
alterations are made to existing townhouses that do not have an automatic  
residential fire sprinkler system installed. (3-29-10)  
  
l. Delete IRC section R313.2.  
  

  Loading....
  
  
m. Add the following to IRC section R315.2.2  Where required in existing  
dwellings: Exceptions: 1. Work involving the exterior surfaces of dwellings,  
such as, but not limited to, replacement of roofing or siding, or the addition  
or replacement of windows or doors, or the addition of a porch or deck or  
electrical permits, are exempt from the requirements of this section.  
  
n. Delete IRC section R322.1.10.  
  
o. Delete IRC section R322.2.2 subparagraph 2.1, and replace with the  
following: The total net area of all openings shall be at least one (1) square  
inch (645 mm2) for each square foot (0.093 m2) of enclosed area, or the  
opening shall be designed and the construction documents shall include a  
statement that the design and installation of the openings will provide for  
equalization of hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing the  
automatic entry and exit of floodwaters.  
  
  
p. IRC Table R403.1(1) &Table R403.1(2) Min. Width and Thickness for  
Concrete Footings-replace with the following:  
q. The exception to Section R405.1 of the International Residential Code, 2015  
Edition, is hereby amended to read as follows:  
Exception: A drainage system is not required when the foundation is installed  
on well-drained ground or sand-gravel mixture soils according to the Unified  
Soil Classification System, Group I and Group II Soils, as detailed in Table  
R405.1.  
  
r. An exception to Section N1103.3.5 shall be added as follows:  
      Exception: Building-framing cavities used as ducts or plenums shall comply  
with Section M1601.1.1.  
  

  
  
s. Table N1102.2.2 (Table R402.1.2) shall be amended to read as follows:   
t. The 2018 International Residential Code (RB229-16) shall modify table  
R602.7.5 of the International Residential Code, 2015 Edition.  
  
u. Delete IRC section R602.10 and replace with the following: Wall bracing.  
Buildings shall be braced in accordance with this section or, when applicable  
section R602.12, or the most current edition of APA System Report SR-102  
as an alternate method. Where a building, or portion thereof, does not comply  
with one (1) or more of the bracing requirements in this section, those  
portions shall be designated and constructed in accordance with section  
R301.1.  
  
v. Delete requirement for special inspections in Section R606.3.5.  
  
  
  
  
7-3-3:  FEES: Fees for building permits and services related to this chapter shall  
be established by resolution of the City Council, which may be amended and modified  
from time to time by resolution.  
  
  
7-3-4:  PENALTY: Any violation of the provisions of this chapter shall be  
deemed a misdemeanor and shall be subject to penalties prescribed for such violations  
under section 1-4-1 of this code.  In addition, a fine and daily fee shall be charged for  
failure to obtain a certificate of occupancy as required by this code and the International  
Building Code.  Said fine shall be as adopted by resolution of the City Council as  
provided for by ordinance.    
  
IDAHO CHAPTER 4  
  
IDAHO STATE PLUMBING CODE  
  
  
SECTION:  
  
7-4-1:  Idaho State and Uniform Plumbing Code Adopted  
7-4-2:  Amendments to the Uniform Plumbing Code  
7-4-3:  Amendments to the IDAPA rules of the Idaho State Plumbing Code   
7-4-4  Violations and Penalties  
  
  
7-4-1:  IDAHO STATE PLUMBING CODE ADOPTED:  
  
(A) Plumbing Code Adopted:  The Idaho State Plumbing Code (ISPC) together with  
the most current Uniform Plumbing Code (UPC) as adopted by the State of Idaho  
Plumbing Board together with the amendments thereto, as published in the Idaho  
Statute, Title 54, Chapter 26 and in Idaho’s Administrative Rules published in the IDAPA  
rules 07.02.03 through 07.02.07, except those portions that are deleted, modified or  
amended by other provisions of this Chapter.  
  
(B) Code on File:  One (1) copy of the most current Uniform Plumbing Code, as  
adopted by the State of Idaho Plumbing Board, shall be duly certified and retained by the  
City Clerk.  
  
7-4-2:  AMENDMENTS TO THE UNIFORM PLUMBING CODE: Amendments to  
the UPC as adopted in the Idaho State Plumbing Code shall be as follows:  
  
Chapter 1, Administration:   
  Section 103.4: Fees: Shall be amended to read as follows: Fees  
shall be determined by a schedule of fees adopted by the City Council by  
resolution which may be amended from time to time.    
  
 Chapter 3, General Regulations: 313.12.4: Delete  
  
 Chapter 4, Plumbing Fixtures and Fixture Fittings:  
 Section 402.4: Metered Faucets: Shall be amended to read as  
follows:  Self-closing or self-closing metering faucets may be installed.  
 Section 411.4: Delete.  
 Section 412.1: Shall be amended to read as follows:  Plumbing  
fixtures shall be provided for the type of building occupancy and the  
minimum number shown in the City’s adopted Building Code.  
  
Chapter 5, Water Heaters:  
 Section 508.5:  Shall be amended to read as follows:  Discharge  
from a relief valve into water heater pan shall be allowed, provided that  
the pan connection and its drain piping are sized at least one pipe size  
larger than the outlet of the relief valve.  
  
Title 7, Chapter 4 Page 1 of 2  Revised 7-12-2018  

  Loading....
Chapter 6, Water Supply and Distribution:  
 Section 604.8, Exception: Shall be amended as follows:  Retain  
first sentence only; delete language requiring a tracer wire to be installed  
when plastic piping is used underground.  
  
Chapter 7: Sanitary Drainage:  
 Section 710.9: The following Exception shall be added: A single  
pump is permitted for public use occupancies when the sump basin  
receives the discharge of not more than one toilet and 10 other drainage  
fixture units.  
  
Chapter 10, Traps and Interceptors:  
 Table 10-1: The footnote shall be amended to read as follows:  
The trap arm lengths of water closets or similar fixtures which depend  
upon self-siphoning and re-filling of their traps for proper operation shall  
be unlimited.  
  
7-4-3: AMENDMENTS TO THE IDAPA RULES OF THE IDAHO STATE                               
PLUMBING CODE:  Amendments to the IDAPA Rules as adopted in the Idaho State  
Plumbing Code shall be as follows:  
  
Rule 07.02.06, #08:  
   The following language shall be added to Section 504.1:  
Exception: The pressure test may be omitted with the use of colored  
primer or glue.  
  
Rule 07.02.06, #22:   
 The language deleted by this Rule shall be retained regarding the  
requirements of the UPC regarding drainage piping of certain commercial  
kitchen equipment.  
  
Rule 07.02.06, #29:   
 The language deleted by this Rule shall be retained regarding the  
original requirements of the UPC regarding drainage of commercial  
kitchen food-preparation sinks and food-handling fixtures.   
  
7-4-4:  VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES: Any person who shall violate any of  
the provisions of the Idaho State and Uniform Plumbing Code as adopted by the City of  
Ammon or the Ammon City Code as it relates to the Idaho State and Uniform Plumbing  
Code shall severally for each and every such violation and noncompliance respectively,  
be guilty of a misdemeanor as allowed in the Idaho State and Uniform Plumbing Code  
shall be charged as adopted in section 1-4-1 of the City Code. The imposition of one  
penalty for any violation shall not excuse the violation or permit it to continue and all  
such persons shall be required to correct or remedy such violations or defects within a  
reasonable time and when not otherwise specified.  Each day that a violation continues  
after due notice has been served shall be deemed a separate offense.  A fine and daily  
fee shall be charged for failure to obtain a certificate of occupancy as required by this  
code and the International Building Code.  Said fine shall be as adopted by resolution of  
the City Council as provided for by ordinance.    
  
  
Title 7, Chapter 4 Page 2 of 2  Revised 7-12-2018  

CHAPTER 5  
  
INTERNATIONAL MECHANICAL CODE  
  
SECTION:  
  
7-5-1:  International Mechanical Code Adopted  
7-5-2:  Fees  
7-5-3:  Penalty  
  
  
  
7-5-1: INTERNATIONAL MECHANICAL CODE ADOPTED:  
  
(A) Mechanical Code Adopted:  The International Mechanical Code,  
2015 Edition, published by the International Conference of Building  
Officials and the International Association of Plumbing and  
Mechanical Officials is hereby adopted as adopted by the State of  
Idaho as the official code of the City, including all appendices,  
except those portions as are deleted, modified, or amended by the  
provisions of this chapter.  
  
(B) Code on File:  One (1) copy of the International Mechanical Code,  
2015 Edition, shall be duly certified and retained by the City Clerk.  
  
7-5-2: AMENDMENTS TO THE ADOPTED CODE:  Amendments to Adopted Codes:   
That the following amendments shall be applicable to the adopted International  
Mechanical Code:  
  
a. Section 103.2 of the International Mechanical Code, 2015 Edition, shall be  
amended to read as follows:   
  
103.2 Appointment. The Code Official shall be appointed by the chief  
appointing authority of the jurisdiction.   
  
b.  Section 109.1 of the International Mechanical Code, 2015 Edition, shall be  
amended to read as follows:   
  
109.1 Application for appeal. A person shall have the right to appeal a  
decision of the code official to the board of appeals. An application for appeal  
shall be based on a claim that the true intent of this code or the rules legally  
adopted thereunder have been incorrectly interpreted. The application shall  
be filed on a form obtained from the code official within twenty (20) days after  
the notice was served.   
  
  

  Loading....
  
  
  
  
7-5-3:  FEES:  Fees for building permits and services related to this chapter shall be  
established by resolution of the City Council, which may be amended and modified from  
time to time by resolution.    
  
7-5-4:  PENALTY: Any violation of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed a  
misdemeanor and shall be subject to penalties prescribed for such violations under  
section 1-4-1 of this code.  
   
  
  
CHAPTER 6  
  
NATIONAL ELECTRICAL CODE  
  
  
SECTION:  
  
7-6-1:  Adoption of National Electrical Code  
7-6-2:  Code on File  
7-6-3:  Amendments to Code  
7-6-4:  Penalty  
  
  
7-6-1:  NATIONAL ELECTRICAL CODE ADOPTED:   The most current edition  
of the National Electrical Code (NEC), as adopted and incorporated by reference by the  
State of Idaho is adopted as the official code of the City.   
  
  
7-6-2: CODE ON FILE:    One (1) copy of the most current edition of the  
National Electrical Code as adopted, shall be duly certified and retained by the City  
Clerk.  
  
  
7-6-3:  FEES:  The City Council shall set Fees by separate action or  
resolution as warranted.  In addition thereto, said applicant shall reimburse city for actual  
expenses incurred by the City.  
  
  
7-6-4:  VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES: Any person who shall violate any of  
the provisions of the National Electric Code as adopted by the City of Ammon or the  
Ammon City Code as it relates to the National Electric Code shall severally for each and  
every such violation and noncompliance respectively, be guilty of a misdemeanor as  
allowed for in the National Electric Code and shall be charged as adopted in section      
1-4-1 of the City Code. The imposition of one penalty for any violation shall not excuse  
the violation or permit it to continue and all such persons shall be required to correct or  
remedy such violations or defects within a reasonable time and when not otherwise  
specified.  Each day that a violation continues after due notice has been served shall be  
deemed a separate offense.  A fine and daily fee shall be charged for failure to obtain a  
certificate of occupancy as required by this code and the International Building Code.   
Said fine shall be as adopted by resolution of the City Council as provided for by  
ordinance.    
  
  
  
Title 7, Chapter 6 Page 1 of 1 Revised 7-12-2018  
  

CHAPTER 7  
  
INTERNATIONAL FIRE CODE  
  
  
SECTION:  
  
7-7-1:  Adoption of International Fire Code  
7-7-2:  Establishment and Duties of Division of Fire Prevention  
7-7-3:  Definitions  
7-7-4:  New Materials, Processes or Occupancies Which May Require Permits  
7-7-5:  Violations  
7-7-6:  Fees  
  
7-7-1:  INTERNATIONAL FIRE CODE ADOPTED:  
  
(A) The current approved edition of the International Fire Code as adopted by the  
State of Idaho, is adopted as the official fire code of the City of Ammon.    
  
(B) One (1) copy of the adopted International Fire Code, current Edition, shall be  
duly certified and retained by the City Clerk  
  
7-7-2:  ESTABLISHMENT AND DUTIES OF DIVISION OF FIRE PREVENTION.  
  
(A) The International Fire Code shall be enforced by the Division of Fire Prevention,  
in the Fire Department of the City, which is hereby established and which shall  
be operated under the supervision of the Chief of the Fire Department.  
  
(B) The Fire Marshal shall be in charge of the Division of Fire Prevention shall be  
appointed by the Mayor with confirmation of the City Council upon  
recommendation from the Chief of the Fire Department on the basis of  
investigation to determine his qualifications.  
  
(C) The Chief of the Fire Department may detail such members of the Fire  
Department as inspectors from time to time as necessary. The Chief of the Fire  
Department shall recommend to the Mayor the employment of technical  
inspectors who, when such authorization is made, shall be selected through an  
investigation to determine their fitness for the position. The examination shall be  
open to members and non-members of the Fire Department, and appointments  
made after investigation shall be for an indefinite term.  
  
7-7-3:  DEFINITIONS: For the purpose of this ordinance, certain words  
and terms are defined as follows:  
  
  CHIEF OF THE DIVISION OF FIRE PREVENTION:  Wherever the  
words “Chief of the division of Fire Prevention” are used in the International Fire  
Code, it shall be held to mean the Fire Marshall for the City of Ammon.  
  
CODE OFFICIAL: Wherever the words “Code Official” are  
Title 7, Chapter 7 Page 1 of 2  Revised 7-12-2018  

  Loading....
   
used in the International Fire Code, it shall be held to mean the Fire  
Chief, Fire Marshal or other designated authority charged with the  
administration and enforcement of the code.  
  
CORPORATE COUNSEL: Wherever the term “Corporate or  
Corporation Counsel” is used in the International Fire Code, it shall be  
held to mean the Attorney for the City of Ammon.  
  
JURISDICSTION: Wherever the word “Jurisdiction” is used in  
the International Fire Code, it shall be held to mean the City of Ammon,  
Idaho.  
  
LIFE-SAFETY SYSTEM: Wherever the words Life-Safety  
System is used in the International Fire Code, it shall be held to mean,  
automatic fire extinguishing system, fire alarm and detection systems, fire  
pumps and any other fire protective system or life safety equipment.  
  
7-7-4:  NEW MATERIALS, PROCESSES, OR OCCUPANCIES WHICH MAY  
REQUIRE PERMITS:   The Mayor, Chief, and Fire Marshal shall act as a  
committee to determine and specify, after giving affected persons an opportunity  
to be heard, any new materials, processes, or occupancies which shall require  
permits, in addition to those now enumerated in said code.   
  
7-7-5:  VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES:  
  
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of the International Fire Code as  
adopted by the City of Ammon or the Ammon City Code as it relates to the International  
Fire Code shall severally for each and every such violation and noncompliance  
respectively, be guilty of a misdemeanor as allowed for in the International Fire Code  
and shall be charged as adopted in section 1-4-1 of the City Code. The imposition of one  
penalty for any violation shall not excuse the violation or permit it to continue and all  
such persons shall be required to correct or remedy such violations or defects within a  
reasonable time and when not otherwise specified.  Each day that a violation continues  
after due notice has been served shall be deemed a separate offense.  A fine and daily  
fee shall be charged for failure to obtain a certificate of occupancy as required by this  
code and the International Building Code.  Said fine shall be as adopted by resolution of  
the City Council as provided for by ordinance.    
   
(A) The application of the above penalty shall not be held to prevent the enforced  
removal of prohibited conditions.  
  
7-7-6:  FEES:  Fees for building permits and services related to this chapter shall be  
established by resolution of the City Council, which may be amended and modified from  
time to time by resolution.   
  
EXCEPTION:  Offices or businesses operated by the State of Idaho or the Federal  
Government shall be exempt from the fire inspection fee.  Fire inspections shall continue  
to be provided by the Fire Department.    
  
  
Title 7, Chapter 7 Page 2 of 2  Revised 7-12-2018  

CHAPTER 8  
  
INTERNATIONAL ENERGY CONSERVATION CODE  
  
  
SECTION  
  
7-8-1:  Adoption of International Energy Conservation   
7-8-2:  Exception  
7-8-3:  Fees  
7-8-4:  Violations and Penalties  
  
  
7-8-1:  ADOPTION OF INTERNATIONAL ENERGY CONSERVATION CODE:     
  
(A) The approved edition of the 2015 International Energy Conservation Code as  
adopted by the State of Idaho or the Idaho Building Code Board, together with any  
amendments or revisions to the International Building Code made by the Idaho Building  
Code Board through the negotiated rulemaking process, is adopted as the official  
building code of the City of Ammon.  
  
(B) One (1) copy of the International Energy Conservation Code, 2015 Edition, shall  
be duly certified and retained by the City Clerk.  
  
7-8-2:  EXCEPTIONS:  
  
a. An exception to Section R403.3.5 shall be added as follows:  
         Exception: Building-framing cavities used as ducts or plenums shall comply  
with Section M1601.1.1 (IRC).  
b. Delete Wood Frame Wall R-value contained in Table R402.1.2 (N1102.1.2)  
for climate zone   
  
Table 402.1.2  
Insulation and fenestration Requirements By  
Componenta 

  Loading....
  
c. Add the following as section 402.4.1.3 (N1102.4.1.3): Visual inspection  
option, Building envelope tightness and insulation installation shall be  
considered acceptable when the items listed in Table 402.4.1.1, applicable to  
the method of construction, are field verified. Where required by code official  
an approved party independent from the installer of the insulation shall  
inspect the air barrier and insulation.   
  
d. Delete Section R402.4.4.   
  
  
7-8-3:  FEES:  Fees for building permits and services related to this chapter shall  
be established by resolution of the City Council, which may be amended and modified  
from time to time by resolution.  
  
  
7-8-4:  VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES:   Each violation of this ordinance or of  
provisions of the documents adopted by reference, or of any regulation, order, or ruling  
promulgated hereunder shall be deemed a misdemeanor and shall be subject to  
penalties prescribed for such violations under section 1-4-1 of this code.  
constitute a misdemeanor.    

  
CHAPTER 9  
  
INTERNATIONAL FUEL GAS CODE  
  
  
7-9-1:  International Fuel Gas Code Adopted  
7-9-2:  Amendments to the Adopted Code  
7-9-3:  Fees  
7-9-4:  Penalty  
  
  
7-9-1: INTERNATIONAL FUEL CODE ADOPTED:  
  
(A) Fuel Code Adopted:  The International Fuel Gas Code, 2015 Edition, published  
by the International Code Council and as adopted by the State of Idaho, is  
hereby adopted as an official code of the City, including all appendices, except  
those portions as are deleted, modified, or amended by the provisions of this  
chapter.  
  
(B) Code on File:  One (1) copy of the International Fuel Gas Code, 2015 Edition,  
shall be duly certified and retained by the City Clerk.  
  
  
7-9-2: AMENDMENTS TO THE ADOPTED CODE:  Amendments to Adopted Codes:  That the  
following amendments shall be applicable to the adopted International Fuel Gas Code:  
  
  
a. Section 103.2 of the International Fuel Gas Code, 2015 Edition, shall be amended to  
read as follows:   
                                                                                                                                                                                     
      
103.2  Appointment. The code official shall be appointed by the chief appointing  
authority of the jurisdiction.   
  
b. Section 109.1 of the International Fuel Gas Code, 2015 Edition, shall be amended to  
read as follows:   
  
109.1 Application for appeal. A person shall have the right to appeal a decision of the  
code official to the board of appeals. An application for appeal shall be based on a  
claim that the true intent of this code or the rules legally adopted thereunder, have  
been incorrectly interpreted. The application shall be filed on a form obtained from  
the code official within twenty (20) days after the notice was served.  
  
  
7-9-3:  FEES:  Fees for building permits and services related to this chapter shall be established  
by resolution of the City Council, which may be amended and modified from time to time by  
resolution.    
  
  
7-9-4:  VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES: Any violation of the provisions of this chapter shall  
be deemed a misdemeanor and shall be subject to penalties prescribed for such violations  
under section 1-4-1 of this code.  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
7-10-5:  PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD PROTECTION:  
  
(A) General Standards: In all areas of special flood hazards, the following standards are  
required:  
  
1. Anchoring:  
  
(a) All new construction and substantial improvements shall be anchored to  
prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the structure.  
  
(b) All manufactured homes must likewise be anchored to prevent flotation,  
collapse, or lateral movement, and shall be installed using methods and  
practices that minimize flood damage. Anchoring methods may include,  
but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors.  
(Reference FEMA’s “Manufactured Home Installation in Flood Hazard  
Areas” guidebook for additional techniques.)  
  
2. Construction Materials and Methods:  
  
(a) All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed  
with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage.  
  
(b) All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed  
using methods and practices that minimize flood damage.  
  
(c) Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air-conditioning equipment  
and other service facilities shall be designed and/or otherwise elevated or  
located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the  
components during conditions of flooding.  
  
3. Utilities:  
  
(a) All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to  
minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system;  
  
(b) New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to  
minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into  the systems and  
discharge from the systems into flood waters; and  
  
(c) On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to  
them or contamination from them during flooding.  
  
4. Subdivision Proposals:  
  
Title 7, Chapter 10 Page 10 of 14 Revised 7-12-2018  
  

  Loading....
  
  
  
(a) All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize  
flood damage;  
  
(b) All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as  
sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems located and constructed to  
minimize flood damage;  
  
(c) All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to  
reduce exposure to flood damage; and  
  
(d) Base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision proposals and  
other proposed development which contain at least fifty (50) lots or five  
(5) acres, whichever is less.  
  
5. Review of Building Permits: Where elevation data is not available either through  
the Flood Insurance Study or from another authoritative souse (Section  
7-10-4(C)2), applications for building permits shall be reviewed to assure that  
proposed construction will be reasonably safe from flooding. The test of  
reasonableness is a local judgment and includes use of historical data, high  
water marks, photographs of past flooding, etc., where available. Failure to  
elevate at least two feet above grade in these zones may result in higher  
insurance rates.  
  
(B) Specific Standards: In all areas of special flood hazards where base flood elevation data  
has been provided as set forth in Section 7-10-3(B), Basis for Establishing the Area of  
Special Flood Hazard or Section 7-10-4(C)2, use of Other Base Flood Data, the  
following provisions are required:  
  
1. Residential Construction:  
  
(a) New construction and substantial improvement of any residential  
structure shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to or  
above base flood elevation, or comply with floodproof basement  
requirements as set forth in Section 7-10-6 of this chapter.  
  
(b) Fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are subject to flooding  
are prohibited, or shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic  
flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of  
floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified  
by a registered professional engineer or architect or must meet or exceed  
the following minimum criteria:   
  
(i) A minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less  
than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed are subject  
to flooding shall be provided;   
(ii) The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above  
grade;   
Title 7, Chapter 10 Page 11 of 14 Revised 7-12-2018  
  

  Loading....
  
  
  
(iii) Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, or other  
coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry  
and exit of floodwaters.  
  
2. Nonresidential Construction: New construction and substantial improvement of  
any commercial, industrial, or other nonresidential structure shall either have the  
lowest floor, including basement, elevated to the level of the base flood elevation;  
or, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, shall:  
  
(a) Be floodproofed so that below the base flood level the structure is  
watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water;  
  
(b) Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and  
hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy;  
  
(c) Be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect that the  
design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted  
standards of practice for meeting provisions of this subsection based on  
their development and or review of the structural design, specifications,  
and plans. Such certifications shall be provided to the officials as set forth  
in Section 7-10-4(C)3(b); and  
  
(d) Nonresidential structures that are elevated, not floodproofed, must meet  
the same standards for space below the lowest floor as described in  
Section 7-10-5 (B) 1(2).  
  
(e) Manufactured Homes: All manufactured homes to be placed or substan- 
tially improved within Zones A1-30, AH, and AE shall be elevated on a  
permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the manufactured  
home is at or above the base flood elevation and be securely anchored to  
an adequately anchored foundation system in accordance with the  
provisions of Section 7-10-5 (A) 1(b).  
  
(C) Floodways: Located within areas of special flood hazard establishments in Section  
7-10-3 (B) are areas designated as floodways. Since the floodway is an extremely  
hazardous area due to the velocity of flood waters which carry debris, potential  
projectiles, and erosion potential, the following provisions apply:  
  
1. Prohibit encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvement,  
and other development unless certification by a registered professional engineer  
or architect is provided demonstrating that encroachments shall not result in any  
increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge.  
  
2. If Section 7-10-5(C)-1 is satisfied, all new construction and substantial  
improvements shall comply with all applicable flood hazard reduction provisions  
of Section 7-10-5, PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION.  
  
Title 7, Chapter 10 Page 12 of 14 Revised 7-12-2018  
  

  Loading....
  
  
  
3. Prohibit the placement of any mobile homes, except in an existing mobile home  
park or existing mobile home subdivision.  
  
(D) Standards for Shallow Flooding Areas (AO Zones):  
  
1. Shallow flooding areas appear in FIRM’s as AO zones with depth designations.  
The base flood depths in these zones range from one (1) to three (3) feet where  
a clearly defined channel does not exist, or where the path of flooding is  
unpredictable and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is usually  
characterized as sheet flow. In these areas, the following provisions apply:  
  
(a) New construction and substantial improvements of residential structures  
within AO zones shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated  
above the adjacent grade of the building site, to or above the depth  
number specified on the FIRM (at least two (2) feet if no depth number is  
specified).  
  
(b) New construction and substantial improvements of nonresidential  
structures within AP zones shall either:   
  
(i) The lowest floor (including basement) elevated above the adjacent  
grade of the building site, to or above the depth number specified  
on the FIRM (at least two (2) feet if no depth number is specified);  
or   
(ii) Together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, be completely  
floodproofed to or above that level so that any space below that  
level is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the  
passage of water and with structural components having the  
capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and  
effects of buoyancy. If this method is used, compliance shall be  
certified by a registered professional engineer or architect as in  
Section 7-10-5 (B) 2(c).  
  
(c) Require adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes to guide  
floodwaters around and away from proposed structures.  
  
  
7-10-6:  REPEALED   
  
7-10-7:  ACCESSORY STRUCTURES:  
  
(A) Accessory structures to a main structure shall be defined as those structures which are  
utilized in connection with a main structure, but in and of the accessory structure itself  
does not constitute a main purpose of function of the improvement. Such accessory  
buildings shall include, but not by way of limitation, storage sheds, tool sheds, garden  
buildings, greenhouses, detached garages, kennels, and barns.  
  
Title 7, Chapter 10 Page 13 of 14 Revised 7-12-2018  
  

  Loading....
  
  
  
(B) No such accessory structure shall at any time be used for human habitation.  
  
(C) All such accessory structures shall be designed to have low flood damage potential.  
  
(D) All such accessory structures shall be constructed and place on the building site so as to  
offer the minimum resistance to the flow of flood waters.  
  
(E) All such accessory structures shall be firmly anchored to prevent flotation which may  
result in damage to other structures.  
  
(F) All service facilities to any such accessory structure such as electrical and heating  
equipment shall be elevated or floodproofed.  
  
(G) When an accessory structure represents a minimal investment, the elevation or dry  
floodproofing standards need not be met. However, all other requirements applicable to  
structures will be applicable. A minimal investment shall be determined by the applicable  
building authority, or by the appeal under the variance procedure and shall be  
determined, if necessary, on a case to case basis. However, as a general application,  
expenditure for the accessory structure of not more than ten percent (10%) of the value  
of the main structure shall be considered a minimal investment.  
  
  
7-10-8:  FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY:  The flood insurance study for the City of Ammon,  
dated April 2, 2002, and any revisions thereto, is hereby adopted by reference and declared to  
be a part of the ordinance of the City of Ammon, for the control and use of property in the City of  
Ammon, Idaho flood plain.    
  
The most current flood insurance study for Bonneville County shall be used for any properties  
annexed into the City of Ammon that are outside of the City of Ammon flood insurance study  
maps..    
  
7-10-9:  ELEVATION CERTIFICATES REQUIRED FOR ALL NEW BUILDINGS IN THE  
CITY:  
Elevation Certificates for buildings in the flood plain shall be required at the following  
times:  Elevation Certificates for buildings in the flood plain should be required as follows:   
(A) Submitted with construction drawings at the time of a request for a building permit (prior  
to any alterations of the ground) and   
(B) After the foundation or pad has been poured.  This certificate should provide the  
information showing the lowest floor is at or above the required elevation.  The City  
Engineer shall certify this.  
(C) The City Engineer working with the Building Department shall inspect and certify that  
any addition devices or structures are in place prior to the final certificate of occupancy.  
  
  
Title 7, Chapter 10 Page 14 of 14 Revised 7-12-2018  

CHAPTER 11  
INTERNATIONAL EXISTING BUILDING CODE  
  
SECTION:  
  
  
7-11-1:  2015 International Existing Building Code Adopted  
7-11-2:  Fees    
 7-11-3:  Penalty   
   
  
7-11-1:   INTERNATIONAL EXISTING BUILDING CODE ADOPTED:    
  
  
(A) The approved edition of the 2015 International Existing Building Code as adopted  
by the State of Idaho or the Idaho Building Code Board, together with any  
amendments or revisions to the International Building Code made by the Idaho  
Building Code Board through the negotiated rulemaking process, is adopted as  
the official building code of the City of Ammon:  
  
(B) Code on File:  One (1) copy of the International Existing Building Code, 2015  
Edition, shall be duly certified and retained by the City Clerk.  
  
  
7-11-2: FEES:     Fees for building permits and services related to this chapter shall be  
established by resolution of the City Council, which may be amended and modified from  
time to time by resolution.  
  
   
7-11- 3: PENALTY: Any violation of the provisions of this chapter shall be  
deemed a misdemeanor and shall be subject to penalties prescribed for such violations  
under section 1-4-1 of this code.  In addition, a fine and daily fee shall be charged for  
failure to obtain a certificate of occupancy as required by this code and the International  
Building Code.  Said fine shall be as adopted by resolution of the City Council as  
provided for by ordinance.    
  
Page 1 of 1        Adopted 12-21-17  
  
Title 08 Public Utilities and Property

   
  
capacity until said industry uses that capacity and then, only to the extent  
used.  
  
(C) Twelve Equal Monthly Installments:  A rate shall be calculated on the  
basis of costs attributable to the maximum load contributed by any given  
industry. This rate reflects the annual capital costs and operating costs  
attributable to industry and the rate is divided into twelve (12) equal  
installments. Charges for capital costs shall be calculated from weekly  
measured quantities of flow, BOD, and suspended solids from each  
industry, using the three (3) consecutive weeks of operation in which that  
given industry's maximum load occurs. Charges for operation and  
maintenance shall be calculated from the total annual contribution of flow,  
BOD, and suspended solids from each industry.  
  
(D) Sampling, testing and monitoring costs incurred by City shall be paid by  
discharger, in addition to charges outlined above.  
  
  
8-1-77:  REPEALED  
  
  
8-1-78:  REPEALED  
  
  
8-1-79:  REPEALED  
  
  
8-1-80:  ADJUSTMENT OF CHARGES:  If at any time the actual discharge of  
industrial waste by a User is greater or less than the rate factor used for computing the  
industrial waste service charge for such User, the User's monthly service charge may be  
recomputed in order to more fairly reflect the actual costs of providing sewage treatment  
services for such User.  
  
  
8-1-81:  SEWER USER SERVICE CHARGE:  A monthly service charge for sewer  
service shall be charged to all Users. The rates established shall generate sufficient  
revenue to offset total costs of the sewerage system which includes:  (a) Capital costs  
and (b) operation, maintenance and replacement costs. The costs of the sewerage  
system shall be reviewed periodically and User rates adjusted, if necessary, to ensure  
adequate revenue to cover all costs and to ensure that all Users share equally the cost  
of operation, maintenance and replacement.  
  
User rates shall be established by resolution of the City Council and may be amended  
by resolution of the City Council from time to time, and shall be kept on file in the office  
of the City Clerk and information furnished to Users or interested parties upon request.  
  
  
8-1-82:  REPEALED     
  
  
  
Title 8, Chapter 1 Page 43 of 47  Revised 7-12-2018  

  Loading....
   
  
8-1-83:  DOMESTIC AND COMMERCIAL RATES OUTSIDE THE CITY:  All  
charges for operation and maintenance shall be uniform for all domestic or commercial  
Users, whether said Users are located within or without the City. Provided, however, that  
Users outside the City may be charged a surcharge for the administrative duties of the  
City in billings and collections.  No service for sewer shall be provided outside the  
corporate limits of the City, unless a signed “Utility Connection and Annexation  
Covenant” agreement has been signed by both the City and the user.  A fee for the  
Utility Connection shall be established by resolution of the City Council and may be  
amended by resolution of the City Council from time to time, and shall be kept on file in  
the office of the City Clerk and information furnished to Users or interested parties upon  
request.  
  
  
8-1-84:  BILLING PERIODS:  All regular billing periods shall be on a monthly  
basis, but domestic or commercial premises occupied for a period of less than one  
month shall be charged only for the number of days wastewater treatment services were  
available for use.  
  
  
8-1-85:  BILLING PROCEDURE:  Accounts receiving metered water service shall  
be charged for sewer service based upon metered water and such charges may be  
included in the metered water billing. All other sewer charges may be included with  
billings for other City services.  
  
  
8-1-86:  DUE DATE:  Bills rendered for sewer service are payable ten (10) days  
following the month of service and as such the bill is due in full at such time. If the  
account is not paid by the 10th of the month following the due date, the account will  
become delinquent. When the due date falls on a legal holiday or on a day when City  
offices are not open for business, the next regular business day is considered the due  
date and the past due date. When remittances are made by mail, bills shall be deemed  
paid on the date of mailing as shown by the postmark.  
  
  
8-1-87:  DELINQUENT ACCOUNTS:  When the bill is not paid by the 10th of the  
month following the month of service, as hereinabove stated, and the bill remains  
unpaid, the account will become delinquent and shall be handled in the following  
manner:  
  
SERVICES THAT ALSO INCLUDE WATER:  
  
(A) On or after the delinquent date, a delinquency statement is to be mailed to  
the responsible party, stating a date the account balance must be paid in  
full.   
  
(B) Following said date, if there has been no response to the mailed statement,  
a notice shall be posted at the residence/location stating the date that the  
water will be turned off. A posting fee will be added to the account for said  
notice.    
  
(C) In cases when a notice is posted at the residence/location, the customer  
Title 8, Chapter 1 Page 44 of 47  Revised 7-12-2018  

  Loading....
   
  
can make payment or arrangements for payment prior to the disconnection  
of service.   
  
(D) In cases when the water is turned off for non-payment, there shall be a fee  
charged which shall include payment for the shut off and the turn on.  Water  
shall not be turned on unless the account is paid in full by approved funds  
as listed in item (G).   
  
(E) In cases where a shut off is not available or has been rendered inoperable,  
the City may install a new shut off in a location determined by the City  
Engineer.  All costs incurred for installation or repair of said shut off, shall  
be at the property owner’s expense, and shall be due and payable prior to  
the reconnection of water service to said property.      
  
(F) Notice of shut off shall be posted at the residence/location stating the date  
that the shut off will be installed.  Notice shall provide a copy of the  
approximate location of installation and inform the resident/responsible  
party to clear the location of the installation of any obstructions.   
Obstructions on the property, that would prohibit the installation of a new  
shut off on the date indicated, shall be removed by the City crew or the  
City’s designee and any expenses incurred for such removal shall be billed  
as part of the expense of installation against the property.  Any violation of  
the provisions of this sub-section shall be deemed an infraction and shall  
be subject to penalties prescribed for such violations under section 1-4-2  
of this code.    
  
(G) In the event of payment of a delinquent account, personal checks shall not  
be accepted, and the balance must be paid by cash or one of the following:  
certified funds; cashier’s check, certified check, credit card or money order.     
  
(H) Reconnection by any person for any reason, other than an authorized City  
of Ammon employee shall be deemed a misdemeanor and shall be subject  
to the penalties prescribed for such violations under section 1-4-1 of this  
code.   
  
(I) Payments received for services by a check that is subsequently returned  
unpaid by any financial institution shall be assessed a return check fee as  
set by resolution of the City Council.  Said fee shall be charged to the  
customer’s utility account and charges for utilities that said check was to  
pay shall also be billed back to the customer’s utility account.   Any returned  
check must be paid within five (5) working days from the time the notice is  
given by the City of the returned check or the utility account shall be  
considered delinquent. All fees shall be paid in full prior to reinstatement of  
services.  Partial payments of amounts due shall be applied to check fees  
prior to being applied to services.  
  
(J) All fees associated with the collection of a delinquent account shall be  
assessed to the utility account of the responsible person.  Said fees shall  
include but not be limited to attorney fees, certified mailing, and serving  
fees.  
Title 8, Chapter 1 Page 45 of 47  Revised 7-12-2018  

  Loading....
   
  
  
  
SERVICES THAT INCLUDE SEWER AND/OR GARBAGE ONLY  
  
(A) On or after the delinquent date, a delinquency statement is to be mailed to  
the responsible party, stating a date the account balance must be paid in  
full.   
  
(B) Following said date, if there has been no response to the mailed statement,  
a notice shall be posted at the residence/location stating the date that  
garbage service will be discontinued.  A posting fee will be added to the  
account for said notice.    
  
(C) In cases when garbage service is terminated for non-payment, there shall  
be a fee charged for both the pickup and delivery of the garbage container.   
Garbage service shall not be reinstated unless the account is paid in full.      
  
(D) Because the monthly garbage service fee is for the continued operation of  
the City sanitation department, the sanitation fee shall continue to be  
assessed monthly on all accounts where garbage service has been  
discontinued and shall become a part of any delinquent account balance  
upon non-payment.  
  
(E) In the event of payment of a delinquent account, personal checks shall not  
be accepted, and the balance must be paid by cash or one of the following:  
certified funds; cashier’s check, certified check, credit card or money order.     
  
(F) Reconnection by any person for any reason, other than an authorized City  
of Ammon employee shall be deemed an infraction and shall be subject to  
the penalties prescribed for such violations under section 1-4-2.   
  
(G) Payments received for services by a check that is subsequently returned  
unpaid by any financial institution shall be assessed a return check fee as  
set by resolution of the City Council.  Said fee shall be charged to the  
customer’s utility account and charges for utilities that said check was to  
pay shall also be billed back to the customer’s utility account.   Any returned  
check must be paid within five (5) working days from the time the notice is  
given by the City of the returned check or the utility account shall be  
considered delinquent. All fees shall be paid in full prior to reinstatement of  
services.  Partial payments of amounts due shall be applied to check fees  
prior to being applied to services.  
  
(H) All fees associated with the collection of a delinquent account shall be  
assessed to the utility account of the responsible person.  Said fees shall  
include but not be limited to attorney fees, certified mailing, and serving  
fees.  
  
  
8-1-88:  RECOVERY OF COSTS INCURRED BY THE CITY:  Any discharger who  
discharges any wastewater in violation of this chapter or who causes damage to or  
Title 8, Chapter 1 Page 46 of 47  Revised 7-12-2018  

  Loading....
   
  
impairs the City's wastewater disposal system shall be liable to the City for any expense,  
loss, or damage caused by such violation. The City may bill the discharger for the  
reasonable cost incurred by the City for any cleaning, repair, or replacement work  
caused by the violation or discharge. Refusal to pay the assessed costs shall constitute  
a violation of this chapter.  
  
  
8-1-89:  FALSIFYING INFORMATION:  Any person who knowingly makes any  
false statement, representation, or certification in any application, record, report, plan, or  
other document filed or required to be maintained pursuant to this chapter, or who  
falsifies, tampers with, or knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring device or method  
required under this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.  
  
  
8-1-90:  LIMITATION OF LIABILITY:  Nothing herein is intended to create any  
private duty to any customer or discharger or create any private right of action on  
account of any failure by the City, or its officers, employees, or agents to perform any  
duty or obligation set forth herein.  
  
  
 8-1-91: PENALTY:    
  
INFRACTION:  Any violation of the provisions of this chapter deemed to be an  
infraction shall be subject to penalties prescribed for such violations under section 1- 
4-2 of this code, subject to the provisions of Idaho Code 18-111 and 18-113A.  Any  
section of this chapter not designated a penalty classification otherwise shall be  
considered an infraction and subject to the penalty as stated in this section.   
  
MISDEMEANOR:   Any violation of the provisions of this chapter deemed to be  
a misdemeanor shall be subject to penalties prescribed for such violations under  
section 1-4-1 of this code, subject to the provisions of Idaho Code 18-111 and 18-113.   
  
  
8-1-92:  FAILURE TO PROVIDE FLOW OR SAMPLING DEVICE: In the event  
industrial/commercial users fail to have flow or sampling devices in proper operating  
condition for more than one (1) week, the City may discontinue city water service or  
remove or close sewer connections and enter upon the property for accomplishing such  
purposes. The expense of discontinuance, removal, or closing, as well as the expense of  
restoring service, shall be a charge to the user of such service and a debt due to the  
City. The City may recover such cost or take any other remedy or method for collection  
thereof as permitted by this Chapter.  
  
Any violation of the provisions of this section shall be deemed to be an infraction.  
  
8-1-93:   UNAUTHORIZED ACCESS TO MANHOLES OR UNAUTHORIZED USE  
OF SYSTEM:  No person shall remove any manhole cover and/or enter into the system  
without authorization from the Public Works Director, the City Engineer or their designee.   
Any unauthorized discharge into the system or removal of any manhole cover shall be  
considered an unauthorized use of the system.  
  
Any violation of the provisions of this section shall be deemed to be a misdemeanor.  
Title 8, Chapter 1 Page 47 of 47  Revised 7-12-2018  

CHAPTER 2  
  
PARKS  
  
  
SECTION:  
  
8-2-1:  Hours of Operation  
8-2-2:  Operation of Concession  
8-2-3:  Amusements  
8-2-4:  Planting of Removal of Shrubs  
8-2-5:  Defacing Public Buildings or Other Structures  
8-2-6:  Leaving or Depositing Refuse in Public Parks  
8-2-7:  Causing Disturbances or Using Profanity  
8-2-8:  Possessing or Consuming Alcoholic Beverages  
8-2-9:  Smoking Restricted  
8-2-10:  Motor Vehicles Prohibited  
8-2-11:  Violating Posted Rules  
8-2-12:  Penalty  
  
8-2-1:  HOURS OF OPERATION: The Ammon city parks shall be opened daily  
to the public between the hours of 5 AM and 11 PM.  It shall be unlawful for any person,  
or persons (other than city personnel conducting city business) to occupy or be present  
in any park in the City of Ammon during any hours in which the parks are not open to the  
public.  Violation of this section shall be deemed an infraction.  
  
8-2-2:  OPERATION OF CONCESSION:    
  
(A) Concessionaire shall be defined as any person or business that sells or offers  
goods for sale within a public park of the City of Ammon  
  
(B) No person shall sell or offer for sale any food, beverage, or candy within a public  
park, except for persons operating under a concession agreement approved by  
the Council.    
  
Any violation of the provisions of this section shall be deemed to be an infraction.   
  
  
8-2-3:  AMUSEMENTS:  No person shall operate or cause to be operated any  
amusement ride, device, mechanical or electronic game or machine, carnival, show, or  
exhibit of any kind for pecuniary gain in any public park, except persons operating under  
a concession or lease agreement approved by the Council.  
  
Any violation of the provisions of this section shall be deemed to be an infraction.   
  
  
8-2-4:  PLANTING OR REMOVAL OF SHRUBS:  No trees, shrubs, or vines shall  
be planted in the parks of the City, nor shall any trees, shrubs, or vines be cut down or  
Title 8, Chapter 2 Page 1 of 3 Revised 7-12-2018  

  Loading....
removed there from, without the consent of the City of Ammon.  
  
Any violation of the provisions of this section shall be deemed a misdemeanor.  
  
8-2-5:  DEFACING PUBLIC BUILDINGS OR OTHER STRUCTURES:   It shall  
be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation using the public parks, grounds, build- 
ings, or other facilities of the City of Ammon to either perform or permit to be performed  
any of the following acts: Willfully mark, deface, disfigure, injure, tamper with, or displace  
or remove any building, bridges, tables, benches, fireplaces, railings, paving or paving  
material, waterlines or other public utilities or parts or appurtenances thereof, signs,  
notices or placards, whether temporary or permanent, monuments, stakes, posts, or  
other boundary markers, or other structures or equipment, facilities, or park property or  
appurtenances whatsoever, either real or personal.  
  
Any violation of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed a misdemeanor.  
  
  
8-2-6:  LEAVING OR DEPOSITING REFUSE IN PUBLIC PARKS:   It shall be  
unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation using the public parks, grounds, buildings,  
or other facilities of the City of Ammon to bring in or dump, deposit, or leave any bottles,  
broken glass, ashes, paper, boxes, cans, dirt, rubbish, waste, garbage, refuse, or other  
trash. No such refuse or trash shall be placed in any waters in or contiguous to any  
public park or building, or left anywhere on the grounds thereof, but shall be placed in  
the proper receptacles where these are provided; where receptacles are not so  
provided, all such rubbish or waste shall be carried away from the park by the person  
responsible for its presence, and properly disposed of elsewhere.  
  
Any violation of the provisions of this chapter deemed to be a misdemeanor   
  
  
8-2-7:  CAUSING DISTURBANCES OR USING OBSCENITIES:   It shall be  
unlawful for any person using the public parks, grounds, buildings, or other facilities of  
the City of Ammon to disturb the peace, or use any obscene language.    
  
Any violation of the provisions of this section shall be deemed to be an infraction.   
  
8-2-8:  POSSESSING OR CONSUMING ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES:   It shall  
be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation using the public parks, grounds,  
buildings, or other facilities of the City of Ammon to carry, possess, or drink alcoholic  
beverages.  
  
Any violation of the provisions of this section shall be deemed to be an infraction  
pursuant to section 1-4-2 of the Ammon City Code.  
  
8-2-9:  SMOKING RESTRICTED: It shall be unlawful for any person to smoke,  
in any form within a park located in the City of Ammon.    
  
Any violation of the provisions of this section shall be deemed to be an infraction  
pursuant to section 1-4-2 of the Ammon City Code.   
  
  
Title 8, Chapter 2 Page 2 of 3 Revised 7-12-2018  

  Loading....
  
8-2-10:  MOTOR VEHICLES PROHIBITED: It shall be unlawful to drive or park  
any motor driven vehicle except on a street, driveway or parking lot in any City of  
Ammon park; or to leave any such vehicle in any place other than established for public  
parking, without a written permit from the City of Ammon.  Violation of this section shall  
be deemed an infraction.  
  
Any violation of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed a misdemeanor.  
  
  
8-2-11:  VIOLATING POSTED RULES:   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm,  
or corporation using the public parks, grounds, buildings, or other facilities of the City of  
Ammon to violate any posted rule for the use of public parks and buildings or other  
facilities made or approved by the Department of Parks and Recreation.    
  
Any violation of the provisions of this section shall be deemed to be an infraction.   
  
  
8-2-12:  PENALTY:   Penalties for violations within this chapter shall be as follows:  
  
INFRACTION:  Any violation of the provisions of this chapter deemed to be an  
infraction shall be subject to penalties prescribed for such violations under section 1- 
4-2 of this code, subject to the provisions of Idaho Code 18-111 and 18-113A.    
  
MISDEMEANOR:   Any violation of the provisions of this chapter deemed to  
be a misdemeanor shall be subject to penalties prescribed for such violations under  
section 1-4-1 of this code, subject to the provisions of Idaho Code 18-111 and 18- 
113.   
  
Title 8, Chapter 2 Page 3 of 3 Revised 7-12-2018  

  
8-3-36:  WATER RATES OUTSIDE CITY:  Monthly rates charged for water  
furnished outside the City limits, whether metered or non-metered, shall be set by  
resolution of the City Council and may be amended from time to time, and such rates shall  
be kept on file in the office of the City Clerk and information furnished to interested parties  
upon request.  
  
  
8-3-37:  METER RATES FOR MULTIPLE METERS:  Where an individual  
consumer is supplied with water through more than one metered service, charges shall  
be computed separately for each individual meter.  
  
  
8-3-38:  SERVICE OUTSIDE CITY:  No service for water shall be provided  
outside the corporate limits of the City unless a signed “Utility Connection and  
Annexation Covenant” agreement has been signed by both the City and the user.  A fee  
for the Utility Connection and Annexation Covenant shall be established by resolution of  
the City Council and may be amended by resolution of the City Council from time to  
time, and shall be kept on file in the office of the City Clerk and information furnished to  
Users or interested parties upon request.  
  
   
8-3-39:  FIRE SERVICE CONNECTION:  No fire service connection shall be made  
without first obtaining a plumbing permit and all other related permits necessary for said  
connection or construction.  Detail plans showing piping, valves, automatic sprinklers and  
other outlets, valves or appurtenances shall be submitted as part of an application.  All fire  
service connections between water mains and property lines shall be installed and  
maintained by the property owner. No fire service connection may be used for domestic  
purposes or any purpose other than for fire protection.   
  
Any violation of this section shall be prosecuted according to the most current Plumbing  
Code penalty provisions adopted by the City within Title 7, Chapter 4.  
  
  
8-3-40:  FIRE HYDRANTS (USE PERMIT REQUIRED):  All public fire hydrants  
shall be maintained by the Water Department. Firefighters shall have access to all fire  
hydrants connected to the city water system in relationship to the performance of their  
duties as a firefighter. No other person shall draw or attempt to draw any water from a fire  
hydrant unless he has applied for and received a permit from the City.  This permit shall  
be kept within the vehicle and available for inspection by City Officials as required during  
all times water is being drawn from any fire hydrant connected to the city water system.   
In addition to a permit all equipment required by the City to prevent accidental  
contamination of the city water system shall be used at all times while drawing from any  
hydrant connected to the city water system.  The fee for said permit shall be determined  
by a schedule of fees adopted by the City Council by resolution which may be amended  
from time to time.     
  
EXEMPTION:   Contractors performing work as part of a contract with the City of Ammon  
shall be exempt from the fee for said permit for the term of the contract.   A permit shall  
be issued at no charge for each vehicle to be used by the contractor as part of the contract  
after approval by the appropriate City Department Head.  All other requirements of this  
  
Title 8, Chapter 3 Page 13 of 17 Revised 7-12-2018  

  Loading....
chapter shall apply to contractors performing work for the City of Ammon.  
  
Any violation of the provisions of this section shall be deemed to be an infraction.    
  
    
8-3-41:  UNLAWFUL CONTAMINATION OR CROSS-CONNECTIONS:    
Cross-connection control shall be provided in accordance with adopted  
codes and ordinances.  No person shall install any water operated  
equipment or mechanism, or use any water-treating chemical or substance,  
if it is found that such equipment, mechanism, chemical, or substance may  
cause pollution or contamination of the domestic water supply.  Such  
equipment or mechanism may be permitted only when equipped with an  
approved backflow prevention device or assembly.  Prior to installation of  
such equipment a permit shall be applied for and approved by the City  
Engineer and inspected by the City Plumbing Inspector.    
  
Any violation of the provisions of this section shall be deemed to be an infraction.   
  
  
8-3-42:  BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICES:  
  
(A) Backflow prevention devices shall be installed by the property owner,  
tenant, occupant, lessee, or other user of City water where the nature and  
extent of the activities conducted or the materials used or stored on the  
premises would present a hazard to the public health or be deleterious to  
the quality of the City water supply should backflow occur. Even though  
cross-connections may not exist at the time, backflow prevention devices  
shall be installed under circumstances including, but not limited to the  
following:  
  
1. Premises having an auxiliary water supply;  
  
2. Premises having internal cross-connections that are not correctable, or  
having intricate plumbing intricate plumbing arrangements which make it  
impracticable ascertain whether or not cross-connections exist;  
  
3. Premises where entry is restricted so that inspections for cross- 
connections cannot reasonably be made;  
  
4. Premises having a history of cross-connections being established or re- 
established;  
  
5. Premises on which any substance is handled under pressure so as to  
permit the entry of substance into the public water supply; and  
  
6. Premises having pumps or devices which may affect the pressure within  
any line connected to the City water supply.  
  
All backflow prevention devices shall be installed and maintained by the property  
owner at his expense, and shall be of a type commensurate with the degree of  
hazard which exists or which could exist as established by adopted codes. Direct  
  
Title 8, Chapter 3 Page 14 of 17 Revised 7-12-2018  

  Loading....
connections between potable water piping and sewer connected wastes shall not  
exist under any condition with or without backflow protection. All backflow  
prevention devices and the installation thereof shall be approved by the City Water  
Superintendent or his duly authorized representative.  
  
(B) The premise owner or responsible person shall have the backflow  
prevention assembly inspected and tested by a certified backflow assembly  
tester at the time of initial installation and annually thereafter, or more often  
if deemed necessary by the City. Access and clearance shall be provided  
for the required testing, maintenance and repair as set forth in adopted  
codes and the manufacturer’s installation instructions. Whenever a  
backflow prevention device is found to be defective or inoperative, it shall  
be repaired, or replaced at the owner's expense. The City Water  
Superintendent shall retain adequate records of all inspections, tests, or  
repairs made pursuant to this Chapter.  
  
(C) In all cases where a backflow prevention device is required, the owner,  
tenant, occupant, or lessee of the property shall apply in writing to the City  
Building Department for a plumbing permit, specifying the type and location  
of such assembly or assemblies. It shall be unlawful to install, relocate, or  
remove a backflow prevention device or assembly without a permit..      
  
 Any violation of the provisions of this section shall be deemed to be an infraction.   
  
  
8-3-43:  INSPECTION OF NEW CONSTRUCTION:  No building, improvement, or  
other structure shall be connected to the City water supply unless such structure has been  
inspected by the Building Official or other authorized officer of the City and found to be in  
compliance with all City adopted codes governing cross–connection control. Any violation  
of this section shall be prosecuted according to the most current Plumbing Code penalty  
provisions adopted by the City within Title 7, Chapter 4.  
  
  
8-3-44:  INSPECTION OF EXISTING BUILDINGS, STRUCTURES, OR  
IMPROVEMENTS AND TERMINATION OF WATER SUPPLY:  Inspections by the City or  
its authorized agent may be made of any existing buildings, structures, or improvements  
of any nature receiving water from the City supply. The Public Works Director or their  
designee shall make an inspection of any building, improvement, or structure of any nature  
receiving water from the City water supply if there is cause to believe that a cross- 
connection exists or that a backflow prevention device should be installed pursuant to this  
Chapter. Whenever a cross connection or other source of contamination to the water  
supply is found, or it is determined that a backflow prevention device is necessary, the  
cross-connection shall be immediately eliminated or the City shall cease delivery of water  
to such premises and the water supply shall not be resumed until the cross-connection or  
source of contamination is eliminated or a backflow prevention device has been installed  
and tested in accordance with this Chapter.    
  
  
8-3-45:  VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES:   Any violation of the provisions of this  
chapter deemed to be an infraction shall be subject to penalties prescribed for such  
violations under section 1-4-2 of this code and Idaho Code 18-113A.  Each day such  
  
Title 8, Chapter 3 Page 15 of 17 Revised 7-12-2018  

  Loading....
violation continues, shall be a separate violation, which shall be deemed as a separate  
infraction and a citation may be issued therefore. Violations shall be assessed on a per  
violation per day basis and may be assessed at increasing levels of infractions pursuant  
to section 1-4-2 of this code.  
  
Any violation of the provisions of this chapter deemed a misdemeanor shall be subject to  
penalties prescribed for such violations under section 1-4-1 of this code and Idaho Codes  
18-113 and 18-303.  Each day such violation continues, shall be a separate violation,  
which shall be deemed as a separate misdemeanor and a citation may be issued  
therefore. Violations shall be assessed on a per violation per day basis.  
  
Violations of any water conservation proclamation, in effect, is neither a misdemeanor nor  
an infraction but shall be assessed a fee as provided in section 8-3-47 of this chapter.   
  
  
8-3-46:  LANDSCAPE WATERING:  Landscape watering shall be allowed for all  
landscape areas, within the City of Ammon, under the following conditions:  
  
(A) It shall be unlawful for water from a landscape system or sprinkler to spray  
water onto the public roadway.  
  
(B) At times, when a water conservation proclamation is in force, it shall be  
unlawful to water landscaping on days not designated as a watering day  
for the property address.    
  
  
8-3-47:  WATER PROCLAMATION VIOLATIONS:  Violations of any water  
conservation proclamation in effect shall be assessed a fee as set in the water  
conservation proclamation resolution.  
  
(A) The City Enforcement Officer or other authorized agent of the City shall first  
present or deliver a warning to the address of the violating property.  Said  
warning shall be hand delivered to a person at the violating property or in  
absence of a person, shall then be attached to the front door of the property  
explaining the violation and stating the fees for future violations.  
  
(B) Upon a second or subsequent violation, the City Enforcement Officer or  
other authorized agent of the City shall deliver a notice of violation citing  
the date and time of said violation along with the amount of the violation.   
The notice shall include language stating that the amount of the violation  
shall be added to the utility service billing account of the address and is  
due and payable upon the next monthly utility billing.  
  
(C) Future payments of the monthly utility billing shall be credited to the  
violation fee first, then to the monthly utility service fees.  
  
(D) Accounts that become delinquent shall be handled per section 8-3-34 of  
this chapter.    
  
  
  
Title 8, Chapter 3 Page 16 of 17 Revised 7-12-2018  

  Loading....
8-3-48:  PRIVATE WELLS PROHIBITED:  It shall be a violation of this Code for any  
person to drill a well for private use within the City limits of the City of Ammon. without the  
written permission of the City Council after a recommendation from the City Engineer.  Any  
request for a private well shall be presented in writing, to the City Engineer detailing the  
reason, use and purpose of a private well.  The City Engineer shall review the request and  
submit a recommendation to the City Council at a City Council meeting held within thirty  
(30) days of the request. Any well previously approved or annexed shall be allowed to  
continue to operate within the terms of any agreements pertaining to said well.  
  
(A) Any property that contains an existing well that is being annexed to or  
developed within the City limits shall present a proposal for the well to be  
phased out.  The requirements shall be determined by the City Engineer  
with final approval of the City Council.   
  
(B) Any water rights attached to a private well that is abandoned within the City  
limits of Ammon shall be transferred to the City of Ammon at the time of  
abandonment, provided State of Idaho regulations allow for such transfer.   
  
Any violation of the provisions of this chapter deemed to be a misdemeanor.  
  
8-3-49:  FAILURE TO REGISTER FOR SERVICES:  It shall be unlawful for any  
person or business to operate or use the services of the City without first entering into a  
contract with the City for said services.  In the event a person or business begins using  
services prior to entering into said contract, the City shall immediately notify the property  
owner that services will be discontinued to the property effective five (5) working days after  
notification unless all previous billings, fines, fees and deposits have been collected by the  
City.    
   
(A) Previous billings shall include billings to the person or business backdated  
to the closest determinable date of occupation of the property.  
  
(B) Fines and fees shall include those assessed by any department of the City,  
with jurisdiction, related to occupation of a building without the proper  
authority or approvals, including, but not limited to, shut off fees or  
certificate of occupancy violations.  
  
(C) Deposits shall include the related deposits required to initiate services  
within the City, as they may apply to each applicant.  
  
Any violation of the provisions of this section shall be deemed to be an infraction.   
  
  
  
  
  
  
Title 8, Chapter 3 Page 17 of 17 Revised 7-12-2018  

  
CHAPTER 4  
  
SANITATION SERVICE  
  
  
SECTION:  
  
8-4-1: Purpose  
8-4-2: Application  
8-4-3: Definitions  
8-4-4: Accumulation of Refuse  
8-4-5: Deposit of Refuse on Public Property  
8-4-6: Unlawful Use of Refuse Containers  
8-4-7: Sanitation Service Charge  
8-4-8: Removal of Waste  
8-4-9: Residential Waste Containers--Regulations  
8-4-10:  Commercial Containers  
8-4-11:  Use of Containers  
8-4-12:  Compost Piles  
8-4-13:  Collection of Waste Containers  
8-4-14:  Exceptions to Waste Removal  
8-4-15:  Scattering of Waste  
8-4-16:  Commercial Sanitation Services Prohibited  
8-4-17:  Sanitary Service Charges  
8-4-18:  Billings for Sanitary Service  
8-4-19:  Delinquent Accounts  
8-4-20:  Violations  
  
  
8-4-1:  PURPOSE:  The accumulation of waste, refuse, trash, garbage, rubbish,  
and other deleterious substances upon private properties, vacant lots, and in streets and  
alleys constitutes a public nuisance and menace and contributes to the spread of  
infectious, contagious, and epidemic diseases. It is necessary for the preservation of  
health, safety, sanitation, peace, and public welfare that proper and adequate regulations  
be adopted to require property owners and occupants use City provided containers and  
receptacles in which to deposit waste, refuse, trash, garbage, and rubbish for collection  
and removal at regular intervals. The high cost of acquiring capital facilities, equipment,  
and vehicles necessary to provide removal of refuse requires the limitation of the number  
of providers of sanitation services within the City.  
  
  
8-4-2:  APPLICATION. This chapter applies to the delivery of sanitation services  
to all residential, commercial, and industrial properties within the City.  
  
  
8-4-3:  DEFINITIONS:  For the purpose of this chapter, the definitions used in  
Chapter 9, Title 5 of this Code shall also apply to this chapter. Certain other terms shall  
have the meanings ascribed below:  
Title 8, Chapter 4  Page 1 of 5 Revised 7-12-2018  

  Loading....
   
  
CONTAINER, COMMERCIAL:   A container for waste having a capacity in excess  
of 1 cubic yard.   
CONTAINER, RESIDENTIAL: A container for waste provided by the City for a fee  
and used for automated collection.    
OCCUPANT: Any person occupying, possessing, or having  
control of real property located in the City, whether  
as an owner, tenant, or licensee.  
RESPONSIBLE PARTY: The property owner, occupant, tenant or lessee of  
property in the event a landlord agreement has  
been executed with the city.  If no landlord  
agreement has been executed the responsible  
party is the property owner.  
SANITARY SERVICE: The availability of sanitation services provided by  
the Sanitation Department.  
  
  
8-4-4:  REPEALED  
  
  
8-4-5:  REPEALED  
  
  
8-4-6:  UNLAWFUL USE OF REFUSE CONTAINERS:  It shall be unlawful for any  
person to deposit refuse into any waste container assigned to a property owned or leased  
by another without the express or implied permission of the owner or lessee of said  
property.  It shall further be unlawful for any person to remove a waste container from the  
property to which it is assigned.      
  
Any violation of this section shall be deemed an infraction and subject to section 1-4-2 of  
the Ammon City Code.    
  
  
8-4-7:  SANITATION SERVICE CHARGES:  Sanitation services for all occupants  
of real property located within the City shall be provided subject to the occupant's payment  
of the charges and fees established hereafter, and subject to the provisions of this chapter.  
Every occupant shall pay a sanitation service charge in accordance with the rate schedule  
as established by the City Council and which may be amended from time to time,  
irrespective of whether waste is removed from the occupant's residence or business  
during the period for which the charge is made.   
  
  
8-4-8:  REMOVAL OF WASTE:  The Sanitation Department will remove waste  
deposited in residential and commercial waste containers in accordance with the  
provisions of this chapter. The Sanitation Department may decline to remove waste from  
any container which does not meet the requirements of this chapter or waste which is not  
placed in such waste containers. Notwithstanding such removal, every occupant of a  
Title 8, Chapter 4  Page 2 of 5 Revised 7-12-2018  

  Loading....
   
  
residential and commercial property shall have the obligation to remove all waste  
accumulating on property under his or her control, in accordance with Section 5-9-13 of  
the Ammon City Code.   
  
8-4-9:  RESIDENTIAL WASTE CONTAINERS--REGULATIONS:  All residential  
waste containers shall be provided for and remain the property of the City of Ammon.    
  
  
8-4-10:  COMMERCIAL CONTAINERS:  All commercial containers shall consist of  
containers furnished by the City.   
  
  
8-4-11:  USE OF CONTAINERS:  The City shall not provide pickup service to any  
container not provided by the City.    
  
8-4-12:  COMPOST PILES:  Compost piles may be maintained for fertilization  
purposes, and matter used for such purposes may be transported, kept, and used in any  
manner which does not emit obnoxious or offensive odors.  
  
  
8-4-13:  COLLECTION OF WASTE CONTAINERS:  The Sanitation Department will  
collect waste containers in accordance with a collection schedule established and  
promulgated by the Sanitation Department. Occupants needing more frequent removal of  
waste may request such removal from the Sanitation department, and the removal will be  
provided in accordance with the Schedule of rates established by the City Council by  
resolution which may be amended from time to time. All waste containers shall be placed  
adjacent to the private drive of any premises on the day scheduled for pickup, or if the  
premises are not adjacent to a private drive, then at the street curb (street surface), on the  
morning of the day scheduled for collection no later than 8AM. All empty waste containers  
shall be removed and stored on each premises private property off of the street/sidewalk  
within twenty-four (24) of the removal of waste from the container.  
  
  
8-4-14:  EXCEPTIONS TO WASTE REMOVAL:  The Sanitation Department shall  
have no duty to remove the following waste:  
  
(A) Dirt, earth, or debris from construction or building renovation.  
  
(B) Appliances, large or heavy machines, furniture, tree trunks, or other debris  
or waste not placed within a waste container meeting the specifications of  
this chapter.  
  
(C) Hazardous waste, toxic chemicals, waste oils, lubricants, paint, or any  
other substance harmful to life or limb.  
  
(D) Dead animals.  
  
(E) Hot Coals, charcoal, or other items that may melt, burn, or otherwise harm  
the City provided container.  
  
(F) In containers blocked by any obstruction.  
Title 8, Chapter 4  Page 3 of 5 Revised 7-12-2018  

  Loading....
   
  
  
Notwithstanding the foregoing, every occupant of property within the City shall be fully  
responsible to remove such waste from his or her premises.  
  
8-4-15:  SCATTERING OF WASTE:  It shall be unlawful to scatter the contents of  
any waste container upon any street, alley, or public park within the City.  
  
Any violation of this section shall be deemed an infraction and subject to section 1-4-2 of  
the Ammon City Code.    
  
8-4-16:  COMMERCIAL SANITATION SERVICES PROHIBITED:  It shall be  
unlawful for any person to conduct, engage, or otherwise participate in any private  
business undertaking or enterprise for the removal or disposal of waste for pecuniary gain  
or profit. Nothing herein shall prohibit the use of waste for recycling purposes by any  
licensed recycling business; salvage yard, second-hand dealer, or other similarly licensed  
enterprise.  
  
Any violation of this section shall be deemed an infraction and subject to section 1-4-2 of  
the Ammon City Code.    
  
8-4-17:  SANITARY SERVICE CHARGES:  A monthly service charge for sanitary  
services shall be assessed for each residence receiving sewer, water or garbage services  
or any occupied business, which shall be at a rate schedule established by the City Council  
by resolution which may be amended from time to time. The rate schedule shall be kept  
on file in the office of the City Clerk and information furnished to interested parties upon  
request.  
  
  
8-4-18:  BILLINGS FOR SANITARY SERVICE: The charge for sanitary service  
shall be due on a monthly basis, which shall be due and payable on or before the 10th  
day of the month following the close of the preceding month. Payments shall be made in  
conjunction with billings for other utility services as employed by the City of Ammon and  
shall be mailed or delivered to the City Clerk.  
  
  
8-4-19:  DELINQUENT ACCOUNTS:  When the bill is not paid by the 10th of the  
month following the month of service, as hereinabove stated, and the bill remains unpaid,  
the account will become delinquent and shall be handled in the following manner:  
  
(A) On or after the delinquent date, a delinquency statement is to be mailed to  
the responsible party, stating a date the account balance must be paid in  
full.   
  
(B) Following said date, if there has been no response to the mailed statement,  
a notice shall be posted at the residence/location stating the date that the  
collection service shall be terminated and the container shall be picked up.  
A posting fee will be added to the account for said notice.   
  
(C) In cases when sanitation service is terminated and the container is picked  
up for non-payment, there shall be a fee charged for both the pickup and  
delivery of the garbage container plus a daily fee per container from the  
Title 8, Chapter 4  Page 4 of 5 Revised 7-12-2018  

  Loading....
   
  
termination date to the reinstatement date.  Service shall not be reinstated  
unless the account is paid in full.    
    
(D) In the event of payment of a delinquent account, personal checks shall not  
be accepted, and the balance must be paid by cash or one of the following  
certified funds; cashier’s check, certified check, credit card or money order.     
  
(E) Payments received for services by a check that is subsequently returned  
unpaid by any financial institution shall be assessed a return check fee as  
set by resolution of the City Council.  Said fee shall be charged to the  
customer’s utility account and charges for utilities that said check was to  
pay shall also be billed back to the customer’s utility account.   Any returned  
check must be paid within five (5) working days from the time the notice is  
given by the City of the returned check or the utility account shall be  
considered delinquent. All fees shall be paid in full prior to reinstatement of  
services.  Partial payments of amounts due shall be applied to check fees  
prior to being applied to services.  
  
(F) All fees associated with the collection of a delinquent account shall be  
assessed to the utility account of the responsible person.  Said fees shall  
include but not be limited to attorney fees, certified mailing, and serving  
fees.  
  
  
  
8-4-20:  VIOLATIONS:  Any violation of the provisions of this chapter deemed to be  
an infraction shall be subject to penalties prescribed for such violations under section 1- 
4-2 of this code, subject to the provisions of Idaho Code 18-111 and 18-113A.  Each day  
of the violation shall be considered a separate offense and shall be punishable by separate  
fines and imprisonment as provided for herein.  
Title 8, Chapter 4  Page 5 of 5 Revised 7-12-2018  

   
  
sewer line, storm drain line, telephone line, fiber optic  
line, electrical line, cable TV line, conduit, gas line or any  
other structure or related facilities in any street, alley,  
easement, or other public right of way of the City.  
   
UNDERGROUND FACILITY: Any item buried or placed below for use in connection  
with the storage, conveyance or transmission of potable  
water, waste water, electronic communications, data,  
radio frequency, light, cable television, electrical energy,  
petroleum products, gas, gaseous vapors, hazardous  
liquids, or other substances, including, but not limited to  
pipes, sewers, conduits, cables, valves, lines, wires  
manholes, attachments, and those parts of poles or  
anchors located below ground.  
   
All days except Saturdays, Sundays, and legal City  
WORKING DAYS:  
holidays.  
   
WORKING HOURS: The hours from eight o'clock (8:00) a.m. to five o'clock  
(5:00) p.m. of any working day.  
  
  
8-5-2:  PERMIT REQUIRED:     No person shall engage in any construction,  
repair, improvement or excavation in any street, alley, easement, or other public right of  
way within the City without first obtaining a permit to be approved by the City Engineer or  
their designee and issued by the City Clerk or their designee for such construction,  
repair, improvement or excavation.  The issuance of a permit by the City and the  
acceptance of said permit by the licensee shall constitute acceptance by the licensee of  
all provisions of this chapter in addition to all obligations created by the enactment of this  
chapter.   
  
 Exceptions:  Unless facts exist which would reasonably cause an excavator to  
believe that an underground facility exists within the depth of the intended excavation, a  
permit shall not be required for the following excavations:  
  
(A) The tilling of soil to a depth of less than 15 inches for agricultural purposes;  
  
(B) For placement of highway guardrail posts, sign posts, delineator posts,  
culverts, electric poles, telephone poles, and traffic control device supports  
in the same approximate location and depth of the replaced item within a  
public highway right of way.  
  
Any violation of the provisions of this section shall be deemed to be an infraction and  
subject to section 1-4-2 of the Ammon City Code.    
  
8-5-3:  INSURANCE:   No permit shall be issued pursuant to this chapter  
unless the applicant presents with the application, or has on file with the City Clerk, a  
certificate of insurance from an insurance company qualified to write insurance contracts  
within the State of Idaho, certifying that the applicant has a policy of public liability  
insurance in an amount of not less than five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000) single  
Title 8, Chapter 5 Page 2 of 6  Revised 7-12-2018  

  Loading....
   
  
limit liability for personal injury, death, and property damage; provided, however, if the  
work to be done under the permit is limited to excavation in an easement situated  
entirely on private property or is for construction of a concrete sidewalk, driveway, or  
curb and gutter within a street right of way, but parallel with and adjacent to private  
property, the amount of such insurance shall be not less than one hundred thousand  
dollars ($100,000) single limit for personal injury, death, and property damage. Said  
insurance policy shall contain a clause requiring that the City be given at least thirty (30)  
days advance written notice in the event of expiration or anticipated cancellation. The  
permit shall be revoked at the time such insurance expires or is canceled unless a  
certificate of comparable insurance is filed with the City Clerk prior to the time of cancel- 
lation or expiration of the original policy of insurance.  
  
  
8-5-4:  SUBMISSION OF APPLICATION FOR PERMIT:    All  
applications shall be submitted to the City Clerk or their designee for processing.    
  
A. All submissions shall be submitted on an application form approved by the City  
Clerk.  
B. All submissions shall be submitted to the City Clerk, at least ten (10) days prior to  
the contemplated construction within the public rights-of-way.    
C. All applications shall include specific type and location descriptions for the  
proposed lines or facilities, including details where the proposed lines or facilities  
shall be located within the public rights-of-way and the construction methods to  
be used for the proposed installation.  Applications shall include maps as  
required by the City Engineer.  Additional information may be required as  
necessary for approval by the City Engineer.  
D. As required by the City Engineer, a traffic control plan shall be submitted for any  
project that will involve obstruction of the roadway surface, including the shoulder  
of said roadway.  
E. After receival, the City Clerk shall send the request to the City Engineer who shall  
review the application.  Upon approval of the City Engineer, the City Clerk shall  
notify the applicant and prepare a copy of the approved right of way permit.  
F. The City Clerk will notify the applicant of approval or denial of a permit.   
Notification may be done via email or USPS mail at the request of the applicant.      
G. All permits and applications shall be kept on file in the City Office as required by  
Idaho State retention laws.  
H. No permit shall be issued until all required documentation has been received in  
the office of the City Clerk and approved by the City Engineer or their designee.  
  
  
8-5-5:  LOCATION PROCEDURE:    Prior to excavation the applicant  
shall order an underground facilities location from the designated one-number locator  
service for the City of Ammon.  Such notification shall meet all the requirements of Title  
55, Chapter 22 of the Idaho State Code.     
  
  
8-5-6:  CITY NOTIFICATION PROCEDURE:   Notice shall be given not  
more than forty-eight hours (48) nor less than twenty-four (24) hours prior to  
commencing construction, repair, or excavation.  If the permitee, after commencing  
work, shall cease construction, repair, or excavation for more than one working day, then  
notice shall again be given to the Director of Public Works or a designated  
Title 8, Chapter 5 Page 3 of 6  Revised 7-12-2018  

  Loading....
   
  
representative not more than forty-eight (48) hours nor less than twenty-four (24) hours  
prior to the time when construction, repair, or excavation shall again commence.  In the  
event the City is providing the location service, there will be a maximum of two (2)  
locates done at no charge for any single location.  Any locates requested above two (2)  
shall be charged at a rate as adopted by resolution of the Council  
  
  
8-5-7:  COMPLETION OF WORK AND BACKFILLING:    Any permit  
issued pursuant to this chapter carries with it an obligation to respect orderly  
management and maintenance of public rights-of-way by the applicant. An applicant  
authorized hereby to use public rights-of-way shall employ sound construction practices  
to maintain the integrity of public improvements and preexisting rights-of-way conditions  
and shall be responsible for repair or replacement of any improvements or maintenance  
or restoration of any conditions disrupted by construction activities. The applicant shall  
cause any such repair or replacement to be made promptly and in a manner that  
complies with adopted standards or as is otherwise appropriate to restore the rights-of- 
way to conditions existing before installation. All work shall be expeditiously performed  
and completed as soon as reasonably possible. Upon completion of construction or  
repair, the permitee shall promptly backfill any street, alley, easement, or other public  
right of way in which permitee has made any excavation. Such backfilling shall be done  
in accordance with the City Standard Drawings and Engineering Specifications adopted  
by ordinance or resolution of the City.  
  
  
8-5-8:  TIME TO COMPLETE REPAIRS:    Permanent asphalt repairs  
shall be completed by the permitee not later than three (3) days after the excavation has  
been backfilled, unless otherwise authorized by the Director of Public Works or a  
designated representative.  If weather conditions prohibit permanent repairs, the Director  
of Public Works or a designated representative may authorize the use and installation of  
temporary cold patches. Such temporary cold patches shall be replaced by the permitee  
as soon as weather permits. The permit issued by the City Clerk shall provide a  
signature line for the closing of all permits issued.  The Director of Public Works or their  
designee shall sign off acceptance of the completion of repairs on all permits issued  
stating the repair has been completed to City standards and closing the permit.  Signed  
permit shall be submitted to the City Clerk for record keeping.  
  
  
8-5-9:  CITY ENGINEER TO REVIEW EXISTING AND FUTURE USE OF RIGHT  
OF WAY:   The City Engineer or their designee, as part of the review of an  
application shall review the existing and proposed future public utilities or municipal  
services within the right of way.  Such review shall endeavor to minimize conflicts and  
avoid damage to existing or otherwise planned facilities.   
  
  
8-5-10:  MAINTENANCE AND SAFEGUARDS:    The permitee shall  
continuously maintain the construction, repair, or excavation site in a safe condition and  
keep the site free from any condition that may cause risk of harm to any person or  
property at all times after the work has commenced and until all work, including  
permanent patching, has been completed and accepted by the City according to the  
requirements of section 8-5-8 of this chapter.  During such time, permitee also shall  
provide, install, and continuously maintain proper safeguards, signs, and barricades at  
Title 8, Chapter 5 Page 4 of 6  Revised 7-12-2018  

  Loading....
   
  
the construction, repair, or excavation site. Such signs and barricades shall conform to  
the requirements and standards set forth in the most recent edition of the Manual on  
Uniform Traffic Control Devices published by the U.S. Department of Transportation,  
Federal Highway Administration, or any other manual adopted by the Idaho Department  
of Law Enforcement pursuant to the provisions of Idaho Code Section 49-201 and any  
traffic control requirements of the permit.  
  
  
8-5-11:  WARRANTY OF REPAIRS:    The permitee shall warrant to the  
City the adequacy and continued satisfactory condition and function of all backfill and  
permanent patches installed by permitee or by any agent or employee of permitee for a  
period of one year after the permanent patch has been accepted by the Public Works  
Director. Such warranty shall extend only to any unsatisfactory condition or function  
caused by inferior design, workmanship, and materials furnished by permitee or by any  
agent or employee of permitee.  Warranty of repair time frame shall not begin until a  
request has been filed and an acceptance letter from the City has been approved by the  
Public Works Director, a copy of which shall be kept on file in the City Clerk’s office.  
  
   
8-5-12:  REPAIRS BY CITY:    If the permitee fails to install permanent  
patching within three (3) days after completion of backfill, or if the permitee fails to honor  
the warranty set forth in the preceding section after demand by the City, the City may  
complete the work and make such repairs. If such repairs are completed by the City, the  
City may charge the cost of the repairs to the permitee. The cost of repairs shall be  
based upon the actual charges and cost to the City of repairs at the time the repair was  
completed. If the permitee is charged with the City's costs of repairs, the permitee shall  
pay such cost within five (5) days after the City has given written notice to permitee of  
the cost.    
  
  
8-5-13:  REMEDY FOR NONCOMPLIANCE:    If any permitee fails to  
perform any duty imposed by this chapter or if any permitee fails to pay cost the costs  
assessed pursuant the preceding section within the time provided therein, the City, at its  
option and upon prior written notice to permitee, may cancel or revoke all permits held  
by the permitee, and deny issuance of further permits for construction, repair, or  
excavation in public rights of way or easements of the City to the permitee or the  
company they represent.  
  
  
8-5-14:  NO DUTY:   Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed or construed to  
impose any private duty or obligation upon the City to properly or accurately locate any  
utility line or facility or to insure a result of the failure of any permitee to comply with the  
provisions hereof.  
  
  
8-5-15:  PERMIT FOR OPEN ACCESS: A permit issued to the applicant shall  
grant open, comparable, nondiscriminatory and competitively neutral access to the  
public rights-of-way within the City of Ammon jurisdiction.   
  
  
Title 8, Chapter 5 Page 5 of 6  Revised 7-12-2018  

  
   
  
8-5-16:  LICENSE FEE: The City may impose a permit fee on an applicant  
relating to the opening, closing, inspection or repair of public rights-of-way over which  
rights-of-way the City has jurisdiction.  Any fee established shall be determined by a  
schedule of fees adopted by the City Council by resolution which may be amended from  
time to time.  
  
8-5-17:  EMERGENCY REPAIRS:   In cases of emergency repairs, the  
Contractor may proceed with the necessary repairs without a request for a permit under  
the following conditions.  
  
1. Except under extreme circumstances all location requirements much be met.  
2. A request for a permit and explanation of the emergency shall be submitted  
on the first working day after the emergency repair has been performed.  All  
other terms of this chapter shall be met when submitting for a permit for  
emergency repairs.  
3. Documentation, as required by the City Engineer shall be submitted as part of  
the explanation of an emergency repair.  
4. NO extension of lines or facilities shall be performed on an emergency repair.  
  
  
Title 8, Chapter 5 Page 6 of 6  Revised 7-12-2018  

   
  
structure, fixture, or business upon any public sidewalk within the City, except as  
permitted by Sections 8-6-5 through 8-6-9 of this chapter.  
  
  
8-6-4: SALE OF MERCHANDISE:  It shall be unlawful to sell, display, or  
advertise the sale of any goods, wares, merchandise, food, or beverage upon or from  
any cart, rack, or structure situated upon any public sidewalk within the City, except as  
permitted by Sections 8-6-5 through 8-6-9 of this chapter.  
  
  
8-6-5: PUBLIC FIXTURES:  Notwithstanding Sections 8-6-2 through and  
including 8-6-4 of this chapter, the City or the State of Idaho may install, place, and  
maintain utility poles and equipment, fire hydrants, traffic signs and signals, benches,  
receptacles for decorative trees and plants, and any other publicly-owned fixtures or  
structures upon public sidewalks within the City.  
  
  
8-6-6: INSTALLATION OF MAILBOXES:  INSTALLATION OF MAILBOXES:  
Notwithstanding Sections 8-6-2 through and including 8-6-4 of this chapter, mailboxes  
may be installed, constructed, and maintained upon the public sidewalks and right of  
ways subject to the following restrictions and standards:   
  
(A)  The mailbox shall be securely attached to its post to prevent separation if struck. It  
shall be placed so the bottom edge of the mail drop slot is no less than 41 inches and no  
more than 45 inches from the surface of the road.  The mailbox support shall be no  
larger than 4” X 4”, or a 2” diameter standard steel or aluminum pipe, buried no more  
than 24”.    
   
(B) The face of the mailbox should be set back no less than 6 inches and no more than 8  
inches from the curb or edge of road service.   
  
(C ) No part of the mailbox or structure shall protrude towards the street beyond the back  
edge of the curb or curb line nor extend towards the residence more than fifteen inches  
(15") from the back edge of the curb line.   
  
(D) The requirement for those mailboxes attached to a sidewalk and not buried is that  
the foot of the pipe shall be grouted or otherwise securely embedded in a hole through  
the sidewalk not exceeding six inches (6") in diameter, the center of which shall be no  
more than eight inches (8") nor less than six inches (6") from the back of the curb edge  
or curb line.   
  
(E) Barrels, cans, receptacles, stones, masonry, or other non-metallic materials  
supporting the structure, except as set forth hereinabove are prohibited.   
  
(F) Spikes, decorations, metal works, or other items shall not protrude from the structure  
in a manner which creates an unreasonable risk of bodily injury or harm to pedestrians.   
  
  
8-6-7: NON-CONFORMING MAILBOXES:  All mailboxes installed prior to the  
effective date of this Code shall be deemed to be in conformity with this section;  
Title 8 Chapter 6  Page 2 of 6  Revised 7-12-2018  

  Loading....
   
  
provided, however, if such mailbox is removed, any replacement thereof shall conform to  
the standards set forth in this chapter.  
  
  
8-6-8: NOTICE OF VIOLATION:  Prior to the issuance of any citation for a  
violation of Section 8-6-3 of this Code, the Public Works Division of the City shall give  
notice in writing to all persons owning or controlling land abutting or adjoining a section  
of sidewalk where a mailbox exists in violation of this chapter. The notice shall be  
personally served upon an adult residing upon said land and shall notify the person  
owning or controlling the land to remove the mailbox or bring it into conformity with the  
standards of this chapter within thirty (30) days after receipt of the notice.  
  
  
8-6-9: SIDEWALK SALES:  
  
(A) Notwithstanding Sections 8-6-2 through and including Section 8-6-4 of this  
chapter, goods, merchandise, food, and beverages may be sold or displayed from carts  
or other structures upon public sidewalks subject to the following restrictions and  
standards set forth in this section.  
  
(B) Definition:  For the purpose of this section, the term "downtown area" shall mean  
the commercial area where business is conducted.  
  
(C) Sales in Downtown Area:  Any licensed merchant or other person conducting a  
lawful business may place tables, racks, stands, carts, or other structures upon a public  
sidewalk located within the downtown area for the purpose of selling or displaying  
goods, wares, merchandise, food, or beverages, subject to the restrictions set forth in  
Section 8-6-9(E) of this section.  
  
(D) Sales in Other Areas:  The City Council may, by resolution duly passed and  
adopted, declare a day or days during which licensed merchants or other persons  
conducting a lawful business may place tables, racks, stands, carts, or other structures  
upon a public sidewalk located outside the downtown area for the purpose of selling or  
displaying goods, wares, merchandise, food, or beverages, subject to the restrictions set  
forth in Section 8-6-9(E) of this section.  
  
(E) Standards:  Any table, rack, stand, cart, or other structure placed upon any public  
sidewalk as permitted by this section shall comply with the following regulations and  
restrictions:  
  
1. All structures shall be placed parallel to the edge of the sidewalk furthest  
from the public street and at a distance no greater than four feet (4') from  
the back edge of the sidewalk.  
1. No such structure shall project on or over or be located in any part of any  
public street or alley; nor shall any such structure rest upon the public  
sidewalk in any area where a public alley or private driveway exits into a  
public street.  
  
2. No such structure shall be placed within fifteen feet (15') of any fire  
hydrant.  
  
Title 8 Chapter 6  Page 3 of 6  Revised 7-12-2018  

  Loading....
   
  
3. No such structure shall be placed within three feet (3') of any marked  
crosswalk, street light pole, utility pole, traffic sign pole, fire call box,  
police call box, or other emergency facility, designated bus stop, or  
designated loading or unloading zone.  
  
4. No such structure shall have any spikes, decorations, or protrusions  
which create unreasonable risk of bodily injury or harm to pedestrian; nor  
shall any cords, ropes, wires, or other materials or devices of any kind or  
nature be placed across the public sidewalk or in a manner which would  
cause or create an unsafe or dangerous condition.  
  
5. All goods, wares, merchandise, food, or beverages shall be placed upon  
a table, rack, stand, cart, or other permitted structure and shall not be  
placed directly upon the public sidewalk.  
  
  
8-6-10: NEWS RACKS, NEWS VENDING MACHINES, AND NEWSSTANDS:    
  
(A) Notwithstanding Sections 8-6-2 though and including Section 8-6-4 of this  
chapter, news racks, news vending machines, and newsstands may be installed, used,  
or maintained upon public sidewalks subject to the following restrictions and standards:  
  
(B) Definitions:  For the purposes of this section a "news rack" is any structure,  
stand, platform, stall, box, rack, booth, or other structure or device used for the  
distribution of newspapers, magazines, or other printed news media.  
  
(C) Encroachment on Public Streets Prohibited:  No person shall install, use, or  
maintain any news rack which projects onto, into, or over any part of the roadway of any  
public street or alley, or which rests wholly or in part, upon, along, or over any portion of  
such roadway.  
  
(D) Interference with Public Uses Prohibited:  No person shall install, use, or  
maintain any news rack which in whole or in part rests upon, in, or over any public  
sidewalk when such installation, use, or maintenance endangers the safety of persons or  
property, or when such site or location is used for public utility purposes, public  
transportation purposes, or other government use, or when such news rack  
unreasonably interferes with or impedes the flow of pedestrian or vehicular traffic, the  
ingress into or egress from any crosswalk, residence, place of business, or any legally  
parked or stopped vehicle, or the use of poles, posts, traffic signs, or signals, hydrants,  
mailboxes, or other public structures or objects installed at said location.  
  
(E) Standards:  Any news rack which in whole or in part rests upon, in, or over any  
sidewalk shall comply with the following standards:  
  
1. No news rack may exceed fifty inches (50") in height, thirty inches (30") in  
width, or two feet (2') in depth.  
  
2. News racks may be placed only near a curb or adjacent to and parallel  
with the wall of a building adjoining the sidewalk or the edge of the  
sidewalk furthermost from the public street. News racks placed near the  
curb shall be placed no less than twelve inches (12") nor more than  
Title 8 Chapter 6  Page 4 of 6  Revised 7-12-2018  

  Loading....
   
  
eighteen inches (18") from the back edge of the curb; however, in  
locations not adjacent to a parking stall, news racks may be placed not  
less than three inches (3") from the back edge of the curb. News racks  
placed adjacent to the wall of a building or back edge of the sidewalk  
shall be placed not more than six inches (6") from such wall or edge of  
the sidewalk. No news rack may be placed or maintained on a sidewalk  
opposite another news rack.  
  
3. No news rack may be chained, bolted, or otherwise attached to any fire  
hydrant, pole, bench, receptacle, or other public fixture.  
  
4. News racks may be chained or otherwise attached to each other;  
however, no more than three (3) news racks may be joined together in  
this manner, and a space of no more than six inches (6") shall separate  
each news rack and a space of no less than eighteen inches (18") shall  
separate each group of three (3) news racks so attached.  
  
5. No news rack, or group of attached news racks, shall weigh, in the  
aggregate, in excess of one hundred twenty-five (125) pounds when  
empty.  
  
6. No news rack shall be placed, installed, used, or maintained:  
  
i. Within three feet (3') of any marked crosswalk.  
  
ii. Within fifteen feet (15') of the curb return of any unmarked  
crosswalk.  
  
iii. Within three feet (3') of any street light pole, utility pole, fire  
hydrant, fire call box, police call box, or other emergency facility.  
  
iv. Within three feet (3') of any driveway.  
  
v. Within three feet (3') ahead of, and fifteen feet (15') to the rear of,  
any sign marking a designated bus stop.  
  
vi. Within three feet (3') of any designated loading or unloading zone.  
  
vii. Within three feet (3') of any publicly-owned bench.  
  
viii. At any location whereby the clear space for the passage of  
pedestrians is reduced to less than five feet (5'); however, in the  
event the sidewalk is less than six feet (6') in width, then the clear  
space shall not be reduced to less than three feet (3').  
  
ix. Within three feet (3') of any display window abutting the sidewalk  
in a manner which impedes or interferes with the reasonable use  
of such window for display purposes.  
  
Title 8 Chapter 6  Page 5 of 6  Revised 7-12-2018  

  Loading....
   
  
(F) Advertising Limitations:  No news rack shall be used for advertising signs for  
publicity purposes other than that dealing with the display, sale, or purchase of the  
newspaper or news periodical sold therein.  
  
(G) Maintenance:  Each news rack shall be maintained in a clean, neat, and  
attractive condition and in good repair at all times. No news rack may be painted in a  
garish or gaudy color or manner.  
  
(H) Identification:  Every person who places, maintains, or operates a news rack  
upon the public sidewalk shall have his name, address, and telephone number affixed  
thereto in a conspicuous place.  
  
  
8-6-11:  VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES:  Any violation of the provisions of this  
chapter shall be deemed an infraction and shall be subject to penalties prescribed for  
such violations under section 1-4-2 of this code, subject to the provisions of Idaho Code  
18-111 and 18-113A.  Each day of the violation shall be considered a separate offense  
and shall be punishable by separate fines and imprisonment as provided for herein.   
  
  
Title 8 Chapter 6  Page 6 of 6  Revised 7-12-2018  

   
  
  
C. Protection/Preservation  
  
1. Obtain a permit from the City Forester before performing any activity  
which may harm any part of a public tree (inclusive of the critical root  
zone).  
2. Notify the City Forester when any part of a public tree has been  
damaged or destroyed.  
  
 Responsibilities For Private Trees  
  
D. Routine Tree Maintenance  
  
1. Removal or pruning of trees located on the owner’s private real  
property that are considered a public nuisance as defined in  section  
8-7-15.  
2. Branches that overhang sidewalks or streets shall be pruned to  
provide sufficient vertical clearance over the sidewalk and street so as  
not to interfere with public travel as provided by this section.  
3. Control of pests on trees located on the owner’s private real property  
which may, upon determination by the City Forester, pose a threat to  
public trees.  
4. Removal of all debris (wood, branches and leaves) from public  
property by sunset of the day on which any tree work is done.  
  
   
8-7-11:  PERMITS  
  
A. It is prohibited for any person to perform any of the following actions without first  
obtaining a permit, for which there is no fee, from the City Forester.  Further,  
there is nothing contained in this section to exempt any person from the  
requirements of obtaining any additional permits as required by law:  
  
1. Plant trees on public rights-of-way or in any other public places.  
2. Prune, cut, remove or otherwise disturb any public tree.  This provision  
shall not prohibit owners of property adjacent to public rights-of-way from  
watering or fertilizing such trees.  
3. Attach any objects to public trees.  
4. Excavate, trench, dig, or pile soil any other object within the critical root  
zone of any public tree(s).  
  
B. Permit Application Procedures  
  
1. Contact the City Forester by mail, phone, fax, or e-mail prior to the  
beginning of the proposed work.  
2. The City Forester may condition the approval of any permit.  
3. Upon inspection, the City Forester may issue a permit to perform any of  
the acts addressed in part A of this section.  
  
  
  
Title 8, Chapter 7    Page 9 of 13    Revised 7-12-2018   
    
  

  Loading....
   
  
  
C. Tree Planting Permits  
  
1. Each application submitted for a planting permit must designate the  
species and variety of the public tree proposed.  The location of the  
planting shall be determined by the City Forester.  
2. Approval of tree species, placement, spacing, and minimum tree well size  
shall be obtained from the City Forester prior to issuing a permit.  
3. For any reason if a tree in planted in conflict with this provision in this  
Chapter, the City Forester has authority to remove or cause the removal  
of the same.  The cost of the tree removal may be charged to the person  
responsible for the planting.  
  
D. Tree Pruning/Removal Permits  
  
1. Before pruning or the removal of any public tree, and application for  
permit must be submitted by the property owner or private tree company  
currently licensed by the City.  
2. Whenever a tree on public rights-of-way is removed, the applicant shall  
replace the removed tree as a condition of the permit for removal unless  
otherwise specified by the City Forester.  Conditions may include  
compensatory payments as indicated in section 8-7-13.  
  
  
8-7-12:  DAMAGING, DESTROYING, OR MUTILATIING PUBLIC TREES:     It is  
prohibited and unlawful for any person to:  
  
A. Damage, destroy, or mutilate any public tree.  
B. Attach any device or structure (i.e. tree houses, lights) to or on any public tree  
unless otherwise specified by the City Forester.  
C. Store, spill, or dump and substance either liquid or solid that may be harmful to  
trees on any part of a public tree or within the critical root zone of a public tree.  
D. Damage public trees through construction activities in violation of the conditions  
of a permit issued under this Chapter.  Such activities include, but are not limited  
to:  
1. Making excavations or cuts in the soil near roots of public trees unless  
otherwise specified by the City Forester.  
2. Damage roots of a public tree by compacting or placing fill within the  
critical root zone of a tree.  
3. Engage in any pruning activity on public trees not in accordance with  
ANSI A300, including, but not limited to;  topping, heading, rounding or  
shearing unless otherwise specified by the City Forester.  
  
  
8-7-13:  COMPENSATORY PAYMENTS:     For any reason a person should remove,  
destroy, or damages any public tree, that person shall be required to replace such tree  
with a tree(s) of equal dollar value unless otherwise determined by the City Forester.   
The value of the tree shall be determined by the City Forester in accordance with  
accepted plant appraisal methods found in the latest edition of The Guide for Plant  
  
  
Title 8, Chapter 7    Page 10 of 13    Revised 7-12-2018   
    
  

  Loading....
   
  
Appraisal published by the International Society of Arboriculture.  In the event that no  
suitable tree is located or if the replacement tree(s) is of lesser value, the person causing  
the tree to be removed shall make a compensatory payment to the City of Ammon equal  
to the difference in value between the tree removed and any replacement tree(s).  In the  
event the City Forester determines that a public tree is damaged but not sufficiently to  
justify its removal shall be considered devalued.  The amount of the devaluation shall be  
paid to the City of Ammon by the person causing the damage.  Collected compensatory  
payments shall be placed into a fund established for community forestry programs.    
  
  
8-7-14:  VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES: Any violation of the provisions of this chapter  
shall be deemed an infraction and shall be subject to penalties prescribed for such  
violations under section 1-4-2 of this code, subject to the provisions of Idaho Code 18- 
111 and 18-113A.  Each day of the violation shall be considered a separate offense and  
shall be punishable by separate fines and imprisonment as provided for herein. In  
addition to any criminal penalties that may be imposed, the City of Ammon may pursue  
civil penalties and restitution for actual damages as defined in section 8-7-13.  
  
  
8-7-15:  PUBLIC NUISANCES:     The following are considered to be public nuisances  
under this Chapter:  
  
A. Any tree or part thereof (private or public) which, by reason of location or  
condition, constitutes a hazard to public safety as determined by the City  
Forester.  
B. Any tree or part thereof (on public or private property) which obstructs the free  
passage of pedestrian or vehicular traffic or which obstructs public street lighting.  
C. Any tree or alternate host plant or part thereof (on public or private property)  
which harbors pests which reasonably may be expected to injure or harm public  
trees.    
  
  
8-7-16:  ABATEMENT OF PUBLIC NUISANCES:     The following are means of abating  
public nuisances:  
  
A. Any tree or host plant or part thereof (public or private) determined to be a public  
nuisance as described in section 8-7-15 shall be pruned, removed or otherwise  
treated in accordance with this Chapter.  All costs for nuisance abatement are  
the responsibility of the adjacent property owner.  
  
B. The City Forester is authorized to cause the immediate abatement of any  
nuisance if it is determined by the City Forester to be an emergency or  
immediate hazard to public safety.  
  
C. The City Forester may cause a written notice to be personally delivered or sent  
by mail to the owner of the particular property.  
  
D. In any case that the nuisance is not abated by the specified date in the notice,  
the City Forester is authorized to cause the abatement of determined nuisance.   
  
  
Title 8, Chapter 7    Page 11 of 13    Revised 7-12-2018   
    
  

  Loading....
   
  
The reasonable cost of abatement shall be charged to the property owner.  The  
property owner shall reimburse the City said abatement costs within 30 days  
after notification of said cost by the City.  If the property owner does not pay said  
abatement amount, the City shall be entitled to collect the same together with all  
attorney fees and court costs incurred in said collection.  Further, the property  
owner where the nuisance is located may be subject to prosecution under this  
Chapter, or any other Chapter of the City Code or the Idaho Code for maintaining  
a public nuisance.  
  
E. If the City Forester determines that disposal of the wood, branches and soil from  
removal of pruning of a nuisance tree is needed to complete the abatement, such  
disposal shall be completed as required and all costs associated with the  
disposal of material from private trees shall be the responsibility of the property  
owner.  
  
  
8-7-17:  LICENSING OF PRIVATE TREE SERVICES:     It shall be unlawful for any  
person to engage in the trade or commercial business of pruning or removing trees  
located on public property without first procuring a license from the City Forester.  
  
A. Each applicant for a license or renewal thereof shall make application to the City  
Forester on a form to be furnished by the City.  The form shall be signed by the  
applicant and shall contain such information as may be required by the City  
Forester.  Information shall include, but not limited to :  
  
  
1. The business name, address, home address and telephone number of  
the company president or owner(s).  
2. Proof of current arborist certification with the International Society of  
Arboriculture held by at least one person on staff of the business in a  
supervisory capacity and approved by the City Forester.  
3. Demonstration that arboricultural work is in accordance with ANSI A300  
may be required prior to approval of license.  
  
  
4. A certificate of liability and property damage insurance by an insurer  
authorized to do business within the state of Idaho.  Such insurance  
policy shall provide not less than $500,000.00 or the amount currently  
required by Idaho Code Title 6.  
   
B. After examining the applicant’s qualifications, the City Forester shall approve or  
disapprove the application.  If the application is approved, the applicant shall file  
the application with the City Clerk along with an annual fee shall be determined  
by a schedule of fees adopted by the City Council by resolution which may be  
amended from time to time.    
  
C. All licenses shall expire one (1) year from the date of issue unless another date is  
endorsed on the license by the Clerk.   
  
  
  
Title 8, Chapter 7    Page 12 of 13    Revised 7-12-2018   
    
  

  Loading....
   
  
D. If for any reason the person performing the tree care does not comply with the  
provisions of this Chapter, the City Forester is authorized to revoke or suspend  
the tree care license.  Failure to maintain arborist certification or required  
insurance shall also result in suspension or revocation.  In the event of a  
revocation of said license, the City Clerk shall mail a letter informing license  
holder of revocation of license.    
  
  
8-7-18:  APPEALS:  
  
A. Any person affected by an order, grant, denial, or revocation of a license or  
permit by the City Forester may appeal such order, grant, denial or revocation to  
the Ammon City Council.  
  
B. Such appeal shall be filed in writing with a fee which shall be determined by a  
schedule of fees adopted by the City council by resolution which may be  
amended from time to time. Appeal and fee shall be submitted to the City Clerk  
within 10 days of the date of notification.   
  
C. The appeal shall be heard by the City Council.  Action by the City Forester and  
the appellant shall be delayed until the decision of the City Council is rendered.  
  
D. The City Council may in conformity with the provisions of this Chapter reverse,  
affirm or modify wholly or partly, the order, grant, denial or revocation of any  
permit and the decision of the City Forester.  
  
E. The decision of the City Council shall be final.  
  
  
  
Title 8, Chapter 7    Page 13 of 13    Revised 7-12-2018   
    

  
CHAPTER 8  
  
MAINTENANCE AND CONSTRUCTION  
OF SIDEWALKS AND CURBS  
  
  
SECTION:  
  
8-8-1:  Duty of Property Owners  
8-8-2:  Order for Construction or Maintenance  
8-8-3:  Special Assessment  
8-8-4:  Construction Specifications  
8-8-5:  Permit for Trap Doors  
8-8-6:  Openings in Sidewalks  
8-8-7:  Coverings Upon Sidewalks  
8-8-8:  Penalty  
  
8-8-1:  DUTY OF PROPERTY OWNERS:  Any person who owns real property within the  
City shall be responsible for all maintenance and construction of sidewalks and curbs adjacent  
to said property.    
  
A. The property owner or their designee shall remove any snow, ice, or other unsafe  
condition upon any sidewalk, curb, and gutter abutting his or her property within 72  
hours of occurrence or notice thereof.    
  
Any violation of the provisions of this sub-section shall be deemed an infraction and  
subject to section 1-4-2 of the Ammon City Code.  
  
B. The property owner of real property within the city or their designee shall maintain and  
replace any deteriorated sidewalk curb and gutter abutting his/her property within 30  
days of order regarding construction or maintenance received from the city.  
  
  
8-8-2:  ORDER FOR CONSTRUCTION OR MAINTENANCE:  The City may order any  
person who fails to perform his or her duty under section 8-8-1-B, upon a finding that such  
sidewalk, curb, and gutter have not been constructed or maintained in accordance with the  
provisions of this chapter. Upon the issuance of such order, the City shall serve a notice  
advising the owner of such property of such owner's violation of this chapter.  Notice shall be  
considered served when one or both of the following requirements are met:  
  
A. The notice shall be served upon the owner by depositing the same into the United States  
mail, certified mail, return receipt requested, postage prepaid, and addressed to the  
owner at the last known address or address shown on the assessment rolls of  
Bonneville County.   
  
Title 8, Chapter 8 Page 1 of 3 Revised 7-12-2018  

  Loading....
   
  
B. If the owner is unknown or cannot be located notice shall be published for two (2)  
consecutive issues in an official newspaper of the City.  If the owner is unknown, said  
publication shall designate the owner as “Unknown Owners” with the description of the  
property to be proposed, together with a description of the character of the  
improvement(s) required, and proof of any such publication shall be filed with the City  
Clerk.  
  
Such notice shall advise the owner that if the sidewalk and curb and gutter are not constructed  
or maintained in accordance with the provisions of this chapter within thirty (30) days after the  
date of such notice, the City Council may order that such work be accomplished, and the costs  
thereof be assessed against the real property adjacent to such sidewalk and curb and gutter.  
  
  
8-8-3:  SPECIAL ASSESSMENT:  In the event any property owner fails to install or  
maintain the sidewalk and curb and gutter adjacent to the owner's property within thirty (30)  
days after a notice is mailed to the owner in accordance with the preceding section, the City  
Council may cause the work to be accomplished and charge the reasonable cost therefore  
against the owner of such property. Upon completion of the work, the City Council shall send a  
Notice of Assessment to the property owner advising the owner of the amount of the costs  
incurred in performing such work and advising the owner that if such amount is not paid within  
thirty (30) days after the date of such notice a special assessment will be made against such  
property in the manner permitted by law, and that twenty-five percent (25%) of the amount  
thereof will be added to such amounts as a penalty. Such notice shall be mailed to the property  
owner in the manner set forth in the preceding section. In the event the property owner fails to  
pay such amount prior to expiration of thirty (30) days from the date the notice was mailed, the  
City Engineer shall certify to the City Council the amount of such costs incurred, and the Council  
may then order the City Treasurer to cause a special assessment to be levied and assessed  
against the property in the amount of such costs, together with the twenty-five percent (25%)  
penalty, in the manner set forth in Idaho Code Section 50-1008.  
  
  
8-8-4:  CONSTRUCTION SPECIFICATIONS:  The construction of all sidewalks, curbs,  
and gutters shall be in accordance with the City Standard Drawings and Engineering  
Specifications.  
  
  
8-8-5:  PERMIT FOR TRAP DOORS:  It shall be unlawful to construct, maintain, or  
operate any trap door, opening, grating, or other opening within or upon a public sidewalk,  
without an approval in writing of the City Engineer or his/her designee.    
  
Any violation of the provisions of this section shall be deemed an infraction and subject to  
section 1-4-2 of the Ammon City Code.  
  
  
8-8-6:  OPENINGS IN SIDEWALKS:  It shall be unlawful for any person to fail or neglect  
to maintain any trap door, opening, or grating approved by the City Engineer, or to fail or neglect  
to keep the same securely closed while any doors covering the same are not in use, or to take  
all reasonable and necessary safety precautions to prevent harm and injury to person or  
Title 8, Chapter 8 Page 2 of 3 Revised 7-12-2018  

  Loading....
   
  
property. All openings for elevators, coal chutes, or service entrances or openings of any kind  
within a public sidewalk shall be constructed and installed in such manner as to prevent entry of  
storm waters or floods from the street or sidewalk.    
  
Any violation of the provisions of this section shall be deemed an infraction and subject to  
section 1-4-2 of the Ammon City Code.  
  
8-8-7:  COVERINGS UPON SIDEWALKS:  All sidewalk doors, coal chutes, and  
coverings and supports therefore shall be made of steel or cast iron, shall be placed flush with  
the sidewalk surface, shall have a corrugated surface or other finish that will prevent slippage  
thereupon, and shall be so constructed as to support a load of not less than 200 pounds per  
square foot.  
  
  
8-8-8:  PENALTY: Any violation of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed an  
infraction and shall be subject to penalties prescribed for such violations under section 1-4-2 of  
this code, subject to the provisions of Idaho Code 18-111 and 18-113A.  Each day of the  
violation shall be considered a separate offense and shall be punishable by separate fines as  
provided for herein.   
    
  
  
Title 8, Chapter 8 Page 3 of 3 Revised 7-12-2018  

8-9-4:     NO OBLIGATION TO SERVE: The City shall have an obligation to provide Access to  
any provider or subscriber. The City shall not be obligated to construct extensions or install  
additional facilities necessary to meet a Customer's needs, except as explicitly authorized by  
the Director.  The City reserves the right to limit or refuse Access at its sole discretion, provided  
access shall not be denied or limited on the basis of race, religion, age, national origin or  
gender.  
  
  
8-9-5:     APPLICABILITY:     The provisions of this chapter shall apply only to the Fiber Optic  
System.  Nothing herein shall be construed or deemed to regulate the delivery of  
communications or data services over or across lines, facilities, or equipment owned by a  
private communications provider, or which may be located in the public right-of-way pursuant to  
a franchise, lease, or other license or privilege granted by the City.  
  
  
8-9-6:     TRANSFER OF RIGHTS PROHIBITED:     All rights to Access and any rights or  
privileges arising under the provisions of this Chapter shall not be transferred to any person or  
entity without the express written approval of the Director.  
  
  
8-9-7:     BILLINGS:         Fiber Optic Utility System Access provided by the City shall be billed  
to the Customer in accordance with a schedule of rates as established by the City Council by  
resolution which may be amended from time to time, and such rates shall be kept on file in the  
office of the City Clerk and information furnished to interested parties upon request.  
  
8-9-8:     LIMITATIONS:   Access to the City of Ammon Fiber Optic system shall be provided  
only to those customers that have been connected via a residential or commercial fiber optic  
project or by separate contract for services negotiated by the Director and approved by the City  
Council.  
Fiber Optic System Access may be supplied under a given rate schedule provided that the fiber  
optic system has the ability to meet the requirements of the rate schedule applicable thereto.  
Nothing herein shall be construed or deemed to prevent the City from negotiating separate  
contracts with any customer solely for the purpose of obtaining assistance in constructing or  
installing additional plant for the benefit of said customer.  Such negotiations shall be handled  
by the Director and approved by City Council.  
  
8-9-9:     RIGHTS OF WAY:     The City may condition providing transport or plant upon the  
customer's dedication or conveyance to the City of a utility easement for the installation,  
operation and maintenance of the City's fiber system, over, across and upon property owned or  
controlled by the customer or the customer's landlord.  Such utility easement may also be used  
for the purpose of providing Access to other customers of the City.  Such utility easement shall  
permit access thereto by authorized representatives of the City at all reasonable hours or at any  
time in any emergency situation. By acceptance of or submission of an application for fiber optic  
access, the customer shall be deemed to waive any claim for damages to the customer's  
Title 8, Chapter 9 Page 3 of 7 Revised 7-12-2018  
   

  Loading....
property or equipment located within such utility easement, arising from the operation or  
maintenance of the Fiber Optic System therein.  Such acceptance or application shall also be  
deemed to constitute a waiver of any claim for damages arising from a taking or any severance  
damages with respect to a customer's underlying fee, simple interest.  
  
  
8-9-10:     LIABILITY FOR INTERRUPTIONS:     The City shall not be liable for any loss, injury  
or damage of any kind, including but not limited to consequential, special and punitive damages,  
resulting from the interruption, reduction, loss or restoration of Access from any cause, including  
without limitation any loss by fire, flood, accident, casualty, sabotage, terrorist act, strike, labor  
slow-down, act of God or the public enemy or failure or inadequacy of the Fiber Optic System.  
The City disclaims any express or implied warranty of merchantability or fitness for a particular  
purpose and the delivery of Access to any customer shall not be construed as or deemed to be  
the delivery of goods under the Idaho Uniform Commercial Code.  By acceptance of transport or  
plant, the customer agrees to, and shall be deemed to, waive any and all claims for damage or  
loss to the customer's lines, facilities, or communications equipment caused by any act or  
omission of the City, however, nothing herein shall be deemed or construed as a waiver of any  
claim for damage or liability arising out of the gross negligence or malicious act of the City, or its  
agents.  
  
  
8-9-11:    INTERRUPTION OF SERVICE SUPPORT:  Support for fiber optic system  
outages shall be handled as follows:  
Residential Service:  
Single Residential Property:  Shall be confined to best effort during regular business  
hours.  No service for a single service will be provided outside of regular business hours.     
Multiple Residential Properties:  Residential outages of 3 or more contiguous properties  
will receive support 24 hours a day, 7 days a week, and 365 days a year.   
Commercial Service:  
Commercial support shall always be given priority and available 24 hours a day, 7 days  
a week, and 365 days a year.    
   
8-9-12:       SHUT-DOWN FOR REPAIRS:     For the purpose of making necessary  
repairs, upgrades or changes to its Fiber Optic System, or to avoid damage to property or to  
persons, the City may without prior notice to the customer suspend Access for such periods as  
may be reasonably necessary to make such repairs, upgrades or changes and the City shall not  
be liable for damage of any kind, direct or indirect, as a result of such discontinuance of Access.  
  
8-9-13:     INTERFERENCE WITH THE FIBER OPTIC SYSTEM:     The City may refuse to  
supply Access where there is a possibility that the delivery of such may seriously impair or  
disrupt any other customers, or which may disrupt the operation of the Fiber Optic System.  The  
City may also discontinue or disconnect Access for a Customer if the Customer, by their use of  
the Fiber Optic System, is seriously impairing any other Customer’s use of the Fiber Optic  
Title 8, Chapter 9 Page 4 of 7 Revised 7-12-2018  
   

  Loading....
System. The City may also, without prior notice, suspend or disconnect any customer using the  
Fiber Optic System for the purposes of delivering any virus, spam, spyware, denial of service  
attacks, or any other illegal or malicious purpose which has the effect of or is intended to impair  
or impede the operation of the Fiber Optic System, the internet, or any public or private  
computer or computer network connected thereto or for the purpose of obtaining illegal or  
unauthorized access to other computers or networks connected to the Fiber Optic System.  
  
  
8-9-14:     PROTECTION OF THE CUSTOMER’S EQUIPMENT:     The customer is solely  
responsible for the selection, installation and maintenance of all equipment and wiring on the  
customer side of the Demarcation Point.  The customer shall install and maintain suitable  
protective devices and equipment to protect life and property from harm or injury and the City  
assumes no duty to warn or otherwise assist the customer in the selection or use of such  
protective devices.  
  
  
8-9-15:     TAMPERING WITH FIBER OPTIC SYSTEM PROHIBITED:     Other than City  
representatives working under the supervision of the Director, no person shall connect to, adjust,  
tamper with or make any alteration or addition to the Fiber Optic System, without having first  
obtained written permission from the Director. Any person who willfully or maliciously causes  
damage to, interference with or obstruction to the efficient operation of the Fiber Optic System  
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.  Any person who causes such damage shall in addition to any  
criminal fines or penalties, be liable to the City for any reasonable damages which may be  
proximately caused by such damage or interference.  Such amounts may be included upon the  
customer's regular monthly billing statement for utility service and upon the customer's failure or  
refusal to pay such charges, Fiber Optic System Access or any other public utility service provided  
by the City, may be terminated in accordance with the procedures set forth in this chapter.    
Any violation of the provisions of this section shall be deemed a misdemeanor and subject to  
section 1-4-1 of the Ammon City Code.  
8-9-16:     THEFT OF ACCESS OR USE:     It shall be unlawful for any person to make any  
connection to or install or construct any facility or equipment with the specific intent of obtaining  
Access from or making use of the Fiber Optic System, without paying for such Access or without  
paying the fees and charges established by the provisions set forth in this chapter.   
  
8-9-17:        FIBER OPTIC RATES, FEES:   Fiber Optic Rates Established. The City Council  
shall establish fiber optic rates and any associated fees by resolution which may be amended  
from time to time, and such rates shall be kept on file in the office of the City Clerk and information  
furnished to interested parties upon request.  
  
8-9-18:  DUE DATE:  Bills rendered for participation in the fiber optic system are payable  
ten (10) days following the month of service and as such the bill is due in full at such time. If the  
account is not paid by the 10th of the month following the due date, the account will become  
delinquent. When the due date falls on a legal holiday or on a day when City offices are not open  
for business, the next regular business day is considered the due date and the past due date.  
Title 8, Chapter 9 Page 5 of 7 Revised 7-12-2018  
   

  Loading....
When remittances are made by mail, bills shall be deemed paid on the date of mailing as shown  
by the postmark.  
  
th 
8-9-19:        DELINQUENT ACCOUNTS:  When a utility account is not paid by the 10 of the  
month following the month of service, as hereinabove stated, and the bill remains unpaid, the  
account will become delinquent and shall be handled in the following manner:  
(A) On or after the delinquent date, a delinquency statement is to be mailed to the  
responsible party, stating a date the account balance must be paid in full.   
  
(B) If there has been no response to the mailed delinquency statement by the deadline  
date in said statement, a notice shall be posted at the residence/location stating  
the date that the utility access will be terminated. A posting fee will be added to the  
account for said notice.    
  
(C) In cases when a notice is posted at the residence/location, the customer can make  
payment or arrangements for payment prior to the disconnection of service.  
  
(D) In cases when services is terminated for non-payment, there shall be a fee charged  
which shall include payment for the shut off and the future reconnect  Service shall  
not be restored until the account is paid in full by approved funds as listed in item  
(F).   
  
(E) Notice of termination shall be posted at the residence/location stating the date that  
the termination/disconnection will be performed.    
  
(F) In the event of payment of a delinquent account, personal checks shall not be  
accepted, and the balance must be paid by cash or one of the following: certified  
funds; cashier’s check, certified check, credit card or money order.     
   
(G) Payments received for services by a check that is subsequently returned unpaid  
by any financial institution shall be assessed a return check fee as set by resolution  
of the City Council.  Said fee shall be charged to the customer’s utility account and  
charges for utilities that said check was to pay shall also be billed back to the  
customer’s utility account.   Any returned check must be paid within five (5) working  
days from the time the notice is given by the City of the returned check or the utility  
account shall be considered delinquent. All fees shall be paid in full prior to  
reinstatement of services.  Partial payments of amounts due shall be applied to  
check fees prior to being applied to services.  
  
8-9-20:  VOLUNTARY DISCONNECT: Fiber optic service may be voluntarily  
disconnected at any time by written request to the City of Ammon administrative office of the City.   
Title 8, Chapter 9 Page 6 of 7 Revised 7-12-2018  
   

  Loading....
There shall be no charge for a voluntary disconnect.  Reconnection of voluntarily disconnected  
service shall be charge a reconnection fee set by resolution of the City Council.  
  
8-9-21:  SERVICES PROVIDED: Fiber Optic Utility Access may include emergency,  
lifeline or other public safety or welfare services as part of the utility rate for Ammon property  
owners.  The City shall not provide any retail end user service, such as voice, video or Internet  
that is not directly related to the City’s police powers or public health and welfare as part of the  
utility rate.  
  
8-9-22:  SEPARATE CONTRACT AUTHORIZED: Nothing herein shall be construed or  
deemed to prevent the City from negotiating separate contracts or agreements with any  
customer for the purpose of obtaining assistance in constructing or installing additional plant for  
the benefit of said customer or providing services not included in the utility rate structure.  Such  
negotiations shall be handled by the Director and approved by City Council.  
  
8-9-23:  CONTINUING OBLIGATION OF EXISTING CONTRACTS:  All contracts in  
effect on the date of the adoption of this code shall remain in effect until said contract expires.   
Upon expiration of a contract all new contracts shall be charged pursuant to the rates set by  
resolution of the Council or by negotiation of a new contract as with the Director and approved  
by the City Council.    
  
  
  
8-9-24:     VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES:     Any violation of the provisions of this chapter  
deemed to be a misdemeanor shall be subject to penalties prescribed for such violations under  
section 1-4-1 of this code. Any person violating the provisions of this chapter deemed to be an  
infraction shall be subject to the penalties as provided for in section 1-4-2.  Violations of this  
chapter shall be deemed an infraction, unless such violation is designated in this chapter as a  
misdemeanor.  
Title 8, Chapter 9 Page 7 of 7 Revised 7-12-2018  


Title 09 Traffic Regulations and Control

CHAPTER 1  
  
TRAFFIC REGULATIONS  
  
  
SECTION:  
  
9-1-1: Applicability of Regulations  
9-1-2: Adoption of Idaho Motor Vehicle Laws  
9-1-3: Copies  
9-1-4: Enforcement  
9-1-5: Obedience to Police Officers  
9-1-6: Construction Crews  
9-1-7: Following Fire Engine  
9-1-8: Parking Near Emergency Vehicles  
9-1-9: Crossing Fire Hose  
9-1-10:  Regulatory Adoption  
9-1-11:  Swales  
  
  
9-1-1:  APPLICABILITY OF REGULATIONS:   The provisions of this title shall  
apply to the operation of all vehicles upon the streets, alleys, and places within the City.  
  
  
9-1-2:  ADOPTION OF IDAHO MOTOR VEHICLE LAWS:   There is hereby  
adopted for the purpose of establishing rules and regulations for the use of all streets  
and public thoroughfares of the City of Ammon, and as the ordinances of the City of  
Ammon, that certain code identified as the Idaho Motor Vehicle Laws, Rules of the  
Road, Title 49, Idaho Code, published by the Department of Law Enforcement, and as  
the same may hereafter be revised or amended by the Idaho legislature or amended by  
a governing body. The same is hereby adopted and incorporated as an ordinance of the  
City of Ammon as fully as though set forth at length herein.  
  
  
9-1-3:  COPIES:  One (1) copy, which may be electronic, of the Idaho Motor  
Vehicle Laws, Rules of the Road, Title 49, Idaho Code, published by the Department of  
Law Enforcement, and as the same may hereafter be revised or amended by the Idaho  
legislature, duly certified, kept and made available by request, by the City Clerk.    
  
  
9-1-4:  ENFORCEMENT:   Any person who violates any traffic or motor vehicle  
law within the City shall be guilty of an infraction and shall be punishable in accordance  
with the provisions of Title 49, Chapter 15, Idaho Code, as the same now exists or as  
amended hereafter. All peace officers shall follow the procedures set forth in such  
chapter when issuing citations for infractions.  
  
  
9-1-5:  OBEDIENCE TO POLICE OFFICERS:   Any person who fails or refuses  
to comply with any lawful order or direction of any duly designated officer of the City, or  
Title 9 Chapter 1 Page 1 of 4 Revised 7-12-2018  

  Loading....
   
  
any other police officer of Bonneville County or the State of Idaho, shall be guilty of a  
misdemeanor.  
  
  
9-1-6:  CONSTRUCTION CREWS:   This chapter shall not apply to the operation  
of any vehicle while the operator is actually engaged in the construction, repair, or  
maintenance of any street, alley, sidewalk, curb, gutter, or any utility located therein, if  
such operator is an employee of the City or has a permit or is otherwise lawfully  
authorized to perform such work.  
  
  
9-1-7:  FOLLOWING FIRE ENGINE:   Any person, who operates a vehicle within  
500 feet of any fire engine, equipment, or vehicle responding to a fire alarm, except  
persons operating a police, fire, or public safety vehicle, shall be guilty of an infraction.  
  
  
9-1-8:  PARKING NEAR EMERGENCY VEHICLES:   Any person who parks any  
vehicle within 500 feet of any police, fire, or emergency vehicle responding to a fire  
alarm shall be guilty of an infraction.  
  
  
9-1-9:  CROSSING FIRE HOSE:   Any person who drives any vehicle over any  
fire hose while such hose is being used to suppress any fire, without the consent of a  
police officer or the fire official in command, shall be guilty of an infraction.  
  
  
9-1-10:  REGULATORY ADOPTION:  
  
(A) The City Council of the City of Ammon, on the basis of an engineering or traffic  
investigation or the residential character of the neighborhood abutting a state  
highway in an urban district may provide, by ordinance or resolution, that the  
speed limit permitted under the Idaho statutes in Title 49, Idaho Code, is greater  
or less than is reasonable and safe under the conditions found to exist upon such  
state highway or part of a highway, or because of the residential character of the  
neighborhood abutting the highway in an urban district, and may determine and  
declare a reasonable and safe maximum limit which:  
  
1. Decreases the limit within an urban district; or  
  
2. Increases the limit within a non-residential area of an urban district, but  
not to more than 55 miles per hour; or  
  
3. Decreases the limit outside an urban district.  
  
(B) The City Council of the City of Ammon shall determine, by an engineering or  
traffic investigation, the proper maximum speed not exceeding a maximum limit  
of 55 miles per hour for all arterial highways and shall declare a reasonable and  
safe maximum limit which may be greater or less than the limit permitted under  
Title 49, Idaho Code, for an urban district.  
  
Title 9 Chapter 1 Page 2 of 4 Revised 7-12-2018  

  Loading....
   
  
(C) Any altered limit established shall be effective at all times or during hours of  
darkness or at other times as may be determined when appropriate signs giving  
notice are erected upon the highway. Any alteration of maximum limits on state  
highways or extensions in the municipality by the local authorities shall not be  
effective until the alteration has been approved by the Department of  
Transportation of the State of Idaho.  
  
(D) The City Council of the City of Ammon may, with respect to highways under the  
jurisdiction of the City of Ammon, and within the reasonable exercise of police  
power upon the passage of any ordinance or resolution, adopt a regulation:  
  
1. Regulating or prohibiting stopping, standing, or parking;  
  
2. Regulating traffic by means of peace officers or traffic control devices;  
  
3. Regulating or prohibiting processions or assemblages on the highways;  
  
4. Designating particular highways for use by traffic moving in one direction;  
  
5. Establishing speed limits for vehicles in public parks;  
  
6. Designating any highway as a through highway or designating any  
intersection or junction on highways as a stop or yield intersection or  
junction;  
  
7. Restricting the use of highways as authorized in Chapter 10, Title 49,  
Idaho Code;  
  
8. Regulating or prohibiting the turning of vehicles or specified types of  
vehicles;  
  
9. Altering or establishing speed limits;  
  
10. Designating no-passing zones;  
  
11. Prohibiting or regulating the use of controlled-access highways by any  
class or kind of traffic;  
  
12. Prohibiting or regulating the use of heavily-traveled highways by any  
class or kind of traffic found to be incompatible with the normal and safe  
movement of traffic;  
  
13. Establishing minimum speed limits;  
  
14. Prohibiting pedestrians from crossing a highway in a business district or  
any designated highway except in a crosswalk;  
  
15. Restricting pedestrian crossings at unmarked crosswalks;  
  
16. Establishing the maximum speed of vehicles on a bridge or other  
elevated structure;  
Title 9 Chapter 1 Page 3 of 4 Revised 7-12-2018  

  Loading....
   
  
  
17. Requiring written accident reports;  
  
18. Regulating persons propelling pushcarts;  
  
19. Regulating persons upon skates, coasters, sleds, and other toy vehicles;  
  
20. Adopting and enforcing temporary or experimental regulations as may be  
necessary to cover emergencies or special conditions;  
  
21. Prohibiting drivers of ambulances from exceeding maximum speed limits;  
  
22. Adopting such other traffic regulations as are specifically authorized by  
Title 49, Idaho Code.  
  
(E) The City Council of the City of Ammon may adopt such regulations as are  
provided in paragraph (D) of this ordinance upon consideration of the reports of  
the officers of the City of Ammon or upon the basis of their own investigation or  
other reports which shall be considered in making such regulations either by  
ordinance or resolution.  
  
(F) No ordinance or resolution enacted under subparagraphs 4 and 16 of paragraph  
(D) shall be effective until traffic control devices giving notice of local traffic  
regulations are erected upon or at the entrances to the highway or the part  
thereof affected as may be most appropriate.  
  
  
9-1-11:  SWALES:   It shall be unlawful for any person to park, drive or operate  
a motorized vehicle within any designated right of way dedicated as a swale within the  
City of Ammon.  Any violation of the provisions of this section shall be deemed an  
infraction and subject to section 1-4-2 of the Ammon City Code.    
  
9-1-12:  PENALTY:   
  
INFRACTION:  Any violation of the provisions of this chapter deemed an infraction shall  
be subject to penalties prescribed for such violations under section 1-4-2 of this code,  
subject to the provisions of Idaho Code 18-111 and 18-113A.  Each day of the violation  
shall be considered a separate offense and shall be punishable by separate fines as  
provided for herein.   
  
MISDEMEANOR:   Any violation of the provisions of this chapter deemed to be a  
misdemeanor shall be subject to penalties prescribed for such violations under section  
1-4-1 of this code, subject to the provisions of Idaho Code 18-111 and 18-113.   
  
Title 9 Chapter 1 Page 4 of 4 Revised 7-12-2018  

CHAPTER 2  
  
TRAFFIC CONTROL SIGNS AND SIGNALS  
  
  
SECTION:  
  
9-2-1:  Adoption of Uniform Manual  
9-2-2:  Display of Unauthorized Signs or Signals  
9-2-3:  Tampering with Traffic Control Devices  
9-2-4:  Penalty  
  
  
9-2-1:  ADOPTION OF UNIFORM MANUAL:   The City hereby adopts the  
Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices published by the U.S. Department of  
Transportation, Federal Highway Administration, or any other manual adopted by the  
Idaho Department of Law Enforcement pursuant to the provisions of Idaho Code Section  
49-201. All traffic signs, signals, and devices installed within the City shall conform to the  
provisions of such uniform manual, except as otherwise expressly ordered by the city  
council.  
  
  
9-2-2:  DISPLAY OF UNAUTHORIZED SIGNS OR SIGNALS:   Any person who  
places, maintains, or displays upon any street, alley, public right of way, or private  
property any unauthorized sign, signal, marking, or device which imitates or resembles  
any official traffic control sign, signal, or device is guilty of an infraction and subject to  
section 1-4-2 of the Ammon City Code.  Such signs, signals, or devices may be  
summarily removed by any police or fire or public safety officer or any employee of the  
Public Works Division.   
  
  
9-2-3:  TAMPERING WITH TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES:   Any person, who  
tampers with, alters, injures, destroys, removes, defaces, or knocks down any official  
traffic control sign, signal, or device, without lawful authority to do so, shall be guilty of an  
infraction and subject to section 1-4-2 of the Ammon City Code.    
  
  
9-2-4: SIGN INSTALLATION:  
  
 The City Engineer shall be responsible for issuing work orders for traffic control  
signs determined to be necessary within the City.  Signs may be those ordered as part of  
a Council resolution or as determined reasonable and necessary by the City Engineer.  
  
  
9-2-5:  PENALTY: Any violation of the provisions of this chapter shall be  
deemed an infraction and shall be subject to section 1-4-2 of the Ammon City Code.    
  
  
Title 9, Chapter 2 Page 1 of 1 Revised 7-12-2018  

CHAPTER 3  
  
SPEED REGULATIONS  
  
  
SECTION  
  
9-3-1:  Basic Rule  
9-3-2:  Establishment of Speed Limits  
9-3-3:  General Speed Limit  
9-3-4:  Minimum Speed Regulations  
  
  
9-3-1:  BASIC RULE:   Any person who operates a vehicle within the limits of the  
City, at a speed greater than is reasonable and prudent under the conditions and having  
regard to the actual and potential hazards then existing shall by guilty of an infraction  
subject to section 1-4-2 of the Ammon City Code.  
  
  
9-3-2:  ESTABLISHMENT OF SPEED LIMITS:   The City Engineer shall be  
responsible for the overseeing of the speed limits posted within the City.  As needed, the  
City Engineer shall make a recommendation for changes to speed limits within the City.   
Such recommendations shall be based on traffic studies and/or an investigation which  
may include observation of a needed change.  The City Engineer shall then make a  
presentation to the City Council who shall by action at a City Council meeting approve or  
deny the City Engineer’s recommendation.    
  
  
9-3-3:  GENERAL SPEED LIMIT:   The general speed limits, unless altered as  
provided in the next preceding section, shall be as follows:  
  
(A) Thirty five (35) miles per hour on all arterial roadways within the City.  
  
(B) Twenty five (25) miles per hour on all streets other than arterial roadways.  
  
(C) Twenty (20) miles per hour in all posted school or safety zones.  
  
(D) Such limits may be altered subject to the provisions of 9-3-2 and upon posting  
notice thereof.  
  
  
9-3-4:  MINIMUM SPEED REGULATIONS:   Any person who drives a vehicle at  
such a slow speed as to impede or block the safe and efficient movement of vehicular  
traffic shall be guilty of an infraction and shall be subject to section 1-4-2 of the Ammon  
City Code.   
  
  
Title 9, Chapter 3 Page 1 of 1 Revised 7-12-2018  
  

  
manner shall be guilty of an infraction and subject to section 1-4-2 of the Ammon City  
Code, to wit:  
  
1. Where the wheels of such vehicle closest to the curb are greater than eighteen  
(18) inches.  
  
2. At a distance of greater than eighteen (18) inches between the curb and the point  
on the front bumper of such vehicle closest to the curb, where the area is  
designated for angle parking.  
  
3. Where a vehicle is not parked with the passenger wheels parallel to the right- 
hand curb and/or parallel to the edge of the asphalt.    
  
  
9-4-8:  UNATTENDED MOTOR VEHICLE: Any person who owns or has control  
of any motor vehicle and who leaves the vehicle upon any public streets or property,  
private property or private property open for public use without first stopping the engine,  
locking the ignition, and removing the key therefrom, effectively setting the parking brake  
and when parked upon a grade without turning the front wheel to the curb or side of street  
to prevent the vehicle from rolling into traffic shall be guilty of an infraction and subject to  
section 1-4-2 of the Ammon City Code.            
  
  
9-4-9:  ABANDONED/STORAGE OF VEHICLES OR PROPERTY: Any motor  
vehicle or commercial vehicle parked upon public streets within the City of Ammon for a  
period of in excess of seventy two (72) hours shall be deemed to have been abandoned  
or stored and the law enforcement official or an official designated by the City may cause  
the same to be removed and impounded in a place for safe-keeping at the owner’s  
expense.  Any motor vehicle or commercial vehicle that has been tagged by any law  
enforcement official or City Enforcement Officer shall be removed from said Public Street  
for a minimum of twenty four (24) hours prior to being parked on a public street.  
  
  
9-4-10:  IMPOUNDING FEES: Any law enforcement official or official designated by  
the City may remove, or cause to be removed, and impound any vehicle parked in violation  
of the provisions of this Chapter or causing a hazardous condition, at the owner’s expense.   
The city is not responsible for any towed motor vehicle, commercial vehicle, trailer, boat,  
recreational vehicle, camper, any item of property or abandoned property including their  
contents.  
  
  
9-4-11:  IMPOUND AND PAYMENT OF TOWING AND STORAGE FEES:   
  
1. The owner of any motor vehicle, commercial vehicle, trailer, boat, recreational  
vehicle, camper, any item of property, or abandoned, property impounded,  
removed from City streets, towed, or stored under this Code or any law of the State  
of Idaho shall pay to the impounding agency all impound and storage fees prior to  
gaining possession of said vehicle.  
  
Title 9, Chapter 4    Page 5 of 9    Revised 7-12-2018  
  

  Loading....
  
2. Should the owner of said vehicle or property fail to pay the impound fees and  
storage charges, the city or its impounding agent may proceed to foreclose its lien  
for such fees and charges as per current State law.  
  
  
9-4-12:  ESTABLISHING AND DESIGNATING PARKING ZONES: The City  
Engineer may establish and designate parking and loading zones upon the streets of the  
City as deemed necessary.  Upon designation of a parking zone, the City Engineer shall  
order the zone to be designated by painting or otherwise marking lines upon the street  
surface, the adjacent curb, or posting a restricted parking sign designating the area within  
which such zones are located.    
  
9-4-13:  REPEALED   
  
9-4-14:  PARKING IN LOADING OR PARKING ZONES:   Any vehicle parked within  
a parking or loading zone shall be parked entirely within the markings designating one  
parking space; shall be parked parallel or diagonal to the curb in accordance with the  
markings of the parking space; and in case of diagonal parking, shall be parked so that  
the front portion of the vehicle closest to the curb is within eighteen (18) inches of the curb.   
A person may park a vehicle in a loading zone for the purpose of immediately unloading  
persons, supplies, or merchandise.  
  
  
9-4-15:  REPEALED   
  
  
9-4-16:  PERSONS WITH A DISABILITY PARKING: Any person who parks or  
allows a vehicle to be parked in any parking space designated for use by persons with a  
disability and signed in conformity with the next section of this Code is guilty of an  
infraction, unless the vehicle is momentarily in the space for the purpose of allowing a  
persons with a disability to enter or leave the vehicle, or unless special license plates or a  
card or temporary card issued for the persons with a disability pursuant to Idaho Code  
Section 49-410 displayed on the vehicle.  For the purposes of this section, the registered  
owner of a vehicle who has expressly or impliedly consented to the use of his or her vehicle  
shall be deemed to have allowed the parking of such vehicle by the person to whom such  
consent was given.  The “persons with a disability” shall have the same meaning as  
described in Idaho code Section 49-117.          
  
  
9-4-17:  DESIGNATION OF PERSONS WITH A DISABILITY PARKING SPACE:  
For the purposes of the preceding section, parking spaces shall be marked as per Idaho  
Code Sections 49-410 and 49-213.  
  
  
9-4-18:  UNAUTHORIZED PARKING ON PRIVATE PROPERTY: Any person, who  
parks or leaves unattended any motor vehicle, commercial vehicle, trailer, boat,  
recreational vehicle, camper, any item of property, or abandoned property upon any  
private property that is posted with one or more signs that are placed visibly from each  
vehicular entrance to the premises and are in English and is without the consent of the  
owner or person thereof, will be guilty of an infraction.  
  
Title 9, Chapter 4    Page 6 of 9    Revised 7-12-2018  
  

  Loading....
  
  
9-4-19:  ENFORCEMENT ON PUBLIC OR PRIVATE PROPERTY OPEN FOR  
PUBLIC USE:  
  
1. The provisions of Section 9-4-16 and 9-4-17 shall be enforceable with respect to  
persons with a disability parking spaces upon public property and private property  
open to public use.  
  
2. Parking restrictions shall be enforceable in any fire apparatus access road upon  
public property and private property open to public use.  
  
3. Any unauthorized parking on private property in the provision of Section 9-4-18  
shall be enforceable.  
  
  
9-4-20:  NOTICE OF PARKING VIOLATIONS:  
  
1. A NOTICE OF VIOLATION of parking regulations of this chapter may be issued by  
any law enforcement official or an official designated by the City.  The NOTICE OF  
VIOLATION shall be issued by placing it on the windshield of an illegally parked  
motor vehicle, commercial vehicle, trailer, boat, recreational vehicle, camper, item  
of property or abandoned property in a secure manner, or in a prominent place  
therein.  A separate notice shall be issued for each parking regulation violated per  
day.  
2. The NOTICE OF VIOLATION shall state the date and time when it is issued and  
the nature of the parking violation observed.  The notice shall advise the owner or  
operator of the motor vehicle, commercial vehicle, trailer, boat, recreational  
vehicle, camper, item of property or abandoned property that he or she must admit  
or deny the violation and appear as listed on the citation:  
3. Any person issued a parking notice may enter an admission by Mailing the  
NOTICE OF VIOLATION with the amount of the penalty stated thereon to the  
address indicated on the NOTICE.  
  
To deny and appear:  
  
4. Citations issued and ordered to pay on an Idaho Uniform Citation shall go before  
the Bonneville County Magistrates Court on the date and time indicated on the  
NOTICE OF VIOLATION. Failure to appear for the NOTICE OF VIOLATION shall  
be reason to cause a summons and criminal complaint to be served upon such  
person.  
5. Citations issued and ordered to pay to the Ammon City Offices shall go before the  
City of Ammon Traffic Hearing Board of Adjustment by requesting a hearing review  
at the City of Ammon offices, either in person or by written request.  Any request  
for a Hearing Board review must be made within fourteen (14) days from the date  
of the issuance of the citation.  After said date the City of Ammon may take actions  
as adopted by the City Council.  All violations are subject to the fees set by the City  
of Ammon City Council by resolution which may be changed from time to time.  
  
  
9-4-21:  PENALTIES:     Any person who violates any parking regulation herein is  
guilty of an infraction and shall be subject to section 1-4-2 of the Ammon City Code.  
Title 9, Chapter 4    Page 7 of 9    Revised 7-12-2018  
  

  Loading....
  
  
  
9-4-22:  ADDITIONAL REMEDIES PRESERVED: The issuance of a notice of  
violation shall not be the exclusive remedy for enforcing the parking regulations of this  
chapter and all other lawful remedies are reserved, including prosecution by filing a  
criminal complaint for failing to respond and answer to an infraction violation.  
  
  
9-4-23:   ADOPTING OF ADDITIONAL PARKING RESTRICTIONS:  
  
1. The City Engineer may after reviewing and making the determination that  
there is a need, restrict parking upon certain areas without impeding the  
free flow of traffic or creating a safety hazard or dangerous and hazardous  
condition to pedestrians or other vehicular traffic.  Upon determining the  
needs for said restrictions the City Engineer shall order signs to the erected  
and placed as needed.  
  
2. The City Council may, after finding as herein stated, adopt a resolution to  
restrict parking to one side of streets and in such event, shall order signs  
to be erected upon such street directing that parking shall be allowed only  
upon one side.  
  
3. The Mayor of the City of Ammon or their designee may from time to time  
determine that all motor vehicles shall be removed from designated streets  
for the purpose of cleaning, clearing, repairing, snow removal, community  
events and for traffic management for limited periods or to establish  
emergency no parking zones.  
  
4. Upon the determination to remove all motor vehicles from designated  
streets, notice shall be given to the owners of any motor vehicles parked  
thereon, if known, or if not known notice shall be placed upon such motor  
vehicles in a prominent place requiring such motor vehicles be removed  
within a designated period in not less than twenty four (24) hours.  
  
9-4-24:  RESTRICTED PARKING/STORAGE ON FRONT YARDS AND STREET  
SIDE CORNER LOTS WITHIN RESIDENTIAL ZONES: Storage of vehicles and/or  
other items on residential properties, within the front yard or street side yard on a corner  
lot, may create unsightly conditions that could reduce overall property values and the  
enjoyment of citizens using the streets, sidewalks and adjacent properties in the  
surrounding area.  The following restrictions shall apply to storage of items and vehicles  
within the designated front yard and/or the street side yard of a corner residential lot:  
   
(A) No driveway or improved parking surface shall cover more than fifty (50) percent  
of a residential front yard within the required setback.     
  
(B) It is prohibited to park or store any automobile, trailer, camper, van, pickup truck,  
recreational vehicle, boat, snow mobiles, ATV’s or other vehicle or other mobile  
equipment (whether or not motorized) unless placed within the allowed fifty (50)  
percent described in sub-section A of this section.   
  
(C) No more than two recreational vehicles or storage trailers shall be stored on a  
Title 9, Chapter 4    Page 8 of 9    Revised 7-12-2018  
  

  Loading....
  
single residential front yard or street side yard of any lot at any time.  
  
(D) No vehicle or item being stored on a lot shall overhang a public right-of-way or  
sidewalk.  
  
(E) Any motorized vehicle, without current registration, trailer, camper, recreational  
vehicle, boat, or other vehicle or other mobile equipment which is inoperable  
shall be stored entirely within an enclosed structure or in a rear yard concealed  
from view by a solid, opaque, screening fence or wall at least six (6) feet in  
height.  
  
  
Title 9, Chapter 4    Page 9 of 9    Revised 7-12-2018  

CHAPTER 5  
  
PARKING ON PRIVATE PROPERTY  
  
SECTION:  
  
9-5-1:  Parking on Private Property  
9-5-2:  Use Must Comply with All City Codes  
9-5-3:  Penalty  
  
  
9-5-1:  PARKING ON PRIVATE PROPERTY: Any person who parks or leaves,  
including the owner of any unattended motor vehicle upon any private property of  
another, without the consent of the owner or person thereof, is guilty of an infraction.  
  
  
9-5-2:  USE MUST COMPLY WITH ALL CITY CODES:  No person owning  
private property within the City shall give permission for an individual or business to park  
a motor vehicle on private property for a purpose that is not allowed within the City or  
within the zone designation of the City Code.  Any person in violation of this section is  
guilty of an infraction.  
  
  
9-5-3:  PENALTY:  Any violation of the provisions of this chapter or order issued  
hereunder shall be deemed an infraction and shall be subject to penalties prescribed for  
such violations under section 1-4-2 of this code, subject to the provisions of Idaho Code  
18-111 and 18-113A.  Each day of the violation shall be considered a separate offense  
and shall be punishable by separate fines as provided for herein.   
  
  
Title 9, Chapter 5    Page 1 of 1     Revised 7-12-2018  
  

CHAPTER 6  
  
BICYCLES  
  
  
  
SECTION:  
  
9-6-1:  Definitions  
9-6-2:  Establishment of Bicycle Paths and Routes  
9-6-3:  Applicability of Vehicle Traffic Laws  
9-6-4:  Operation of Motor Vehicles Upon Bicycle Path  
9-6-5:  Right of Way to Cyclists  
9-6-6:  Two-Way Traffic on Bicycle Paths  
9-6-7:  General Speed Regulation  
9-6-8:  Emerging From Alley or Driveway  
9-6-9  Carrying Articles  
9-6-10:  Penalty  
  
  
9-6-1:  DEFINITIONS: The following terms whenever used in this chapter shall  
have the meaning ascribed below:  
   
BICYCLE: Every vehicle propelled exclusively by human power  
upon which person may ride having two tandem wheels,  
except scooters and similar devices.  
   
A way established, marked, and signed specifically for  
BICYCLE PATH:  
the riding of bicycles, and which is not otherwise part of a  
public street.  
   
BICYCLE ROUTE: A travel way designated specifically for the riding of  
bicycles along and upon a public street.  
   
The privilege of immediate use of a bicycle path or  
RIGHT OF WAY:  
bicycle route.  
   
VEHICLE: Every device in, upon, or by which any person or  
property is or may be transported or drawn upon a street,  
highway, alley, or other public way, except bicycles.  
  
  
9-6-2:  ESTABLISHMENT OF BICYCLE PATHS AND ROUTES: The City  
Council may, by resolution duly passed and approved, establish and designate the  
location of bicycle paths and bicycle routes within the City.  
  
  
9-6-3:  APPLICABILITY OF VEHICLE TRAFFIC LAWS: All motor vehicle traffic  
laws shall apply with respect to the operation of any bicycle upon any bicycle path or  
Title 9, Chapter 6 Page 1 of 2   Revised 7-12-2018  

  Loading....
bicycle route, except as expressly otherwise provided in this chapter or except as the  
context of such ordinance or statute expressly indicates otherwise.  
  
  
9-6-4:  OPERATION OF MOTOR VEHICLES UPON BICYCLE PATH: Any  
person who operates a motor vehicle or parks a vehicle upon or across any bicycle path,  
except at intersections of a path within a public street or alley or when necessary to  
enter or leave a driveway, shall be guilty of an infraction.  
  
  
9-6-5:  RIGHT OF WAY TO CYCLISTS: Any person driving any vehicle into or  
across any bicycle path which intersects a public street or alley or driveway who fails to  
yield the right of way to any cyclist operating a bicycle shall be guilty of an infraction.  
  
  
9-6-6:  TWO-WAY TRAFFIC ON BICYCLE PATHS: Any person who fails to pass  
to the right of any oncoming cyclist on a bicycle path shall be guilty of an infraction.  
  
  
9-6-7:  GENERAL SPEED REGULATION: Any person who operates a bicycle  
upon any public street, bicycle route, or bicycle path at a speed greater than is  
reasonable and prudent under the conditions then existing shall be guilty of an infraction.    
  
  
9-6-8:  EMERGING FROM ALLEY OR DRIVEWAY: Any person operating a  
bicycle emerging from an alley, driveway, or building shall yield the right of way to all  
pedestrians walking upon any sidewalk or sidewalk area intersection with the alley,  
driveway, or building egress and upon entering the public street shall yield the right of  
way to all vehicles approaching on such public street shall be guilty of an infraction.   
  
9-6-9:  CARRYING ARTICLES: Any person who carries any package, bundle, or  
article which prevents the rider from keeping at least one hand upon the bicycle  
handlebars shall be guilty of an infraction.   
  
9-6-10:  PENALTY:  Any violation of the provisions of this chapter shall be  
deemed an infraction and shall be subject to penalties prescribed for such violations  
under section 1-4-2 of this code, subject to the provisions of Idaho Code 18-111 and 18- 
113A.  Each day of the violation shall be considered a separate offense and shall be  
punishable by separate fines as provided for herein.   
  
  
  
  
Title 9, Chapter 6 Page 2 of 2   Revised 7-12-2018  

CHAPTER 7  
  
OTHER VEHICLES  
  
  
SECTION:  
  
9-7-1:  Definitions  
9-7-2:  Pedestrian Right of Way  
9-7-3:  Unlawful to Ride Bicycle on Sidewalk  
9-7-4:  Unlawful to Ride Motorcycle on Sidewalk  
9-7-5:  Snowmobiles  
9-7-6:  Provisions for Skateboards  
9-7-7:  Violations  
9-7-8:  Penalty  
  
  
9-7-1:  DEFINITIONS:  The following terms whenever used in this chapter shall  
have the meaning ascribed below:  
   
BICYCLE: Every vehicle propelled exclusively by human power  
upon which a person or persons may ride having two  
tandem wheels, and except scooters and similar devices.  
   
Every motor vehicle having a seat or saddle for the use  
MOTORCYCLE:  
of the rider and designed to travel on not more than three  
(3) wheels in contact with the ground, but excluding a  
tractor.  
   
Every motorcycle, motor scooter, or motorized bicycle  
MOTOR-DRIVEN CYCLE:  
having an engine with less than 150 cubic centimeters  
displacement or with 5-brake horsepower or less.  
   
SKATEBOARD: Every board or substance of any material with wheels  
affixed to the underside designed to be ridden by a  
person. For the purpose of this ordinance, the term  
skateboard will include scooter, coaster, roller skates, or  
roller blades.  
   
Any vehicle propelled on skids, skis, tracks, or belts and  
SNOWMOBILE:  
propelled by motor power designed to be used upon  
snow or ice.  
   
TOY VEHICLE: Any skates, roller blades, sleds, coasters, wagons, or  
other means by which a person is propelled on wheels,  
skids, or slides by his own power.  
   
EXCLUSIONS: Specifically excluded from the definitions herein are  
wheelchairs, conveyances for the physically  
handicapped and disabled, and juvenile toys of tricycles,  
peddle cars, and push cars.  
Title 9, Chapter 7 Page 1 of 2 Revised 7-12-2018  
  

  Loading....
  
  
9-7-2:  PEDESTRIAN RIGHT OF WAY:  Pedestrians shall have the right of way  
at all times upon all sidewalk areas, all sidewalk crossing areas, and all areas  
designated as pedestrian areas within the City of Ammon. All persons riding bicycles,  
motor-drive cycles, motorcycles, skateboards, and toy vehicles shall yield the right of  
way to all pedestrians upon any sidewalk, a sidewalk crossing area, or area designated  
for pedestrians.  
  
  
9-7-3:  UNLAWFUL TO RIDE BICYCLE ON SIDEWALK:  Repealed 4-3-2014  
Ord 540.  
  
  
9-7-4:  UNLAWFUL TO RIDE MOTORCYCLE ON SIDEWALK:  It shall be  
unlawful for any person to ride a motor-drive cycle or vehicle or motorcycle upon any  
sidewalk in the City of Ammon.  
  
  
9-7-5:  SNOWMOBILES:  It shall be unlawful for any person to ride any snow- 
mobile upon any public way, easement, or public property within the City of Ammon.  
  
  
9-7-6:  PROVISIONS FOR SKATEBOARDS:  The riding of skateboards, roller  
skates, roller blades, and other self-propelled toy vehicles shall be permitted upon side- 
walks in the City of Ammon with the exception of certain designated sidewalks which the  
Council may designate as not permitting such vehicles upon the sidewalks and which  
are duly posted with such instruction.  
  
  
9-7-7:  VIOLATIONS:  Any person who operates or is in control of any bicycle,  
motor-driven cycle, motorcycle, skateboard, or toy vehicle upon a sidewalk, a highway, a  
street, or upon public or private property open to public use in the City of Ammon  
carelessly and heedlessly, or without due caution and circumspection, or in a manner so  
as to endanger or be likely to endanger any other person or property, or who has been  
inattentive, careless, or imprudent in light of the circumstances then existing, shall be  
guilty of a violation of this ordinance.  
  
  
9-7-8:  PENALTY:  Any violation of the provisions of this chapter shall be  
deemed an infraction and shall be subject to penalties prescribed for such violations  
under section 1-4-2 of this code, subject to the provisions of Idaho Code 18-111 and 18- 
113A.  Each day of the violation shall be considered a separate offense and shall be  
punishable by separate fines as provided for herein.   
  
  
  
  
   
Title 9, Chapter 7 Page 2 of 2 Revised 7-12-2018  
  

CHAPTER 8  
  
MOTORIZED VEHICLE OPERATION  
  
  
SECTION:  
  
9-8-1:  Restriction on Use  
9-8-2:  Loud and Excessive Noises - Purpose  
9-8-3:  Unlawful Noises  
9-8-4:  Definition  
9-8-5:  Equipment for Motor Vehicles  
9-8-6:  Prima Facie Evidence; Vehicles  
9-8-7:  Penalty  
  
  
9-8-1:  RESTRICTION ON USE: It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or  
permit the operation of any automobile, truck, tractor, motorcycle, snowmobile, all-terrain  
vehicle, go-cart, or other motorized vehicle on any park, ballpark, playground, tennis  
court, or school ground, including walkways and adjacent parking areas, located within  
the corporate limits of the City of Ammon, Bonneville County, Idaho, except where the  
use of such vehicles is authorized for the maintenance and care of those areas or the  
walkways and parking areas adjacent thereto. Any person who violates the provisions of  
this section shall be guilty of an infraction.  
  
  
9-8-2:  LOUD AND EXCESSIVE NOISES - PURPOSE:  
  
(A) The making and creation of loud, unnecessary, or disturbing noises within the  
limits of the City is a condition which has existed for some time and the extent  
and volume of such noises is increasing.  
  
(B) The making, creation, or maintenance of such loud, unnecessary, and/or  
disturbing noises are a detriment to the public health, comfort, convenience,  
safety, and welfare of the residents of the City.  
  
(C) The necessity for the provisions and prohibitions hereinafter contained and  
enacted is declared as a matter of legislative determination to be in the public  
interest, and it is further declared that the provisions and prohibitions hereinafter  
contained and enacted are in pursuance of and for the purpose of securing and  
promoting the public health, comfort, convenience, safety, and welfare and the  
peace and quiet of the City and its inhabitants.  
  
  
9-8-3:  UNLAWFUL NOISES: It shall be unlawful for any person to make,  
continue, or cause to be made or continued, any loud, unnecessary, or unusual noise or  
any noise which either annoys, disturbs, injures, or endangers the comfort, repose,  
health, peace, or safety of others within the limits of the City.  
  
  
Title 9, Chapter 8 Page 1 of 2 Revised 7-12-2018  
  

  Loading....
9-8-4:  DEFINITION: “Loud, excessive, or disturbing noise” as used in this  
ordinance includes, but is not limited to, any sound made by a passenger motor vehicle  
or a motorcycle at any time under any condition of grade, speed, acceleration, or  
deceleration which exceeds ninety-two (92) decibels or any lower decibel level that is  
fixed by law or the rules and regulations regularly adopted by the Idaho Air Pollution  
Control Commission, on the A scale of a general radio company No. 1551-B sound level  
meter, or equivalent, stationed at a distance of not less than twenty feet (20') to the side  
of such vehicle or motorcycle as such vehicle or motorcycle passes the sound meter or  
is stationed not less then twenty feet (20') from a stationary motor or engine.  
  
  
9-8-5:  EQUIPMENT FOR MOTOR VEHICLES:  
  
(A) Every motor vehicle shall at all times be equipped with a muffler in good working  
order and in constant operation to prevent excessive or unusual noise and  
annoying smoke, and no person shall use a muffler cut-out, bypass, or similar  
devise upon a motor vehicle on any street or roadway within the City.  
  
(B) The engine and power mechanism of every motor vehicle operated within the  
City shall be so equipped and adjusted as to prevent the escape of excessive  
fumes, smoke, or noise.  
  
(C) No person shall modify the exhaust system of a motor vehicle or a motorcycle in  
a manner which will amplify or increase the noise of such vehicle or motorcycle  
above that emitted by the muffler originally installed on the vehicle by the  
manufacturer.  
  
  
9-8-6:  PRIMA FACIE EVIDENCE; VEHICLES: A showing that a motorcycle  
exceeds the maximum allowable decibel level as established in Section 9-8-3 hereof  
shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of this ordinance.  
  
  
9-8-7:  PENALTY: Any violation of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed  
an infraction and shall be subject to penalties prescribed for such violations under  
section 1-4-2 of this code.    
  
Title 9, Chapter 8 Page 2 of 2 Revised 7-12-2018  
  

  
CHAPTER 9  
  
SNOW REMOVAL  
  
  
SECTION:  
  
9-9-1:  Purpose  
9-9-2:  Definitions  
9-9-3:  Snow Removal Proclamation  
9-9-4:  Parking Restrictions  
9-9-5:  Other Parking Restrictions  
9-9-6:  Removal of Vehicles  
9-9-7:  Payment of Towing and Storage Fees  
9-9-8:  Placing Snow in Public Right of Ways  
9-9-9:  Duty of Property Owners  
  9-9-10:   Violations and Penalties  
  
  
9-9-1:  PURPOSE: The City Council does hereby determine and declare that this  
ordinance is necessary and desirable for the following purposes:  
  
(A) To render the removal of snow and ice from the public streets safe, more economical and  
efficient.  
  
(B) To avoid collisions of snow removal equipment with motor vehicles, motorcycles, trailers,  
equipment.   
  
(C) To reduce the possibility of accidents involving pedestrians.    
  
  
9-9-2:  DEFINITIONS: The following terms shall have the meaning as herein specified:  
  
   
Every self-propelled vehicle in, upon, or by which any  
MOTOR VEHICLE:  
person or property is or may be transported or drawn  
upon a public street or highway except vehicles or  
devices used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks.  
   
MOTORCYCLE: A motor vehicle having a seat or saddle for the use of the  
rider and designed to travel on not more than three  
wheels in contact with the ground.  
   
TRAILER: Every vehicle without self-propelled motive power  
designed to carry persons or property and which is  
drawn or propelled by other motive power.  
  
Title 9 Chapter 9     Page 1 of 3     Revised 7-12-2018  
  
  

  Loading....
   
EQUIPMENT: Any property which is stored or maintained upon a public  
street of the City of Ammon.  
  
  
9-9-3:  SNOW REMOVAL PROCLAMATION: The Mayor, the Council President, or in their  
absence, the City Administrator, may, at any time, issue a Snow Removal Proclamation declaring  
that snowfall may accumulate on the public streets of the City in amounts sufficient to pose a  
hazard to the health, safety, and welfare of the inhabitants of the City. Such proclamation shall  
order that the parking restrictions as set forth in said proclamation shall be placed in effect and  
shall state the specific date and time when the restrictions shall go into effect. Such restrictions  
shall become effective upon the date and time stated therein; provided, however, that the  
restrictions shall become effective upon the expiration of twelve (12) hours following the time  
when the Proclamation delivered to the media outlets normally used in the broadcasting of Public  
Service Announcement by the City.  The City shall post on the City website information advising  
of the proclamation and provide whenever possible, schedules for snow removal operations.   
Further the City shall be entitled to take all such actions, including but not limited to the removal  
of vehicles, towing of vehicles and the issuing of citations for violations of any snow proclamation,  
etc., as provided for in said proclamation.  All penalties provided for in said snow proclamation  
shall be a civil penalty, a parking infraction and/or an infraction as provided for in the Ammon City  
Code at the determination of the enforcement officer or their designee.     
  
  
9-9-4:  PARKING RESTRICTIONS: No person shall stop, stand, or park a motor vehicle,  
motorcycle, trailer, or equipment on the streets of the City when:   
  
A. A snow proclamation has been issued in accordance with section 9-9-3 or  
  
B. At times of heavy snowfall or  
  
C. At other times as deemed necessary by the Mayor, Council President, or in their absence  
the City Administrator.  
  
  
9-9-5:  OTHER PARKING RESTRICTIONS: In the event any other ordinance, statute, or  
regulation provides for parking restrictions which are more restrictive than those set forth herein  
then such other parking restrictions shall be controlling and may be enforced in accordance with  
the terms of such other ordinance, statute, or regulation.  
  
  
9-9-6:  REMOVAL OF VEHICLES: Any motor vehicle, motorcycle, trailer, or equipment  
parked upon any public street in violation of this ordinance may be ordered to be removed at any  
time at the direction of the Enforcement Officer or their appointed designee working in conjunction  
with the designated law enforcement agency to the City of Ammon and may be towed to another  
public street that does not violate the provisions of this or any other provisions of this Code.  The  
vehicle may also be towed and stored in any public or private storage lot without prior notice to  
the owner or operator of the vehicle.      
  
  
  
Title 9 Chapter 9     Page 2 of 3     Revised 7-12-2018  
  
  

  Loading....
9-9-7:  PAYMENT OF TOWING AND STORAGE FEES: The owner or operator of any  
motor vehicle, motorcycle, trailer, or equipment towed, removed, or stored pursuant to the  
preceding section shall be responsible for all reasonable towing, removal, and storage charges  
of the private towing company. Such charges shall be paid to the private towing company before  
the vehicle, motorcycle, trailer, or equipment is released.   
  
  
9-9-8:  PLACING SNOW IN PUBLIC RIGHT OF WAYS: It shall be unlawful for any  
person to move, place or deposit snow from private property onto or across the road right of ways  
within the City.  
  
  
9-9-9:  DUTY OF PROPERTY OWNERS:  Every person who owns real property within  
the City shall remove any snow, ice, and other obstruction or dangerous condition upon any  
sidewalk, curb, and gutter abutting his or her property within 72 hours of occurrence.    
  
  
9-9-10:  VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES:  Any violation of the provisions of this chapter  
shall be deemed an infraction and shall be subject to penalties prescribed for such violations  
under section 1-4-2 of this code.  Each day such violation continues, shall be a separate violation,  
which shall be deemed as a separate infraction and a citation may be issued therefore. Violations  
shall be assessed on a per violation per day basis.  
  
At the discretion of the City of Ammon Enforcement Officer or their designee parking violations  
listed in Title 9, Chapter 4, Section 1 of the Ammon city Code.  The City of Ammon may designate  
said violations to be subject to penalties and fees payable directly to the City of Ammon which  
shall be determined by a schedule of fees adopted by the City Council by resolution which may  
be amended from time to time.  
  
  
  
Title 9 Chapter 9     Page 3 of 3     Revised 7-12-2018  

CHAPTER 10  
  
THROWING, FIRING, PROPELLING, OR DISCHARGING  
OF ANY OBJECTS AT MOTOR VEHICLES  
  
  
SECTION:  
  
9-10-1: Throwing, Firing, Propelling, or Discharging of Any Objects at Motor Vehicles  
9-10-2:  Penalty  
  
  
9-10-1:  THROWING, FIRING, PROPELLING, OR DISCHARGING OF ANY OBJECTS  
AT MOTOR VEHICLES:  It shall be unlawful for any person to throw, fire, propel, or discharge,  
or cause or permit to be thrown, fired, propelled, or discharged any object, material, or  
substance at any motor vehicle which is likely to be disruptive to vehicular traffic or which is  
likely to cause damage or injury to property or persons.  
  
  
9-10-2:  PENALTY:   Any violation of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed an  
infraction and shall be subject to penalties prescribed for such violations under section 1-4-2 of  
this code, subject to the provisions of Idaho Code 18-111 and 18-113A.  Each day of the  
violation shall be considered a separate offense and shall be punishable by separate fines as  
provided for herein.    
  
Title 9, Chapter 10 Page 26 of 1 Revised 7-12-2018  
  
  
  
CHAPTER 11  
  
TRAFFIC COMMISSION  
  
  
SECTION:  
  
9-11-1: Creation of Traffic Commission  
9-11-2:  Purpose  
9-11-3:  Composition  
9-11-4:  Powers, Duties and Responsibilities  
9-11-5:  Appeals  
9-11-6:  Severability  
  
  
SECTION 1:  
  
9-11-1:  CREATION OF TRAFFIC COMMISSION:  A Traffic Commission is hereby  
created for the City of Ammon. The same shall be known as the “Ammon Traffic Commission”.  
  
  
SECTION 2:  
  
9-11-2:  PURPOSE: The Ammon Traffic Commission is created to advise the Mayor  
and City Council on all matters related to traffic, parking, and the regulation of vehicular and  
pedestrian use of the city’s streets, alleys and rights of way and to administer the same.  
  
SECTION 3:  
  
9-11-3:  COMPOSITION: The Ammon Traffic Commission shall consist of the city  
administrator, the public works director, the city engineer, the code enforcement officer, city  
planner, and one City Council member appointed by the Mayor. The City Council member shall  
be an ex-officio member. The city administrator may temporarily appoint a city employee to any  
vacancy of the Ammon Traffic Commission, except the City Council member position.  
  
SECTION 4: POWERS, DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES: The Ammon Traffic  
Commission shall have the following powers, duties, and responsibilities:  
  
A. To inform the City Council of any proposed substantial changes in traffic circulation,  
parking or related matters and to seek policy guidance from the City Council on the  
same.  
B. To give reasonable notice and seek input from parties who may be substantially affected  
by any decisions of the Ammon Traffic Commission.  
C. To recommend amendments to any portion of this code or any City ordinance which in  
any manner relates to traffic or parking.  
D. To establish locations within the city for the regulation of all matters relating to parking  
including, without limitation, time limit parking, no parking, loading and unloading zones,  
bus stops, taxi zones, handicapped parking, school zones and pedestrian zones and to  
erect appropriate signage therefor.  

  Loading....
  
E. To establish locations for crosswalks and speed bumps and to erect appropriate signage  
therefor.  
F. To establish locations for one-way traffic and to erect appropriate signage therefor.  
G. To establish locations for all markings on curbs and in the rights of way.  
H. To establish locations for all traffic regulations including, without limitation, speed limits,  
yield signs, stop signs, truck routes, and traffic lights and to erect appropriate signage  
therefor.  
I. To establish requirements for disabled persons parking zones and spaces within the city  
pursuant to Idaho Code and to erect appropriate signage therefor.  
J. To determine the installation, location and proper timing and maintenance of traffic  
control devices.  
K. To conduct analyses of traffic accidents and conditions and to devise remedial measures  
therefor.  
L. To plan the operation of traffic on the streets and to cooperate with other city officials,  
employees and agents in the development of ways to improve traffic conditions, and to  
carry out the additional powers and duties imported by the provisions of this code.   
M. To hear appeals from any person regarding parking violations, citations, and infractions  
and determine whether to uphold, waive, or reduce said violation, citation or infraction.   
  
SECTION 5:  
  
9-11-5:  APPEALS: Any person aggrieved by any decision made by the Ammon  
Traffic Commission under the provisions of this chapter may make an appeal therefrom to the  
City Council by delivering notice of such appeal to the city within thirty (30) days of such  
decision. Such notice shall be in writing, addressed to the Ammon Traffic Commission and shall  
be hand delivered or mailed via certified mail to the Ammon Traffic Commission. Failure to  
deliver such notice within the thirty (30) day period shall result in the waiver of the right to  
appeal. After receipt of such notice, the city shall schedule a hearing at the next regularly  
scheduled City Council meeting which takes place more than five (5) business days after receipt  
of such notice. At such hearing, the City Council shall determine whether the decision appealed  
is reasonable, and shall thereupon sustain, overrule, or modify such decision or remand to the  
Ammon Traffic Commission for further consideration. The City Council member who serves ex  
officio on the Ammon Traffic Commission shall participate and vote in proceedings under this  
section unless otherwise unable to do so.   
  
SECTION 6:  
  
9-11-6: SEVERABILITY:  This ordinance is hereby declared to be severable.  Should any portion  
of this ordinance be declared invalid by a Court of competent jurisdiction, the remaining portions  
shall continue in full force and effect and shall be read to carry out the purpose(s) of the  
ordinance before the declaration of partial invalidity.   

Title 10 Planning and Zoning

CHAPTER 1  
  
TITLE, PURPOSE, DECLARATION, INTENT  
  
SECTION:  
  
Title  
10-1-1:  
Purpose 
10-1-2:   
Declaration  
10-1-3:  
Interpretation and Intent  
10-1-4:  
10-1-5: Penalties  
  
10-1-1:  
 TITLE: This Title of the Ammon Code shall be and may be known as “THE ZONING  
ORDINANCE OF AMMON, IDAHO,” AND MAY BE SO CITED AND PLEADED.  
  
10-1-2: 
  PURPOSE: The zone boundaries and regulations made in accordance with a  
comprehensive plan designated to promote the health, safety, peace, convenience, and general  
welfare of the inhabitants of Ammon.  
  
(A) To promote the orderly growth and development of the City in accordance with the  
Comprehensive Plan.   
  
(B) To promote economy in the cost of fire and police protection and other governmental  
services.  
  
(C) To provide a roadway system that adequately meets the transportation needs of the City’s  
resident and businesses.    
(D) To protect the tax base.  
  
(E) To foster industry.  
  
(F) To protect property values.  
  
(G) To avoid undue concentration of population and prevent the overcrowding of land.  
  
(H) To facilitate adequate provisions for transportation, water, sewage, schools, and other public  
requirements.  
  
(I) To promote and foster a wholesome, serviceable, and attractive City.  
  
10-1-3:  DECLARATION: In establishing the zones, the boundaries thereof and the regulations  
applying within each of the zones, due and careful consideration was given, among other things, to  
the suitability of land for particular uses with a view to conserving the value of buildings and  
encouraging the most appropriate use of land throughout the City.  
  
10-1-4: 
  INTERPRETATION AND INTENT: It is the intent of the City Council of Ammon that  
the regulations and restrictions as set forth in this ordinance shall be so interpreted and construed as  
to further the purpose of this ordinance and objectives and characteristics of the respective zones.  
  
  
1-1           ADOPTED 6-27-13  

  Loading....
10-1-5:   
PENALTIES:  Any violation of any provision of Title 10, unless designated separately  
shall constitute an infraction and be subject to the penalties as set by this City Code.  
  
  
1-2           ADOPTED 6-27-13  

  
Sign (Building Identification):  A sign designed to identify a building either by name, address  
or both.  
  
Signed Shared Roadway (Signed Bike Route):  See Trails (Bicycle/Pedestrian)  
  
Single Family Group Homes:  For the purpose of the Ammon City Code a Group Home in any  
single family residential zone shall be allowed pursuant to the requirement of the Idaho State  
Code 67-6531.  Any group home operated within the City of Ammon shall comply with all the  
requirements and conditions of the Idaho State Code.    
  
Single Family Residence:  A building consisting of one (1) or more residential dwelling units,  
where, excluding common areas, each of the residential dwelling units can be owned separately  
from all other residential dwelling units in the building.    
  
Site Plan:  A site plan is a scale drawing showing proposed structures and improvements for a  
parcel of land as required by the applicable regulations. It includes lot lines, lot area, streets,  
parking spaces, private roadways, walkways, topographic features, reserved open space,  
buildings and other structures, landscaping, and the location of proposed or existing utility  
easements. A site plan is a more detailed representation of a proposed development than  
shown in a plat, and may also include density and statistical data.   
  
Site Plan Review:  Site plan review is the process whereby city staff and the planning and  
zoning commission, review the site plan of a development to assure that it meets the stated  
purposes and standards of the zoning and subdivision ordinance.  
  
Special Use Permit:  See Conditional Use Permit.  
  
Spot Zoning:  Spot zoning is a form of discriminatory zoning that serves to further the interests of a few  
private property owners instead of the welfare of the entire community as set forth in the comprehensive  
plan. Spot zoning is based on the arbitrary and inappropriate nature of a rezoning change rather than, as  
is commonly believed, the size of the area being rezoned.     
  
Storm Water:  Water or runoff from rainstorms or snowmelt that does not soak into the ground or  
evaporate, but instead flows across surface areas such as lawns, parking lots, rooftops, streets etc.   
  
Storm Water Retention:  An area of retention designed to contain storm water for a period of  
forty-eight (48) hours. Where green space serves as the required storm water retention areas,  
only grasses and vegetation compatible with water retention may be allowed.    
  
Story:  That portion of a building included between the surface of a floor and the ceiling next  
above the floor.  
  
Street:  A public thoroughfare other than an alley also referred to as an arterial, collector or  
local.  
  
Street (Arterial):  More detailed information for the following street designations can be found in  
the BMPO Access Management Plan at www.bmpo.org.    
  
 Principal Arterials are major roadways that are intended to primarily serve through traffic      
so access to abutting properties is restricted.  
  
Page 14 of 18     DEFINITIONS   REVISED 12-21-2017  
  
  

  Loading....
  
 Minor Arterials are like principal arterials, except vehicle access is less restricted.  
  
Street (Collector):    
  
Major collectors are roadways that provide local circulation over moderate distances and  
link arterials to local streets.  Except for individual residences, they may provide direct  
access to abutting properties.   
  
 Residential collectors are like major collectors, except they provide local circulation over  
short distances and although discouraged, by City Engineer approval may be permitted to  
provide direct access to individual residences.   
  
Street (Local):  Roadways that are intended to provide access to abutting properties and serve  
very little to no through vehicle traffic.    
  
Structural Alterations:  Any change in the supporting members of the building, such as the  
bearing walls, columns, beams, girders or roof.  
  
Subdivision:   The division of a developed or undeveloped tract or parcel of land into three (3)  
or more parts for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of sale or of building development.   
Subdivision is both the process and the result of laying out a parcel of undivided land into lots,  
blocks, streets, and public areas.  
  
Subdivision Regulations:  Subdivision regulations are local ordinances that regulate the  
conversion of undivided land into building lots for residential or other purposes. The regulations  
establish requirements for streets, utilities, site design and procedures for dedicating land for  
open space or other public purposes to the local government or for fees in lieu of dedication,  
and prescribe procedures for plan review and payment of fees.  
  
Substantial Improvement:  Any repair, reconstruction or improvement of a structure, the cost  
of which equals or exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the structure either: (1)  
before the improvement or repair is started, or (2) if the structure has been damaged and is  
structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external  
dimensions of the structure.  
  
Surgical Center:  See Hospital/Surgical Center.  
  
Swimming Pool (Private):  A swimming pool serving as an amenity to and located within the  
lot of a primary dwelling unit.  
  
Swimming Pool (Public):  A swimming pool located on a lot where a primary residence is not  
included on the same lot.  Examples of public swimming pools would be a pool located within a  
subdivision for the use of all or part of the residents within the subdivision, regardless of the type  
of ownership of said swimming pool.  
  
Town House Dwelling:  Two or more Single Family attached Dwelling Units within the same  
building separated by zero lot line construction where ownership of the individual dwelling units  
is independent of each other including specified ground around the individual dwelling units and  
no common ownership in the building or grounds exist.    
Page 15 of 18     DEFINITIONS   REVISED 12-21-2017  
  
  

  Loading....
  
  
Town House Unit:  A Single Family Dwelling Unit contained in a Town House Dwelling.  
  
Trails (Bicylcle/Pedestrian):   For the purpose of this Code, the following definitions shall be  
included in the definitions referring to trails:  
  
(A) Bike Lanes:  A portion of a roadway designated by striping, signing and pavement  
markings for the preferential or exclusive use of bicyclists.  Bike lanes are striped lanes  
on existing roadways running parallel, and adjacent, to the outside motor lane.  A bike  
lane is for the exclusive use of bicyclists and allows for one-way travel in the same  
direction as the motor vehicle with one lane on each side of the road.  
  
(B) Bikeway:  A generic term for any road, street, path or way which, in some manner, is  
specifically designated for bicycle travel, regardless of whether such facilities are  
designated for the exclusive use of bicycles or are to be shared with other transportation  
modes.  
  
(C) Multi-Use Path/Trail:  Paths entirely separated from the roadway, generally by a space  
of at least five (5) feet, except at infrequent intersections.  Bicyclists, pedestrians and  
various other non-motorized users can use multi-use paths/trails.  
  
(D) Share Use Path/Trail:  A bikeway physically separated from motorized vehicular traffic  
by an open space or barrier and either within the street right-of-way or within and  
independent of right-of-way.  Shared use may also be used by pedestrians, skaters,  
wheelchair users, joggers and other non-motorized users.  
  
(E) Signed Shared Roadway (Signed Bike Route):  A shared roadway designated by  
signing as a preferred route for bicycle use.  When signs are used, it indicates to  
bicyclists that particular advantages exist to using the route compared to alternates and  
the responsible agency has taken action to ensure the roadway is suitable and  
maintained.  
  
Trailer Court:  See manufactured home court.    
  
Trailer House:  See manufactured home.  
  
Travel Trailer Park/Court:  See RV Park  
  
Trailer Space:  See RV Space.    
  
Travel Trailer:  The term "travel trailer" shall mean and include all living accommodation units  
which are capable of unrestricted highway use and not placed upon any foundation.  The term  
shall include, but not be limited to, travel trailers, motor home units, fifth wheels, and campers  
mounted on automotive vehicles.    
  
Vacant  Although this category is primarily intended to specify those lands which have no  
particular use designation, this category is also used to specify lands which have been annexed  
but have not been issued a building permit or have been designated as transportation right-of- 
ways, major utility easements and waterways.  The category could include both platted and  
unplatted lands.    
  
Page 16 of 18     DEFINITIONS   REVISED 12-21-2017  
  
  

  Loading....
  
Variance:  A waiver of specific regulations of this ordinance granted by the City in accordance with the  
provisions set forth in this ordinance for the purpose of assuring that no property, because of special  
circumstances applicable to it, shall be deprived of privileges commonly enjoyed by other properties in  
the same zone.  Those requirements can be found in Chapter 9 section (10-9-8-B).  
  
Vertical Project:  A vertical project/building can be any project or building containing two or more levels  
above grade.    
  
 Wholesale:  Sale of goods for resale as distinguished from sale of good to consumers.  
  
Yard:  An open space on a lot with a building, which space is unoccupied or unobstructed from  
the ground upward, except as otherwise permitted in this ordinance.  
  
Yard (Front):  The minimum horizontal distance measured from the building foundation  
or any projection thereof, excluding steps, that is closest to the street, to the property  
line adjacent to the street or if not facing a street, the minimum distance from the  
foundation to the required setback of the next adjacent building.  
   
Yard (Required):  The open space around buildings which is required by the terms of this  
ordinance.  
  
Yard (Rear):  An open, unoccupied space on the same lot as a building, measured from the  
building foundation closest to the rear lot line of the building (exclusive of steps) and the rear  
property line, and extending for the entire width of the lot.  
  
Yard (Side):  A yard between the building and the side property line of the lot and extending  
from the street line to the rear of the lot, measured from the building foundation nearest to the  
side property line.  
  
Zero Lot Line:  A property line which meets either of the following two conditions:  
  
1.  A property line runs through a solid, unbroken, not hollow wall running from the bottom  
of the basement or crawl space to the top of the ceiling of a building.  Each property to  
either side of this dividing wall may install any needing support beams and an inner wall  
against the dividing wall.  Utility lines (electric, telephone, cable, etc.) and pipes (water,  
sewer, natural gas, etc.) may be placed behind the inner wall, but in no case may any  
line, pipe or any other opening pierce the dividing wall.  
  
2. A property line which runs between two buildings whose solid, unbroken outer walls,  
, touch each other.  No utility line or pipe may cross the two touching  
walls, nor may any other opening in one touching wall align with any opening in the wall  
it touches.  
  
Zoning Ordinance:  Zoning ordinance is the local law adopted by the governing body to assure orderly  
development according to specific standards established for the general public welfare and govern the  
types of permitted land uses, the maximum density or minimum lot size, building heights, setbacks and  
so on. Zoning ordinances consist of text and a zoning district map. The map divides the jurisdiction into  
districts (zones) for different types of development, while the text specifies what regulations apply to each  
district, including general provisions and administration.  
Page 17 of 18     DEFINITIONS   REVISED 12-21-2017  
  
  

  Loading....
  
Zoo (Petting):   Temporary or permanent events, open farms or premises where contact is permitted  
between approved animals and members of the public, whether a fee is charged or not.   
Page 18 of 18     DEFINITIONS   REVISED 12-21-2017  
  
  
  
CHAPTER 3  
  
   
NON-CONFORMING BUILDINGSAND USES 
  
SECTION:  
  
Maintenance Permitted  
10-3-1:      
Repairs  
10-3-2:     
Expansion or Enlargements 
10-3-3:       
Restoration of Damaged Buildings  
10-3-4:      
Discontinuance  
10-3-5:      
Change to Conforming Use  
10-3-6:      
Change to Another Non-Conforming Use  
10-3-7:      
Reclassification of Territory  
10-3-8:      
Permits Granted Prior to Passage of Ordinance or Amendment  
10-3-9:      
     Thereto Vested Interest 
  
Non-Conforming Lots of Record  
10-3-10:   
  
10-3-1:  
 MAINTENANCE PERMITTED: It is the intent of this zoning ordinance to prohibit the  
addition or enlargement of non-conforming uses.  Nevertheless, a non-conforming building or  
structure may be maintained and may be continued to the same extent as that which legally existed  
at the time of the effective date of this ordinance.  
  
10-3-2:  
 REPAIRS: Repairs may also be made to a non-conforming use, provided such repairs  
shall not have the effect of increasing the floor space devoted to the non-conforming use, capacity or  
volume of business.  
  
10-3-3: 
  EXPANSION OR ENLARGEMENTS:  
  
(A) Land: Land area of any non-conforming use shall not be increased.  
  
(B) Buildings: The floor area in a building or structure occupied by a non-conforming use shall  
not be increased except to overcome unsafe or unsanitary conditions when required by  
an official, safety or health officer.  
  
10-3-4:  
 RESTORATION OR DAMAGED BUILDINGS: A non-conforming building or structure  
or a building or structure occupied by a non-conforming use which is damaged or destroyed by fire,  
flood, wind, earthquake or other calamity or act of God or public enemy, may be restored; and the  
occupancy or use of such building, structure or part thereof which was legally in existence at the time  
of such damage or destruction may be continued or resumed, provided that such restoration is  
started within a period of one year form the date of destruction and is diligently pursued to  
completion and provided that such restoration does not increase the floor space devoted to the non- 
conforming use over that which existed at the time the building became non-conforming.  
  
10-3-5: 
  DISCONTINUANCE: A non-conforming building or structure or portion thereof or a lot  
occupied by a non-conforming use which is or hereafter becomes abandoned or is discontinued for a  
  
Page 1 of 2  
           5/7/03  

  Loading....
  
continuous period of one year shall not thereafter be occupied except by a use which conforms to the  
use regulations of the zone in which it is located.  
  
10-3-6: 
  CHANGE TO A CONFORMING USE: Any non-conforming use may be changed to a  
conforming use.  Any non-conforming use, which has been changed to a conforming use, shall not  
thereafter be changed back to a non-conforming use.  
  
10-3-7:  
 CHANGE TO ANOTHER NON-CONFORMING USE: A non-conforming use of a  
building or lot shall not be changed to another non-conforming use.  Any change of use whatsoever  
must be to a conforming use.  
  
10-3-8: 
  RECLASSIFICATION OF TERRITORY: The provisions pertaining to non-conforming  
uses of land and buildings shall also apply to land and buildings which hereafter become non- 
conforming due to an amendment in the zoning ordinance.  
  
10-3-9:  
 PERMITS GRANTED PRIOR TO PASSAGE OF ORDINANCE OR AMENDMENT  
THERETO–VESTED INTEREST: Notwithstanding the issuance of a permit therefor, no building  
which becomes non-conforming upon the passage of this ordinance or which becomes non- 
conforming due to an amendment to this ordinance shall be built unless a significant amount of  
construction has taken place thereon before the effective date of this ordinance.  A significant  
amount of construction shall be interpreted to mean enough construction to require an expenditure of  
at least $500.00 to duplicate the materials and labor so expended.  
  
10-3-10: 
 NON-CONFORMING LOTS OF RECORD: In any district in which one family dwellings  
are permitted, a one-family dwelling and customary accessory buildings may be erected on any lot of  
record at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this ordinance, even though such lot fails to  
meet the requirements for area or width, or both, that are generally applicable in the district.   
However, yard dimensions and other requirements not involving area or width, or both, of the lot  
shall conform to the regulations for the district in which such lot is located.  Variance of area, width  
and yard requirements shall be obtained only through action of the Board of Adjustments.  
If two or more lots or combinations of lots and portions of lots with continuous frontage in  
single ownership are of record at the time of passage or amendment of this ordinance, and if all or  
part of the lots do not meet the requirements for lot width and area as established by this ordinance,  
the lands involved shall be considered to be an undivided parcel for the purposes of this ordinance,  
and no portion of said parcel shall be used which does not meet lot width and area requirements  
established by this ordinance, nor shall any division of the parcel be made which leaves remaining  
any lot with width or area below the requirements stated in this ordinance. 
  

CHAPTER 4  
  
AMENDMENTS  
  
  
SECTION:  
  
10-4-1:  Ordinance and Map May be Amended  
10-4-2:  Petition to Planning Commission  
10-4-3:  Amendments to be in Harmony with Land Use Plan  
10-4-4:  Public Hearing Required by City Council--Notice  
10-4-5:  Protest  
  
10-4-1:  ORDINANCE AND MAP MAY BE AMENDED: This zoning ordinance, including the  
map, may be amended, supplemented, changed or modified from time to time, but all proposed  
amendments shall be submitted first to the Planning Commission for its recommendations, which  
recommendations shall be submitted to the City Council for its consideration.    
  
The official zoning map of the City shall be amended after any re-zone, annexation or other change  
to this title that may affect the official zoning map.  It shall be the policy of the City to display and  
have available the most up to date zoning map as possible.  Any change to the official zoning map  
shall be considered adopted after any ordinance effecting this Title as it relates to the official zoning  
map of the City has been published.  
  
10-4-2:  PETITION TO PLANNING COMMISSION: Persons seeking an amendment of the  
zoning ordinance or map shall submit to the Planning Commission a written petition designating the  
change desired, the reasons therefor and wherein the proposed amendment would further promote  
the objectives and purposes of the zoning ordinance, together with such fee as may be established  
by the City Council.  Upon the receipt of the petition, the Planning Commission shall consider the  
request.  The Planning Commission shall call a public hearing upon such matters as are required to  
be heard by the Planning Commission under law and may call a public hearing on other matters, in  
the commission's discretion before submitting its recommendations to the City Council.  The  
Planning Commission may also recommend amendments to the ordinance and map to the City  
Council on its own initiative.  
  
10-4-3:  AMENDMENTS TO BE IN HARMONY WITH LAND USE PLAN: Before  
recommending an amendment to the ordinance, it must be shown that such amendment is  
reasonably necessary, is in the interest of the public and is in harmony with the Land Use Plan  
adopted by the City Council.  Failure on the part of the Planning Commission to make  
recommendations within thirty (30) days from the date of receipt of the petition by the Building  
Official shall be deemed to constitute approval of such proposed amendment unless a longer period  
is granted by the City Council.  The fee provided herein shall not be returnable.  
  
10-4-4:  PUBLIC HEARING REQUIRED BY CITY COUNCIL--NOTICE: Amendments to the  
ordinances of this title, the zoning map, the long range plan or long range planning map may be  
adopted only after a public hearing has been held in relation thereto by the City Planning and Zoning  
Commission with recommendations made by the Commission to the City Council.  Notice of the time  
and place of such hearing shall be published in the official newspaper of the city as provided in  
Section 67-6509 of the Idaho Code and in addition thereto in the case of a zoning district boundary  

  Loading....
change or annexation, additional notice shall be provided by mail to property owners or purchasers  
of record within the land being considered and within 500 feet of the external boundaries of the land  
being considered.    The City Council as the governing board may in its discretion conduct at least  
one (1) public hearing in addition to the public hearing conducted by the Commission under the  
same notice and hearing procedures as herein provided.  The governing board may act upon the  
recommendation of the Planning and Zoning Commission or as it determines, order an additional  
hearing and may then act using evidence provided by the Commission and information provided at a  
City Council hearing.  As the governing board they may adopt, reject, repeal or amend the proposed  
zoning or map ordinance amendments.    
     
  
10-4-5:  PROTEST: In the case of a protest against a change in the zoning ordinance or map,  
signed by the owners of twenty percent (20%) or more, either of the area of the lots included in such  
proposed change or of those immediately adjacent to the rear thereof, extending three hundred  
(300) feet from the street frontage of such opposite lots, such amendment shall not become  
effective except by favorable vote of at least three-fourths (3/4) of all members of the City Council.  
  
  
  
application and all parking requirements must be met prior to the issuance of a  
business license.  All parking requirements are the responsibility of the property  
owner.  
  
(G) Combined Parking Facilities.  The required off-street parking and loading facilities may  
be provided collectively for two (2) or more buildings or uses, provided that the total  
number of parking spaces shall be not less than the sum of the requirements for each of  
the individual uses, and provided that all other requirements of this ordinance are met.   
Parking may only be combined in the case of single ownership of the shared buildings or  
with a common area agreement allowing shared parking and loading facilities and in  
such case, properties must be adjacent to one another.  The common area agreement  
must be on file with the City.  
  
(H) Mixed Uses.  Calculation of parking requirements for a new building shall be done at the  
minimum requirement of the zone which the use is located in.  In the event that two (2) or  
more uses occupy the same building, lot or parcel of land, the total requirements for off- 
street parking and off-street loading space shall be in the sum of the requirements of the  
various uses computed separately.  
  
When calculating mixed uses for an existing building and those mixed uses operate and  
create different demands of parking based on the operating hours and/or peak hours of  
operation the parking requirements may be reduced below the combined total of the two  
uses.  Reduction in parking requirements shall only be allowed after a presentation of the  
hours and/or peak hours of the given uses to the reviewing staff for business licensing.    
  
(I) Size of Parking Spaces.    
  
No off-street parking space shall have dimensions of less than nine (9) feet in width and  
eighteen (18) feet, in length. The size of a required parking space shall be determined by  
City policy 50-003 as standards adopted by the City of Ammon.  No part of the area of a  
required parking space shall be used for driveways, aisles or other required  
improvements. Stalls under the minimum size shall not be included in the calculation for  
required parking spaces.   
  
(J) Access to Parking Facilities.  Access driveways shall be provided for ingress to and  
egress from all parking and loading facilities.  Each parking and loading space shall be  
easily accessible to the intended user.  The width of driveway entrances and exits from a  
public street shall be as set forth in City ordinances controlling and regulating access to  
public streets.  
  
(K) Other Access Requirements.  The following additional requirements shall govern access  
to off-street parking facilities:  
  
1. Forward travel to and from parking facilities from a dedicated street or alley is  
required for all uses except residential.  The parking area shall be adequate to  
facilitate the turning of vehicles to permit forward travel upon entering a street.  
  
  
Page 12 of 16    SUPPLEMENTARY REGULATIONS   REVISED 12-21-17  
  

  Loading....
  
2. All uses, which adjoin a major or secondary highway, shall, wherever possible,  
have access by way of a service road or alley.  
  
3. The access to all off-street parking facilities shall be designed in a manner, which  
will not interfere with the movement of traffic.  
  
4. Access driveways across sidewalks or pedestrian ways shall be designed in such  
a manner as to promote pedestrian safety.  
  
(L) Circulation Within a Parking Area.  The circulation within a parking area shall comply with  
the following requirements:  
  
1. Minimum aisle widths shall be provided in accordance with the angle of the  
parking spaces they serve:  
  
30° Parking - 12 feet  
45° Parking - 12 feet  
60° Parking - 18 feet  
90° Parking - 24 feet  
  
Other aisle widths shall be determined by interpolation from the above minimum  
requirements.  
  
2. Circulation within a parking area with more than one (1) aisle must be such that a  
car need not enter the street to reach another aisle within the same parking area.  
  
(M) Location of Parking Facilities Restricted.  The location of parking and loading           
facilities shall comply with the following:  
  
1. In Residential Zones, the parking required by section 10-5-23-(D)-1-(b), shall not  
be permitted in the required front yard or the required side yard that faces on a  
street.  Parking may be permitted in other required side and rear yards in the  
residential zones, providing all other requirements of this ordinance are met.  
  
2. In the Business Commercial and Industrial Zones, the required yard areas may  
be used for parking (except when specifically prohibited in the zone), provided   
that a protective curb shall be installed not less than two (2) feet from the edge of  
the sidewalk or in the case where there is no sidewalk then two (2) feet from the  
edge of the street line to prevent the use of the sidewalk for automobile parking,   
 bumper overhang and travel purposes.  
  
3. No part of any parking area for more than five (5) vehicles shall be closer than ten  
(10) feet to any residence, school, hospital or other institution for human care  
located on an adjoining lot, unless screened by a masonry wall or hedge not less  
than four (4) feet in height.  
  
  
Page 13 of 16    SUPPLEMENTARY REGULATIONS   REVISED 12-21-17  
  

  Loading....
  
(N) Development and Maintenance of Parking Areas.  Every parcel of land hereafter used as  
a public or private parking area, including a commercial parking lot and a vehicle sales  
area, shall be developed and maintained in good condition and in accordance with the  
provisions of this ordinance and the requirements of the zone in which the parking space  
is located.  All commercial parking areas, parking area drive aisles and commercial drive  
aisle/sales areas shall be constructed of hard surface material such as but not limited to  
asphalt and concrete.  All areas required to be hard surface that are adjacent to the front  
of a building, the frontage of a city street or the area adjacent to a required landscape  
area shall be either asphalt or concrete, or on a case by case basis, similar material that  
may be approved by the City Engineer.   Areas in the rear of a commercial or industrial  
building contained in a fenced area are not required to be hard surface but must be  
maintained weed free and with gravel in any area that is used for parking and/or storage.  
  
(O) Lighting of Parking Areas.  Any lighting used to illuminate off-street parking facilities or  
vehicle sales area shall be so arranged as to reflect the light away from the adjoining  
premises in any residential zone.  
  
(P) Limitation on Use of Required Parking Areas.  Required parking areas shall be used  
exclusively for vehicle parking in conjunction with a permitted use and shall not be  
reduced or encroached upon in any manner.  Parking areas above minimum standards  
may be used for special events or merchandise stands providing any required permits  
have been obtained from the City.  The parking facilities shall be so designed and  
maintained as not to constitute a nuisance at any time, and shall be used in such a  
manner that no hazard to persons or property, or unreasonable impediment to traffic will  
result.  
  
(Q) Continuing Obligation.  The required off-street parking and loading facilities shall be a  
continuing obligation of the property owner so long as the use requiring vehicle parking  
or vehicle loading facilities continues.  It shall be unlawful for an owner of any building or  
use to discontinue or dispense with the required vehicle parking or loading facilities  
without providing other vehicle parking or loading area which meets the requirements of  
this ordinance.  
  
(R) Plot Plan Approval Required.  At the time a building permit is requested for any building  
or structure, or at the time a new use of land which would require off-street parking is  
established, a plot plan shall be submitted showing the proposed development of the  
property, including the layout and development of the parking and loading facilities;  
except that said plans shall not be required when parking space is to be provided by a  
legal entity established for the purpose of providing off street parking facilities.  All  
parking and loading spaces shall be designated, as well as the access aisles and other  
improvement.  The Zoning Administrator may disapprove such plans if he finds they are  
inconsistent with the requirements of this ordinance.  
  
(S) Required Off-street Loading Space.  One (1) off-street loading space shall be provided  
and maintained for every building or separate occupancy having a gross floor area of ten  
thousand (10,000) square feet or more which requires the receipt or distribution of  
goods, material merchandise or supplies by vehicle, except that the Board of Adjustment  
  
Page 14 of 16    SUPPLEMENTARY REGULATIONS   REVISED 12-21-17  
  

  Loading....
  
may permit off-street loading facilities for two (2) or more buildings to be combined.  One  
(1) additional loading space shall be provided for each additional twenty thousand  
(20,000) square feet of gross floor area of such building or for each vehicle which must  
be loaded or unloaded at the same time, whichever requirement is greater.  
  
Each required off-street loading space shall not be less than ten (10) feet in width,  
twenty-five (25) feet in length and fourteen (14) feet in height.  Such required off-street  
loading space shall be provided on the same lot as the building or principal use, except  
that the Board of Adjustment may authorize the use of substitute loading facilities subject  
to the following conditions.  
  
1. The substitute off-street loading facilities are conveniently located on nearby  
property.  
  
2. Use of public streets or alleys will not be required in loading and unloading  
activities, and all such activities can be conducted off public rights-of-way.  
  
10-5-24: LANDSCAPING: The purpose of the landscaping requirements in this ordinance shall  
be to bring relief from heat, noise and glare through proper placement of green plants and trees and  
to enhance, conserve and stabilize property values by encouraging pleasant and attractive  
surroundings.  
  
(A) Landscaping Defined.  Landscaping shall mean some combination of planted trees, shrubs,  
vines, ground cover, flowers or lawns.  In addition, the combination or design may include  
rock and such structural features as fountains, pools, art works, screens, walls, fences or  
benches, but such objects alone shall not meet the requirements of this ordinance.  The  
selected combination of objects for landscaping purposes shall be arranged in a harmonious  
manner.  
  
(B) Landscaping and Screening Required.  In zones requiring landscaping there shall be a  
landscaped strip of lawn, shrubbery and/or trees provided and maintained along the entire  
length of any street within the zone. A landscaping width of thirty (30) feet for all  
developments abutting any arterial street shall be required.  Developments abutting a  
collector street shall provide a fifteen (15) foot buffer along the collector. Developments  
having frontage on both an arterial and a collector or local street shall provide the above  
landscaping requirements on both streets.  The landscaping plan shall show the location  
and species of all plants, along with plans for sprinkler irrigation and other landscape  
features.  Additional landscaping may be required as determined by the Planning and  
Zoning Commission or the Governing Board.  
  
(C) Maintenance.  Required landscape areas shall be maintained in a neat, clean orderly and  
healthful condition.  This is meant to include proper pruning, mowing of lawns, weeding,  
removal of litter, fertilizing, replacement of plants, when necessary, and the regular watering  
of all plantings.  Required landscaped areas shall be provided with a suitable permanent  
method for watering or sprinkling of plants.  This watering system shall consist of sprinklers  
or hose bibs to insure a sufficient amount of water for plants within the landscaped area.  
  
  
Page 15 of 16    SUPPLEMENTARY REGULATIONS   REVISED 12-21-17  
  

  Loading....
  
(D) Screening Requirements.  Screening shall be provided between residential and non- 
residential zones.  Screening shall consist of evergreen shrubs closely spaced, walls, fences  
or berms to be maintained at a minimum height of six (6) feet unless otherwise specified.  In  
 be required.  
  
(E) Plot Plan Required.  Where landscaping is required in this ordinance, a plot plan showing  
the proposed landscaping development, water system and use of the property shall be  
submitted to the Zoning Administrator.  The same plot plan used to show parking layout or  
other requirements for the issuance of a building permit may be used, providing all proposed  
landscaping is adequately detailed on said plot plan.  The Zoning Administrator may  
disapprove such plans if he determines that they are not consistent with the purposes of this  
ordinance.  
  
(F) Nonconforming Status.  Any use of property which, on the effective date of this ordinance or  
any subsequent amendment thereto if non-conforming only as to the regulations, relating to  
landscaping may be continued in the same manner as if the landscaping was conforming.  
However, such may not be increased in intensity except in accordance with the requirements  
of the ordinance shall not be reduced unless suitable substitutions are made which would  
meet the requirements of this ordinance.  
  
(G) Time to Complete.  In zones requiring landscaping, no certificate of occupancy shall be  
granted until landscaping has been installed in accordance with the approved landscape  
plan for such property.  Where the Board of Adjustment determines it is warranted, an  
exception to this requirement may be granted, subject to such terms and conditions as  
imposed by the Board to assure completion of installation of all required landscaping by a  
later, specified date.  
  
10-5-25: Penalty: Any person, firm or corporation, whether as principal, agent, employee  
or otherwise who fails to comply with the conditions and or requirements this chapter shall be guilty  
of an infraction and shall be subject to penalties prescribed for such violations under section 1-4-2 of  
this code. Each day such violation continues, shall be a separate violation, which shall be deemed  
as a separate infraction and a citation may be issued therefore. Violations shall be assessed on a  
per violation per day basis.  
  
10-5-26: Zoning Use Table: Uses are shown by zone as allowed, not allowed or allowed by  
conditional use permit (CUP) or master plan approval (MP).  
  
  
Page 16 of 16    SUPPLEMENTARY REGULATIONS   REVISED 12-21-17  
  
CHAPTER 6  
  
MOVING OF BUILDINGS  
  
SECTION:   
  
10-6-1:  Moving of Buildings 
  
  
10-6-1:  
 MOVING OF BUILDINGS: No permit shall be issued for the moving of any  
residential, commercial or industrial building without first filing an application with the Building and  
Zoning Departments.  
  
(A) Application for Moving a Building Required:    
  
1. To a Site Within the City:  The following information shall be included as part of the  
initial application:    
  
a. Location and address of the old and new site.  
b. Plot plan of the new location, also showing adjacent lots on all sides of the  
property and indicating all structures and improvements on said lots.  
c. Plans and specifications for the proposed improvements at the new  
location.   
d. For commercial buildings a site plan must be submitted as required by  
Title 10 of the City Code.  
2. From a site within the City to a site outside the City:  Any building being moved  
from a site in the City to a site outside the City shall first apply with the Building  
and Zoning Departments for the appropriate reviews and required permits.  Said  
review shall include but not be limited to notification of all required utility  
companies as required in section 10-6-1-(F) of this chapter.  Additional review  
may be required as deemed necessary by the Building Official or the Planning  
Director.  
  
(B) Departments Review of Application:  Before approval of a permit to move a building to a  
location within the city the following items must be considered:    
  
1. Certification of the Fire Marshall that the structure is in compliance with all  
requirements of the fire code as adopted by the City of Ammon.  
2. Certification of the Building Official that the structure is sound enough to be  
moved and that the building will conform to the building code as adopted by the  
City of Ammon.  
3. Certification of the Zoning Administrator that the building and lot will conform to  
the current zoning codes of the City of Ammon.  
4. That the building is in conformity with the type and quality of buildings existing in  
the area into which it is proposed to be moved.  
5. That its location on the lot does not in any substantial way adversely affect  
buildings or uses on abutting properties.  
6. That all dedications and improvements, as required by the City for streets and  
facilities and buildings, shall be provided in conformity with the standards of the  
City.  
  
C) Standards Required Before Occupancy.  Prior to occupancy, the building shall be brought  
up to all requirements of occupancy meeting the standards of the building code for a new  
Page 1 of 2    MOVING OF BUILDINGS    REVISED 7-2-09  
             

  Loading....
building.    
  
(D) Bond Required.  Before a permit to move a building may be granted, the applicant shall  
  
post a cashbond or other assurance in the amount required to complete the proposed  
placement of the moved building.  This bond shall include all required improvement  
including but not limited to utility connections, landscaping requirements and all  
remodeling to bring the building into compliance with all codes of the City of Ammon.    
  
(E) Building Code Requirements:  Prior to the granting of a permit the applicant must also  
meet all requirements of Title 7 of the City of Ammon City Code and the adopted building  
  
codes for building permits of the City of Ammon. 
  
(F) Prerequisites to Moving:  Prior to moving any building through or along a route which  
crosses or in any manner interferes with the line of any telephone, electric line, fire alarm  
circuit or other electric wire line the applicant shall give at least seventy two (72) hours  
written notice to the owner or manager of any such apparatus.  The notice shall contain  
all the information set forth in the application for permit.  The applicant shall also pay in  
advance to such owner or manager the amount of the cost and expense of cutting,  
repairing, moving, raising and replacing such wires, cables or other apparatus as will be  
  
cut of interfered with.   
  
(G) Inspection Fees Applicable:  An inspection fee in the amount set by resolution of the City  
Council for building inspections shall be paid prior to inspections to fulfill the application  
process as described in item D above.  Additional building permit fees and inspection  
may be applicable prior to the issuance of a building permit for remodeling and or  
  
renovation of any building moved into the City of Ammon. 
  
(H) Penalty:  Any violation of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed a misdemeanor  
and shall be subject to penalties prescribed for such violations under section 1-4-1 of this  
code.  
  
Page 2 of 2    MOVING OF BUILDINGS    REVISED 7-2-09  

CHAPTER 7  
  
SPECIAL PROVISIONS APPLYING TO  
MISCELLANEOUS USES  
  
SECTION:  
  
10-7-1:  Public and Semi-Public Parks, Playgrounds, and Schools  
10-7-2:  Gasoline Pumps  
10-7-3:  Flammable Liquid Storage (REPEALED  Refer to IFC)  
10-7-4:  Accessory Buildings  
10-7-5:  Cemeteries, Crematories, Mausoleums, and Columbaria  
10-7-6:  Clubs, Lodges, Churches, and Similar Buildings  
10-7-7:  Mortuaries and Funeral Homes  
10-7-8 : Public Utility and Facilities  
10-7-9:  Circuses and Carnivals  
10-7-10: Fences  
10-7-11: Hospitals  
10-7-12: Corner Lot Setbacks  
10-7-13: Model Homes  
  
10-7-1:  PUBLIC AND SEMI-PUBLIC PARKS, AND PLAYGROUNDS:  
  
(A) The intent of this provision:  
  
1. To foster the appropriate location and layout of public parks and  
playgrounds.  
  
2. To harmonize the various features and facilities of parks and playgrounds with  
the surrounding area, so as to produce sound, stable residential  
neighborhoods.  
  
3. To foster a co-ordination of public recreational facilities on the part of the City,  
and other public and semi-public agencies.  
  
(B) Approvals NecessaryPlans.  Before construction of a public or semi-public park, or  
playground, shall be approved, the overall plan of said park, or playground shall be  
prepared and submitted to the Planning Director, The Planning Director shall  
provide a copy of the proposed park or playground to the Parks Director or their  
designee.  The Parks Director shall review the proposed plan and make  
recommendations regarding the sprinkler system and landscaping, including trees  
and any playground equipment that may be proposed.  All proposed parks that shall  
become maintained by the Parks Department shall meet all the criteria and  
requirements for installations of sprinklers and landscaping of the Parks Director  
and policies of the City of Ammon.  
  
  
            

  Loading....
All submissions for approval of a park layout shall be accompanied by plans  
showing the general layout and location of roadways, entrances and exits, walks,  
paths and buildings and structures; the general layout and location of landscaped  
areas, play area, play apparatus area, hard-surfaced areas, off-street parking,  
drainage, water supply, sewerage and other features of design.  
  
(C) Standards and Requirements.    
  
1. Trees, shrubs, grass and other forms of landscaping shall be provided in  
sufficient quantities to insure a park-like appearance.    
  
2. Facilities involving lights shall be so located, and the lights shall be designed and  
located so that glare and discomfort will not be unreasonably detrimental to  
surrounding residences.  
  
3. Off-street parking areas and other facilities which attract or are intended to  
accommodate spectators shall be screened or located so that the detrimental  
effects of noise and traffic on any surrounding residential area will be kept to a  
minimum.  
  
4. The entire layout and design of the park and playground shall be so arranged as  
to harmonize with the objectives and characteristics of the zone in which the park  
and playground are located.  
  
5. Adequate ingress and egress shall be provided for both vehicles and pedestrians  
which the park, playground or school is intended to serve.  
  
  
10-7-2:  GASOLINE PUMPS: Gasoline pumps shall be set back not less than twenty (20)  
feet from any street line to which the pump island is at right angles, and fourteen (14) feet from  
any street line to which the pump island is parallel, and not less than twelve (12) feet from any  
residential zone boundary line.  If the pump island is set on an angle on the property with  
respect to the street, it shall be so located that automobiles stopping for service will not extend  
over the property line.  In no case shall gasoline pumps be set closer than fourteen (14) feet  
from any street line.  
  
Canopies, when supported by a column, may be located within the setback but not  
closer to a street than fourteen (14) feet.  Projection within fourteen (14) feet from a street shall  
be deemed to be a marquee.    
  
  
10-7-3:  REPEALED  
  
  
10-7-4:  ACCESSORY BUILDINGS: The location and use of accessory buildings shall be  
governed by the following regulations:  
  
(A) Attachments to main buildings restricted.  
  
  
            

  Loading....
1. An accessory building which encroaches on any part of a required yard or open  
space shall not be attached to any main building.  
  
2. An accessory building which conforms to all of the yard and open space  
requirements established for a main building may be attached to a main building,  
provided such attachment is by means of a foundation wall or roof conforming to all  
provisions of the building code.  
  
3. Where an accessory building is attached to a main building, it shall be considered  
as part of the main building, and its use and location shall be governed by the  
requirements of this ordinance applicable to main buildings.  
  
  
10-7-5:  CEMETERIES, MAUSOLEUMS, AND COLUMBARIA: No cemetery, mausoleum,  
or columbarium shall be established or enlarged until a valid conditional use permit has first  
been granted by the Board of Adjustment.  The Board of Adjustment may require that the  
application for said conditional use permit include maps, names and addresses, etc., for an area  
within a radius of two thousand (2,000) feet of the exterior boundaries of the cemetery, and such  
other information as it deems necessary.  Said required information shall include proof of  
compliance with State law dealing with development and maintenance of cemeteries.  
  
The Board may also require an additional filing fee based on an estimate of the cost  
involved in processing said application.  
  
  
10-7-6:  CLUBS, LODGES, CHURCHES, AND SIMILAR BUILDINGS: No club, lodge,  
church, or similar use shall be established until a valid conditional use permit has first been  
granted by the Board of Adjustment.  Premises used for the meeting place and related facilities  
of any club, lodge, fraternal order or similar organization shall comply with the following  
regulations:  
  
(A) Where such uses are located in or adjoining a residential zone, all buildings, except  
accessory buildings, shall be located not less than twenty (20) feet from any side or  
rear lot line adjoining such residential zone.  
  
(B) If such uses are located in a zone which does not permit commercial uses, there  
shall be no external evidence of any commercial activity.  Any retail sales on the  
premises shall be for members or guests only and shall be carried on as an activity  
which is minor and incidental to the major function of the organization.  
  
(C) In the opinion of the Board of Adjustment, preferably after consultation with the  
Planning Commission, traffic safety, with respect to exits and entrances, shall be fully  
maintained.  
  
  
10-7-7:  MORTUARIES, CREMATORY AND FUNERAL HOMES: A conditional use  
permit shall be required for the establishment or enlargement of a mortuary, crematory or  
funeral home as required by Chapter 18 of this Code.  In establishing the requirements for such  
uses, the Board of Adjustment shall consider, among other criteria, the following:  
  
            

  Loading....
  
(A) Whenever possible, such uses shall be located on a major street.  
  
(B) Such uses should be located as to not inhibit or deter proper development of nearby  
properties.  
  
(C) The site should be of ample size to allow for the makeup of funeral processions, as  
well as to provide the required off-street parking and loading facilities and  
landscaping.  
  
(D) The design of vehicular access to and from the site should conform to accepted  
traffic engineering practices so as to minimize traffic congestion on the adjoining  
streets.  
  
  
10-7-8:  PUBLIC UTILITY AND FACILITIES: This section applies only to non- 
governmental public utilities and facilities.  Power substations, sewer lift stations, water pumping  
plants, and similar public facilities shall be permitted in any zone in Ammon; provided, however,  
that a Conditional Use Permit shall be issued therefore, after a public hearing is held thereon by  
the City Council after such notice as the Council shall order.  Reasonable development  
standards may be imposed which are necessary to carry out the objectives and characteristics  
of the zone in which the facilities are located, as follows:  
  
(A) The activity to be carried on must not generate an amount of vehicular traffic that  
will be detrimental to values in surrounding area.  
  
(B) Lights which may be used must be directed away from surrounding residential area.  
  
(C) In the opinion of the City Council, the development will be in harmony with the  
objectives of the zoning ordinance and with the characteristics of the zone in which  
the development is located.  
  
  
10-7-9:  CIRCUSES AND CARNIVALS: A circus or carnival may be permitted on a  
temporary basis in any zone, but only after a valid conditional use permit has first been issued  
by the City Council.  
  
  
10-7-10: FENCES: No fence, wall, hedge, or other sight obscuring object or structure  
which is more than three (3) feet in height shall be constructed or allowed to exist above said  
height within fifteen (15) feet of any front lot line along any street.  This section shall not be  
construed to permit any structure, shrub, hedge or sight obscuring object to exist in violation of  
Section 10-5-8 of this ordinance.  
  
  
10-7-11: HOSPITALS: Hospitals may be permitted in any zone, but only after a valid  
Conditional Use Permit has first been issued by the City Council.  
  
  
  
            

  Loading....
10-7-12: CORNER LOT SETBACKS: Corner lot setbacks shall comply with the  
requirements of Section 10-5-8 which relates to the clear view of intersecting streets and ways,  
and Section 10-5-19 which relates to the exceptions to front and side yard setback  
requirements.  
  
In addition, setback requirements for accessory buildings from internal lot lines of corner  
lots shall be the same as the setback requirements for the adjacent lots which share the  
common interior lot line or as required for similar lots within the same zone.  
  
  
10-7-13:          MODEL HOMES:  Model homes may be allowed in any residential zone under  
the following conditions:   
  
(A) One (1) to five (5) model homes are permitted in any currently under development  
subdivision containing a minimum of twenty (20) buildable lots at the time of  
opening of the model homes.  These allowed model homes shall not contain an  
office that operates more than twenty-four (24) hours per week or    
  
(B) A model home with an office that operates in excess of twenty-four (24) hours per  
week may be allowed after granting of a conditional use permit, which has been  
approved following the procedures in the City Code regarding conditional use  
permits or  
  
(C) More than five (5) model homes may be allowed in a subdivision under  
development after a granting of a conditional use permit, which have been approved  
following the procedures in the City Code regarding conditional use permits or  
  
(D) A model home may be allowed in any subdivision after a granting of a conditional  
use permit, which has been approved following the procedures in the City Code  
regarding conditional use permits.  
  
  
CHAPTER 8  
  
ENFORCEMENT AND ADMINISTRATION  
  
SECTION:  
  
10-8-1:  Office of Zoning Administrator Established  
10-8-2:  Application and Plans Required  
10-8-3:  Building Permits Required  
10-8-4:  Power and Duties of the Enforcing Officers  
10-8-5:  Permits to Comply with Ordinance  
10-8-6:  Certificate of Occupancy  
10-8-7:  Construction and Use to be Stated in Applications, Plans, Permits  
and Certificates of Occupancy  
10-8-8:  Notice to Correct  
10-8-9:  Failure to Maintain Landscaping, Continuing Obligation  
  
  
10-8-1: 
  OFFICE OF ZONING ADMINISTRATOR ESTABLISHED: There is hereby  
established in Ammon, Idaho, the office of Zoning Administrator, which shall be under the  
jurisdiction of the City Council of Ammon, Idaho.  The administrators in the office of Zoning  
Administration may, with the approval of the council, be combined with another appointive office or  
offices of the City.  The City Council shall, from time to time, by resolution, establish the duties of  
the various appointed administrators in the office of Zoning Administration and designate the duties  
and functions to be performed by each such appointee.  For the purposes of this ordinance, when  
the term Zoning Administrator is used, it shall refer to that person who has been appointed by the  
City Council to perform such administration duties and functions to which the particular section of  
the ordinance is referring.  
  
  
10-8-2: 
  APPLICATION AND PLANS REQUIRED: Any person, firm or corporation desiring to  
construct a building in Ammon, Idaho or to do any construction or installation of any nature upon  
any property within the City, excluding therefrom structures or installations appurtenant to private  
residences such as patios, driveways, parking pads, and similar installations, shall apply to the  
Building Department which shall forward to the Zoning Administrator the necessary documentation  
for zoning approval.  All applications for building permits shall be accompanied by a plot plan  
showing the size and location of the existing building and buildings to be erected or structures or  
improvements to be constructed. The plot plan shall also show the zone in which a lot or parcel of  
land is located. All plot plans shall be submitted to the Zoning Administrator electronically prior to  
the approval of any request for a building permit.  
  
  
10-8-3: 
  BUILDING PERMITS REQUIRED: It shall be unlawful to erect, construct, move or  
structurally alter any building or structure, or any part thereof, or to do any construction or  
installation of any nature upon any property within the City excluding structures and installations  
appurtenant to private residences such as patios, driveways, parking pads, and similar installations,  
 until after a written permit therefore has been issued by the Building Department acting for and on  
  
Page 1 of 3           ADOPTED 6-27-13 
  

  Loading....
  
behalf of the City.  
  
  
10-8-4: 
  POWERS AND DUTIES OF THE ENFORCING OFFICERS: It shall be the duty of  
the Building Department, or designated official, to inspect or cause to be inspected all buildings in  
the course of construction or repair.  Inspections shall be written and deficiencies given to the  
contractor/builder.  Deficiencies shall be corrected prior to the next inspection.  The Zoning  
Administrator shall enforce all provisions of this ordinance and shall refer violations to the City  
Code Enforcement Officer.  As needed violations shall be directed to the City Attorney, entering  
actions in the court, when necessary; and his failure to do so shall not legalize any violation of such  
provisions, nor shall the failure of the City Attorney to enter actions in the courts legalize any  
violation of such provisions.    
  
  
10-8-5:  
 PERMITS TO COMPLY WITH ORDINANCE: From the time of the effective date of  
this ordinance, the Zoning Administrator shall not grant a permit for the construction of any building  
or structure, or for the moving of the building or structure onto a lot, or for the change in any use of  
land, building or structure, if such construction, alteration, moving or change in use would be in  
violation of any of the provisions of this ordinance, nor shall any other officer of the City grant any  
permit or license for the use of any building or land if such would be in violation of this ordinance.  
  
  
10-8-6:   
CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY: It shall be unlawful to use or permit the use of any  
building or premises or part thereof hereafter created, erected, altered, changed or converted  
wholly or partly in its use or structure until a certificate of occupancy to the effect that the building or  
premises or the part thereof so created, erected, altered, changed or converted and the proposed  
use thereof conform to the provisions of this ordinance shall have been approved  by  the Building  
Official.  Penalties for violation of this section shall be punishable by a fine and per day fee as  
adopted by resolution of the City Council.   
  
  
10-8-7:  
  CONSTRUCTION AND USE TO BE STATED IN APPLICATIONS, PLANS,  
PERMITS AND CERTIFICATES OF OCCUPANCY: Building permits or certificates of occupancy  
issued on the basis of plans and applications approved by the Building Official authorizes only the  
use, arrangement and construction set forth in such approved plans and applications and no other  
use, arrangement or construction.  Use, arrangement or construction at variance with that  
authorized shall be deemed a violation of this ordinance and punishable as provided herein.  
  
  
10-8-8: 
  NOTICE TO CORRECT: Whenever the Zoning Administrator shall observe any  
apparent violation or infraction of this ordinance, he shall direct that a notice be sent to the property  
owner on whose land the apparent violation occurs, setting forth the nature of the alleged violation,  
together with a statement of what must be done to correct said alleged violation, and a statement  
of time in which said alleged violation must be corrected.  
  
  
10-8-9:   
FAILURE TO MAINTAIN LANDSCAPING; CONTINUING OBLIGATION:  
Maintenance of required landscaping is a continuing obligation.  In case of failure to maintain  
landscaping as required by the provisions of this ordinance, or as specifically made applicable  
  
Page 2 of 3           ADOPTED 6-27-13 
  

  
  
thereto by action of the Planning and Zoning Commission or City Council, in connection with the  
issuance of a permit, such failure or neglect shall be deemed to be a violation of this ordinance and  
shall be subject to the penalties prescribed for misdemeanors in section 1-4-1 of this code.    
  
  
Page 3 of 3           ADOPTED 6-27-13 
  
   
1. Special circumstances do actually attach to the particular property which  
do not apply generally to the other properties in the same zone.  
  
2. Because of some special circumstances the appellant's property is  
deprived of privileges possessed by other properties in the same zone.  
  
3. The granting of such variance will not adversely affect the comprehensive  
plan of zoning in the City.  
  
4. Adherence to the strict letter of the ordinance will cause difficulties and  
hardships, the imposition of which is unnecessary in order to carry out the  
purposes of the zoning plan.  
  
5. The hardship has not been caused by an action of the property owner  
taken after the effective date of this ordinance.  
  
C. Conditional Use Permits.  The Board of Adjustment may grant the following  
conditional use permits:  
  
1. The Board of Adjustment may authorize a dwelling to face upon a private  
driveway, subject to the following conditions:  
  
(a) The structure in which such dwelling is situated will be at least  
twenty feet (20') from the nearest other building on the same or  
adjoining lot.  
  
(b) It is readily accessible by emergency vehicles.  
  
(c) It has side, front, and rear yards at least as great as those  
required in the RP-A zone.  
  
(d) In the opinion of the Board of Adjustment, the dwelling is located  
in harmony with the objectives and characteristics of the zone in  
which the dwelling is located.  
  
2. Flood Channels.  The Board of Adjustment may permit buildings to be  
constructed within seventy-five (75) feet from the banks of a natural flood  
channel, subject to conditions set forth in paragraph 10-5-11 of this  
ordinance.  
  
3. Permit temporary use of certain lands and structures.  
  
(a) The Board of Adjustments may permit the temporary use of  
certain lands and buildings as set forth in paragraph 10-5-22 of  
this ordinance.  
  
(b) The Board of Adjustment may allow and authorize the issuance of  
a building permit and/or conditional certificate of occupancy for the  

  Loading....
   
use of land and/or the erection and use of buildings for a use  
which the Board determines is in harmony with the objectives and  
characteristics of the zone in which such use is to be located.  
  
Such conditional use permit shall be for a limited time and may be  
renewed in the discretion of the Board but shall not survive the  
change of ownership of the property or of the use.  
  
As a condition to granting any special use permit, the Board may  
require the written consent of all property owners who own  
property contiguous and adjacent to the subject property and may  
require a notification of all land owners within five hundred (500)  
feet of the subject property.  Notification of the application of the  
special use permit to all property owners within five hundred (500)  
feet of the subject property with the notice of the hearing date and  
time thereon, shall be made by the petitioner by first class mail  
with an affidavit of mailing naming the addressees and the date of  
mailing.  Any such permit shall be granted only after public notice  
and hearing as provided in Section 67-6509 of the Idaho Code.  
  
  
4. Reduce off-street Parking Requirements in CC-1 Zone.  The Board of  
Adjustment may reduce off-street parking requirements in the CC-1  
Central Commercial Zone, subject to conditions set forth in paragraph 10- 
5-23-(D)-(2) of this ordinance.  
  
5. Permit Off-street Parking to be Provided on Adjacent Lots.  The Board of  
Adjustment may permit off-street parking facilities required in connection  
with dwellings to be located on adjacent or nearby lots, subject to  
conditions set forth in paragraph 10-5-23-(D)-(l)-b of this ordinance.  
  
6. Determine Off-street Parking Requirements for Uses Not Mentioned in  
Ordinance.  The Board of Adjustment may determine the number of off- 
street parking spaces required for uses not specifically mentioned in this  
ordinance, subject to the conditions set forth in paragraph 10-5-23-(D)-(5)  
of this ordinance.  
  
7. Authorize Off-street Loading Facilities in the CC-1 Zone to be provided on  
Adjacent or Nearby Lots.  The Board of Adjustment may permit required  
off-street loading facilities in the CC-1 Zone to be located on adjacent or  
nearby lots, subject to conditions set forth in paragraph 10-5-23-(S) of this  
ordinance.  
  
8. Authorize the Moving of Buildings.  The Board of Adjustment may  
authorize the Zoning Administrator to issue a permit for the moving of  
buildings, subject to conditions as set forth in paragraph 10-6-1 of this  
ordinance.  
  

  Loading....
   
9. Authorize a Permit for Mortuaries and Funeral Homes.  The Board of  
Adjustment may authorize the Zoning Administrator to issue a permit for a  
mortuary or funeral home, as required by Chapter 18 of this Title.   
  
10. Authorize a Permit for Cemeteries, Mausoleums, and Columbaria. The  
Board of Adjustment may authorize the Zoning Administrator to issue a  
permit for a cemetery, mausoleum or columbarium, subject to conditions  
set forth in paragraph 10-7-6 of this ordinance.  
  
11. Grant Permit for Shooting Range.  The Board of Adjustment may grant a  
permit for the construction of a shooting range in the I&M Zone, provided  
satisfactory evidence is presented to the Board that the safety of the  
surrounding area will be fully safeguarded.  
  
12. Authorize a Permit for Dwelling Groups.  It shall have the power to  
authorize the issuance of a permit for a dwelling group (planned), subject  
to conditions and standards as set forth in paragraph 10-27-4 of this  
ordinance.  
  
13. Authorize a Permit for Parks.  It shall have the power to authorize the  
issuance of permits for public and semi-public parks, playgrounds and  
schools, subject to conditions and standards as set forth in paragraph 10- 
7-1 this ordinance.  
  
14. Authorize a Permit for Churches, Clubs, and Lodges.  The City Planning  
Commission shall have the power to authorize the issuance of a permit  
for churches, clubs, lodges and similar buildings, subject to conditions as  
set forth in paragraph 10-7-7 of this ordinance.  
  
15. Grant Other Conditional Use Permits Authorized by Ordinance.  The  
Board of Adjustment may grant other conditional use permits as deemed  
acceptable in the sole discretion of the board and after considering all  
relevant facts and with the intent of creating uniformity in granting of  
conditional use permits.    
  
16. In approving or denying a request for a conditional use permit on which  
the Board is requested to pass, evidence must be presented to the Board  
that the objectives and characteristics of the ordinance and the zone in  
which the development is located shall not be adversely affected.   
  
D. May Attach Reasonable Conditions.  The Board of Adjustment may attach  
reasonable conditions or requirements to the grant of a variance, exception, or  
conditional or special use permit which the petitioner must comply with as a  
condition of the grant or approval and may attach a time limit on the exercise  
non-exercise of any grant.  If the petitioner fails or refuses to comply with any of  
the conditions within the time specified, the grant or permit shall become null and  
void.  Those conditions may include but are not limited to, those that:  
  

  Loading....
   
1. Minimize adverse impact on other development;  
2. Control the sequence and timing of use/development;  
3. Control the duration of the use/development;  
4. Assure that the use/development is maintained properly;  
5. Designate the exact location and nature of use/development;  
6. Require the provision for on-site or off-site public facilities or services;  
7. Require more restrictive standards than those generally required in an  
ordinance;  
8. Require mitigation of effects of the proposed development upon service  
delivery by any political subdivision, including school districts, providing  
services within the planning jurisdiction;  
9. Prior to granting a special use permit, studies may be required of the  
social, economic, fiscal, and environmental effects of the proposed  
special use.   
   
E. May Reverse or Affirm Zoning Administrator.  In performing the duties as set  
forth herein, the Board of Adjustment is hereby empowered to reverse or affirm,  
wholly or party, or modify the order, requirement, decision or determination of the  
enforcing officer, and may make such order or requirement as ought to be made;  
provided, however, the Board of Adjustment shall not have power to amend this  
ordinance nor to permit nor prohibit any actions which would have the effect of  
amending this ordinance.  
  
F. Authority Limited.  The powers and duties of the Board of Adjustment are limited  
to administrative matters as herein set forth which shall be strictly construed.  It  
shall not be the function of the Board of Adjustment to grant a request which  
would have the effect of amending the zoning ordinance or of correcting what it  
may consider to be an unwise requirement in the zoning ordinance.   
Nevertheless, the Board of Adjustment shall have administrative duties as set  
forth in this ordinance and, within the meaning of the provisions of this ordinance,  
shall perform its duties and shall have the power to perform those acts as herein  
set forth; and such administrative actions shall not be interpreted as unauthorized  
amendments to this ordinance.  
  
G. Precedent.  A special use permit shall not be considered as establishing a  
binding precedent to grant other special use permits.   
  
H. Non-transferable.  A special use permit is site and use specific and not  
transferable from one parcel of land to another.  
  

  Loading....
   
10-9-9:   VOTE: The concurring vote of one-half plus one of the members present  
of a quorum from the total membership of the Board shall be necessary to decide upon  
any matter upon which it is required to pass.    
  
  
10-9-10: RECOURSE FROM DECISION OF BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT:  
  
A. Recourse from Decision of the Board of Adjustment.  The determination of the  
Board of Adjustment shall be final unless a written appeal is made to the City  
Council within fifteen (15) days from the date of the written determination.  The  
written notice of appeal shall be filed with the City Clerk and shall set forth  
specifically wherein the Board of Adjustment erred in its determination.  Upon the  
receipt of an appeal, the City Council shall refer one copy of the appeal to the  
Board of Adjustments; and thereupon, the Board of Adjustment shall make a  
report to the City Council disclosing in what respect the application and facts  
offered in support thereof met or failed to meet the necessary requirements.  The  
concurring vote of a majority of the members of the City Council shall be required  
to reverse any order, requirement, decision or determination of the Board of  
Adjustment.  
  
B. Recourse From Decision of City Council.  Any person aggrieved by a decision of  
the City Council may have and maintain a plenary action for relief therefrom in  
any court of competent jurisdiction.  
  
  
10-9-11: AUTHORITY TO CREATE SEPARATE BOARD: The City Council may, in  
lieu of acting as Board of Adjustment for the City, appoint a separate Board to aid in the  
administration of this ordinance, with powers and duties as hereinabove set forth. Said  
Board shall consist of five (5) members, each to be appointed by the Mayor, with the  
consent of the City Council, for a term of four (4) years, provided that the terms of the  
members of the first Board so appointed shall be such that the term of not more than two  
(2) members shall expire in any one year.  One member of the Board shall also be a  
member of the planning commission.  Any member may be removed for cause by the  
City Council upon written charges and after a public hearing, if such public hearing is  
requested.  Vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired term of any member whose term  
is not completed.  
  
 
  
  
CHAPTER 10 
  
  
PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION   
SECTION:   
10-10-1:    Appointment   
10-10-2:    Powers and Duties of Planning and Zoning Commission   
10-10-3:    Submission of Building and Zoning Matters to Planning Commission   
  
10-10-1 
 : APPOINTMENT: A Planning and Zoning Commission shall be appointed as provided in  
Chapter 65 of Title 67 of the Idaho Code and as provided in Chapter 2 of Title 1 of the codified  
ordinances of the City of Ammon.   
10-10-2 
:  POWERS AND DUTIES OF PLANNING COMMISSION:  The Planning and Zoning  
Commission shall have the powers and duties as provided in Chapter 65 of Title 67 of the Idaho Code  
and as provided in Chapter 2 of Title 2 of the codified ordinances of the City of Ammon.   
It shall be the duty of the Planning Commission to make reports and recommendations to the City, the  
Zoning Administrator and the Board of Adjustment created under this title with respect to the issuance of  
building permits, conditional use permits, variances, alleged violations of the zoning ordinance and map  
and amendments pertaining thereto.   
Also, it shall submit plans to the Council respecting the long-range, comprehensive plan for the orderly  
physical development of the City. The Commission may make suggestions for such changes as the  
Commission feels to be desirable in the zoning regulations and shall study and make recommendations  
for the laying out, widening, extending and locating of streets, roads and highways for the relief of traffic,  
the future development, growth and beautification of the City in respect to its public buildings, streets,  
parks, grounds and lands, in order to promote the public health, morals, safety and welfare of the  
inhabitants thereof.   
  
10-10-3 
:  SUBMISSION OF BUILDING AND ZONING MATTERS TO COMMISSION:                     The  
Zoning Administrator and the City shall submit all applications for conditional use permits, request for  
variances, and proposed amendments to the zoning ordinance to the Planning and Zoning Commission  
prior to acting thereupon.   
   
Page 1 of 4    Revised 12-19-13     

  Loading....
  
BY-LAWS  
OF THE  
CITY OF AMMON PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION  
  
ARTICLE I  
NAME  
The name of this body shall be the City of Ammon Planning and Zoning Commission.  
  
ARTICLE II  
PURPOSE  
The purpose of this Commission is to promote the health, safety and general welfare of the citizens of  
Ammon in the following manner:  
  
1. By impartial and uniform administration of the City Planning and Zoning Ordinance to all  
residents without exception.  
  
2. By providing and administering Zoning Law which is reasonable to individuals and which  
is not confiscatory or destructive to business and free enterprise which is the basic  
source of tax revenue in Ammon.  
  
3. By encouraging urban and urban-type development within the incorporated City of  
Ammon.  
  
4. By insuring that development on land is commensurate with the physical characteristics  
of the land.  
  
5. By continuously examining the Law for ways to improve it in order to guide the orderly  
development and prosperity of Ammon without unnecessary restriction of the property  
rights of the individual landowner.   
  
6. By cooperating and working closely with Bonneville County and the City of Idaho Falls to  
insure the orderly growth of the surrounding area.  
  
ARTICLE III  
OFFICERS  
Section 1. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall elect a Chairman and a Vice-Chairman.  It  
may also create and fill any other office deemed necessary.  
  
Section 2. The Chairman shall be elected at the first regular meeting following the beginning of the  
calendar year.  
  
The term of office shall be one year and no one shall serve more than two consecutive terms.  
The duties of the Chairman shall be as follows:  
  
1. To preside at all meetings of the Commission.  
2. To approve the agenda.  
3. To review the minutes of the meetings.  
Page 2 of 4    Revised 12-19-13     

  Loading....
  
4. To appoint committees.  
5. To keep open the line of communication between staff personnel, the Mayor, the  
City    Council, and the Planning and Zoning Commission, and the Chairman shall have  
the    full right of expression and vote.  
  
Section 3. The Vice-Chairman shall preside at meetings and in all ways perform as Chairman in the  
absence of the Chairman.  
  
The term of office shall be the same as that of Chairman.  
  
Section 4. In the event of a vacancy in office, a special election shall be held at the next regular  
meeting.  
  
ARTICLE IV  
MEETINGS  
Section 1. The kinds of meetings shall be regular, special, work sessions and public hearings.  
  
All meetings shall be open to the public.  
  
A quorum of a majority of the members is required to be in attendance for regular and special meetings.  
  
Records open to the public shall be kept of all meetings, hearings, resolutions, studies, and action taken.   
Records retention shall be as required by Idaho State Statute.  
  
Section 2. Regularly meetings shall be held on a monthly basis for at least nine months each year  
for the purpose of making decisions and recommendations to the City Council concerning items on the  
agenda.  
  
Section 3. Special meetings may be called by the Chairman or by a request from a majority of the  
commission members for the purpose of making a decision on a specific item or items of business.  
  
Section 4. Work sessions may be held at the discretion of the commission for the purpose of  
discussion, study and information.  
  
Section 5. Public hearings shall be held wherever required by statute and also when deemed  
necessary by a majority vote of a quorum of the commission at any formal meeting.  
  
ARTICLE V  
VOTING  
Section 1. Voting shall be by voice or as otherwise directed by the Chairman.  
  
Section 2. At all meetings of the Planning and Zoning Commission each member present shall be  
entitled to cast one vote.  
  
Section 3. The affirmative vote of a majority of the quorum shall be required for the approval of any  
voting matter.  
  
Page 3 of 4    Revised 12-19-13     

  
  
Section 4. Members voting in opposition to a proposed sub-division shall be encouraged to present  
their reasons in writing to the Chairman to be placed on file.  
  
ARTICLE VI 
Section 1 Amendments to these by-laws may be proposed by any member of the Commission,  
provided all such amendments are presented in writing at a regular meeting.  
  
Section 2. All members shall be given notice of proposed amendments.  
  
Section 3. Voting will take place at the next regular meeting following the proposal of an  
amendment.  
  
Section 4. If approved by a majority of the quorum, the amendment shall become effective  
immediately.  
  
Page 4 of 4    Revised 12-19-13     

CHAPTER 11  
  
ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONES  
  
SECTION:  
  
10-11-1: City Divided Into Zones  
10-11-2: Map--A Part of Ordinance  
10-11-3: Application of Zone Regulations  
10-11-4: Siting of Manufactured Homes  
  
  
10-11-1: 
 CITY DIVIDED INTO ZONES: In order to accomplish more fully the objectives and  
purposes of this ordinance, the City of Ammon, Idaho, is hereby divided into zones which shall be  
known by symbols and names as follows:  
  
RP  RESIDENCE ZONE  
RP-A RESIDENCE ZONE  
R-1 RESIDENCE ZONE  
R1-A RESIDENCE ZONE  
R-2 RESIDENCE ZONE  
R2-A RESIDENCE ZONE  
R-3 RESIDENCE ZONE  
R3-A RESIDENCE ZONE  
RMH RESIDENTIAL MOBILE HOME ZONE  
RSC-1 RESIDENTIAL SHOPPING CENTER ZONE  
C-1 LIMITED BUSINESS ZONE  
HC-1 LIMITED BUSINESS ZONE  
CC-1 CENTRAL COMMERCIAL ZONE  
GC-1 GENERAL COMMERCIAL ZONE  
M-1 MANUFACTURING ZONE  
I&M-1 INDUSTRIAL AND MANUFACTURING ZONE  
I&M-2 INDUSTRIAL AND MANUFACTURING ZONE  
O-L OVERLAY ZONE  
PB PROFESSIONAL BUSINESS ZONE  
RE RESIDENCE ESTATE  
  
(A) Residential Zones.  The following comprise the City's residential zones: RP, RP-A, R-1,  
R1-A, R-2, R2-A, R-3, R3-A, RMH, AND RE.  
  
(B) Commercial Zones.  The following comprise the City's commercial zones: RSC-1, C-1,  
HC-1, CC-1 GC-1, AND PB.  
  
(C) Manufacturing Zones.  The following comprises the City's manufacturing zones: M-1.  
  
(D) Industrial Zones.  The following comprise the City's industrial zones: I&M-1, I&M-2. 
   
  
  
Page 1 of 4 REVISED 6-27-13  

  Loading....
10-11-2: 
 MAP--A PART OF ORDINANCE: The location and boundaries of each of the zones  
are shown on the Official Zone Map of Ammon, Idaho, and said map, with all notations, references  
and other information shown thereon, is hereby declared to be an official record and part of this  
ordinance.  
  
The Official Zone Map shall be located in the office of the Zoning Administrator and shall accurately  
designate the current boundary lines of the several zones within Ammon, Idaho.  
  
Whenever amendments are made in zone boundaries or other matter portrayed on the Official  
Zone Map, said Official Zone Map shall be promptly changed by the Zoning Administrator.  
  
No amendment to the Official Zone Map shall become effective; however, until the map has been  
duly changed in accordance with the amending ordinance and the amending ordinance has been  
signed by the Mayor and attested to by the City Clerk.  
  
In the event of a conflict between the ordinance and Zone Map, the ordinance shall govern.  
  
(A) Determination of Zone Boundaries.  
  
Where uncertainty exists with respect to the boundaries of various zones, the following rules shall  
apply:  
  
1. Where the intended boundaries on the Zone Map are approximately street or alley  
lines, said street or alleys shall be construed to be the zone boundaries.  
  
2. Where the indicated boundaries are approximately lot lines, said lot lines shall  
be construed to be the zone boundaries, unless otherwise indicated.  
  
3. Where land has not been subdivided into lots, the zone boundary shall be  
determined by the use of a scale of measurement shown on the map.  
  
4. Where other uncertainty exists, the Board of Adjustment shall interpret the map,  
subject to review by the City Council.  
  
  
10-11-3: 
 APPLICATION OF ZONE REGULATIONS: The regulations set by this ordinance  
within each district shall be minimum regulations and shall apply uniformly to each class or kind of  
structure or land, and particularly except as hereinafter provided.  
  
(A) No building, structure, or land shall hereafter be used or occupied, and no building or  
structure or part thereof shall hereafter be erected, constructed, reconstructed, moved or  
structurally altered unless in conformity with all of the regulations herein specified for the  
zone in which it is located.  
  
(B) No building or other structure shall hereafter be erected or altered:  
  
1. To exceed the height;  
  
2. To accommodate or house a greater number of families;  
  
3. To occupy a greater percentage of lot area; or  
  
Page 2 of 4 REVISED 6-27-13  

  Loading....
  
4. To have narrower or smaller rear yards, front yards, side yards, or other open  
spaces;  
  
than herein required or in any other manner be contrary to the provisions of this ordinance,  
except that encroachment into yards shall be permitted on lots occupied by buildings which  
were in existence prior to the effective date of this ordinance, but not to an extent greater  
than the existing encroachment.  
  
(C) Every property annexed to the City must be assigned a zone as a part of the annexation.  
  
  
10-11-4: 
 SITING OF MANUFACTURED HOMES: Manufactured homes as defined in this  
(RMH 
code and ordinance may, in addition to being located upon manufactured housing zoning ),  
be allowed and sited on all land zones for single family residential uses upon meeting the  
placement standards as herein set forth and such use as provided herein shall be in addition to  
manufactured homes on lots within designated mobile home parks or manufactured home  
subdivisions.  
  
The following minimum requirements shall apply for the approval of manufactured homes located  
outside of RMH zone areas:  
  
(A) The manufactured home shall be multi-sectional and enclose a space of not less than the  
minimum square footage allowed in the zone in which it is being placed.   
  
(B) The manufactured home shall be placed on an excavated and backfilled permanent  
perimeter foundation as approved by the State of Idaho regulations and enclosed at the  
perimeter such that the home is similar in elevation to conventional site built homes; The  
manufactured home shall have a pitched roof with a standard of three (3) feet in height for  
each twelve (12) feet in width;  
  
(C) The manufactured home shall have exterior siding and roofing which in color, material, and  
appearance is similar to the exterior siding and roofing material commonly used on  
  
residential dwellings within the community or which is comparable to the predominant 
materials used on surrounding dwellings as determined by the local permit approval  
authority;  
  
(D) The requirement for parking and garages varies by residential zone. Refer to section 10-5- 
23-D-1-b for garage and parking requirements.   
(E) In addition to the provisions of paragraphs (A) through (D) of this subsection, the City shall  
subject a manufactured home and the lot upon which it is sited to any lot development  
standard, subdivision standards, and minimum size requirements to which a conventional  
single family residential dwelling on the same lot would be subjected;  
  
(F) Any manufactured housing placed upon a residential lot, not in a manufactured home zone,  
shall be of a manufacturing origin dated subsequent to the date of the most recent  
standards and not having had prior occupancy; or if prior thereto, or having had prior  
  
occupancy, shall have a Certificate of Compliance of Rehabilitation as provided inIdaho  
  
CodeTitle 44, Chapter 25.  
  
  
(G) Nothing in this section shall be construed as abrogating a recorded restrictive covenant. 
  
Page 3 of 4 REVISED 6-27-13  

  
  
  
Page 4 of 4 REVISED 6-27-13

CHAPTER 12 
  
  
  
RP RESIDENCE ZONE   
  
General Objectives and Characteristics of Zone  
10-12-1:  
Use Requirements  
10-12-2:  
Area Requirements  
10-12-3:  
Width Requirements  
10-12-4:  
Location of Buildings and Structures  
10-12-5:  
Height of Buildings  
10-12-6:  
Size of Buildings  
10-12-7:  
  
  
10-12-1: 
 GENERAL OBJECTIVES AND CHARACTERISTICS OF ZONE: The objective in  
establishing the RP Residence Zone is to encourage the creation and maintenance of residential  
areas within the City which are characterized by large lots at least twelve thousand (12,000) square  
feet on which single-family dwellings are situated, surrounded by well kept lawns, trees and other  
plantings.  A minimum of vehicular and pedestrian traffic and quiet residential conditions favorable to  
family living and the rearing of children shall also be characteristic of this zone.  No single lot,  
regardless of the status of platting in the RP Residence Zone shall contain more than one dwelling  
unit, except as specifically allowed by this Title of the City code.  This zone falls under the low  
density designation and does not allow density that will exceed 2.5 living units per acre.     
  
  
In order to accomplish the objectives and purposes of this ordinance and to promote the  
characteristics of this zone, the following regulations shall apply in the RP Residence Zone (see also  
§10-5 Supplementary Regulations to Zones, §10-7 Special Provisions Applying to Miscellaneous  
Uses, and §10-29 Subdivision Regulations).  
  
  
10-12-2: 
 USE REQUIREMENTS: The following uses shall be permitted in the RP Residence  
Zone:  
  
(A) One-family detached dwellings and accessory buildings, complying with all requirements  
  
   
of the zone including but not limited to setbacks and open space. 
  
  
(B) Agriculture and gardening.  
  
  
(C) Swimming Pools 
  
(D) Customary household pets, including, but not limited to, cats, dogs, and canaries; subject  
  
to the conditions of the City Code concerning animals.   
  
(E) Guest Houses (as allowed in section 10-13-2-(B).  
  
  
Page 1 of 3 REVISED 6-27-13  

  Loading....
(F) Churches, when approved by the Board of Adjustment as a conditional use, but not  
including temporary revival tents or buildings, and not including night lighting for outdoor  
recreational purposes, except when permitted under the term of paragraph 10-7-7.    
  
(G) Public and parochial schools and public and semi-public use, when approved by the  
Board of Adjustment as a conditional use, as set forth in paragraph 10-7-2.    
  
(H) Public utility buildings and structures, when approved as required.    
  
(I) Cemeteries, when approved by the Board of Adjustment as a conditional use.  
  
(J) Child Care Facilities allowing no more than twelve (12) children; which have received   
approval as a home occupation (Title 4, Chapter 13)  and are compliant and licensed as  
either a Family Child Care Facility or a Group Child Care Facility as defined in Title 6,  
Chapter 3 of the Ammon City Code.  
  
  
10-12-3: 
 AREA REQUIREMENTS: An area of not less than twelve thousand (12,000) square  
feet shall be provided and maintained for each one-family dwelling and uses accessory thereto.  
  
  
10-12-4: 
 WIDTH REQUIREMENTS: The minimum width of any building site for a dwelling  
shall be one hundred (100) linear feet.  
  
  
10-12-5: 
 LOCATION OF BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES:  
  
(A) Setback.    All buildings shall be set back a minimum distance of thirty (30) feet from any  
  
public street or from any granted easement of vehicularaccess, except as herein provided  
and required under the provisions of this ordinance.  No auxiliary building shall be located  
closer to the street (or granted easement of vehicular access) fronted by the main building,  
than the distance of the main building to the street (or granted easement of vehicular  
    
access). 
  
(B) Side Yards.  Subject to 10-12-5(A), there shall be a side yard on each side of a main building  
of not less than twenty (20) feet.       
  
1. Side yard requirements for accessory buildings shall be the same as for main  
buildings, except those subject to §10-12-5(A).  Any accessory building placed in  
the calculated side yard of the main building shall maintain the side yard  
requirements of the zone in which it is in.  The distance between the main building  
and the accessory building shall be subject to the requirements in the most  
recently adopted version of the International Building Code or International  
Residential Code as they may apply.  
  
2. No side yard shall be required for accessory buildings which are located more  
than twelve (12) feet in the rear of the main building (calculated from the furthest  
point of extension of any part of the foundation), provided that the auxiliary  
building's drip line remains within the property.    
  
Page 2 of 3 REVISED 6-27-13  

  Loading....
  
(C) Rear Yard.  Subject to §10-12-5(A), for main buildings, there shall be a rear yard of not less  
than twenty-five (25) feet.  Subject to §10-12-5(A), for accessory buildings, no rear yard shall  
be required, provided that the auxiliary building's drip line remains within the property, except  
where an alley is located at the rear of the lot, in which case a three (3) foot rear yard is  
required.  
  
  
10-12-6: 
 HEIGHT OF BUILDINGS: Maximum building height is subject to the Fire Department’s  
ability to provide adequate fire protection.  Roofs above the square of the building, chimneys, flag  
poles, television antennas and similar structures not for human occupancy are excluded in  
determining height.  
  
  
10-12-7: 
 SIZE OF BUILDINGS: The floor area of the first story above grade of any one-family  
dwelling shall be not less than one thousand four hundred (1,400) square feet, excluding garage  
space and open porches and carports.  For dwellings containing more than one story above grade,  
the floor space of the first story above grade may be reduced below this level provided the total floor  
area of all stories located above grade is not less than two thousand four hundred (2,400) square  
feet.  (Only those stories which are more than fifty percent (50%) above grade shall be considered to  
be above grade.  See §10-2 for the definition of "grade".)  
  
Page 3 of 3 REVISED 6-27-13  

CHAPTER 13 
  
  
  
RP-A RESIDENCE ZONE 
  
SECTION:  
  
General Objectives and Characteristics of Zone  
10-13-1:  
Use Requirements  
10-13-2:  
Area Requirements  
10-13-3:  
Width Requirements 
10-13-4:   
Location of Buildings and Structures  
10-13-5:  
Height of Buildings  
10-13-6:  
Size of Building  
10-13-7:  
  
  
10-13-1: 
 GENERAL OBJECTIVES AND CHARACTERISTICS OF ZONE: The objectives in  
establishing the RP-A Residence Zone is to provide a residential environment within the City which is  
characterized by smaller lots and somewhat denser residential environment than is characteristic of  
the RP Residence Zone.  Nevertheless, this zone is characterized by spacious yards and other  
residential amenities adequate to maintain desirable single-family residential conditions.  The  
principal uses permitted in this zone shall be one-family dwellings and certain other public facilities  
needed to promote and maintain stable residential neighborhoods.  No single lot, regardless of the  
status of platting in the RP-A Residence Zone shall contain more than one dwelling unit, except as  
specifically allowed by this Title.  This zone falls under the low density designation and does not  
     
allow density that will exceed 2.5 living units per acre. 
    
In order to accomplish the objectives and purposes of this ordinance and to promote the essential  
characteristics of this zone, the following regulations shall apply in the RP-A Residence zone (see  
also §10-5 Supplementary Regulations to Zones, §10-7 Special Provisions Applying to Miscellaneous  
Uses, and §10-29 Subdivision Regulations).  
  
  
10-13-2: 
 USE REQUIREMENTS: The following uses shall be permitted in the RP-A Residence  
Zone:  
  
(A) Any use permitted in the RP Residence Zone.  
  
(B) Guest houses shall be allowed under the following conditions:  
1. Lot size shall be a minimum of 20,000 square feet.    
2. Guest house shall not exceed 300 square feet (measured at the foundation line).  
Kitchen area shall not contain full cooking facilities.  Items allowed shall not  
exceed the following items:  
  
a. Dishwasher  
b. Two burner cook top (no oven)  
c. Microwave Oven  
d. Refrigerator  
e. Single bowl kitchen sink  
  
Page 1 of 3 REVISED 6-27-13  

  Loading....
  
4. Bath not exceeding toilet, bath sink, shower stall.  
5. Utility connections shall be a part of the main house.  
6. Architecturally designed to be consistent with the main living structure.  
7. Shall not have separate parking area.  
8. Building shall meet all requirements of the building code as adopted by the City of  
Ammon.  
9. A maximum of one guest house is allowed per platted building lot.  
10. A water meter shall be installed on the water system of each property with a guest  
house.  The property shall be assessed the metered residential water and sewer  
rates based on the current utility rate resolution of the City Council, which may be  
changed from time to time by resolution of the City Council.  
  
  
10-13-3: 
 AREA REQUIREMENTS: An area of not less than ten thousand (10,000) square feet  
shall be provided and maintained for each one-family dwelling and uses accessory thereto.  No  
minimum area shall be required for other main buildings except as required for conditional uses  
permitted in the zone.  
  
  
10-13-4: 
 WIDTH REQUIREMENTS: The minimum width of any building site for a dwelling  
shall be ninety (90) linear feet, measured at the setback line.  
  
  
10-13-5: 
 LOCATION OF BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES:  
  
(A) Setback.   All buildings shall be set back a minimum distance of thirty (30) feet from  
any public street or from any granted easement of vehicular access, except as herein  
provided and required under the provisions of this ordinance.  No auxiliary building shall  
be located closer to the street (or granted easement of vehicular access) fronted by the  
main building, than the distance of the main building to the street (or granted easement of  
vehicular access).  
  
(B) Side Yards.  Subject to 10-13-5(A), there shall be a side yard on each side of a main  
building of not less than eight (8) inches for each foot of building height, except that no  
side yard shall be less than ten feet (10).     
  
1. Side yard requirements for accessory buildings shall be the same as for main  
buildings, except those subject to §10-13-5(A).  Any accessory building placed in  
the calculated side yard of the main building shall maintain the side yard  
requirements of the zone in which it is in.  The distance between the main building  
and the accessory building shall be subject to the requirements in the most  
recently adopted version of the International Building Code or International  
Residential Code as they may apply.  
  
2. No side yard shall be required for accessory buildings which are located more  
than twelve (12) feet in the rear of the main building (calculated from the furthest  
point of extension of any part of the foundation), provided that the auxiliary  
building's drip line remains within the property.    
  
Page 2 of 3 REVISED 6-27-13  

  
  
(B) Rear Yard.   Subject to §10-13-5(A), for main buildings, there shall be a rear yard of not  
less than twenty-five (25) feet.  Subject to §10-13-5(A), for accessory buildings, no rear yard  
shall be required, provided that the auxiliary building's drip line remains within the property,  
except where an alley is located at the rear of the lot, in which case a three (3) foot rear yard  
is required.  
  
  
10-13-6: 
 HEIGHT OF BUILDINGS: Maximum building height is subject to the Fire Department’s  
ability to provide adequate fire protection.  Roofs above the square of the building, chimneys, flag  
poles, television antennas, church towers and similar structures not suited for human occupancy are  
excluded in determining height.  
  
  
10-13-7: 
 SIZE OF BUILDINGS: The floor area of the first story above grade of any one-family  
dwelling shall not be less than one thousand two hundred (1,200) square feet, excluding garage  
space and open porches and carports.  For dwellings containing more than one story above grade,  
the floor space of the first story above grade may be reduced below this level provided the total floor  
area of all stories located above grade is not less than two thousand (2,000) square feet.  (Only  
those stories which are more than fifty percent (50%) above grade shall be considered to be above  
grade.  See §10-2 for the definition of "grade".)  For churches, schools, and other buildings, there  
shall be no minimum floor area requirements.  
  
Page 3 of 3 REVISED 6-27-13  

CHAPTER 14  
  
R-1 RESIDENCE ZONE  
  
SECTION:  
  
10-14-1: General Objectives and Characteristics of Zone  
10-14-2: Use Requirements  
10-14-3: Area Requirements  
10-14-4: Width Requirements  
10-14-5: Location of Buildings and Structures  
10-14-6: Height Requirements  
10-14-7Size of Buildings 
:   
  
  
10-14-1: 
 GENERAL OBJECTIVES AND CHARACTERISTICS OF ZONE: The objective in  
establishing the R-1 Residence Zone is to provide a residential environment within the City which is  
characterized by somewhat smaller lot width and a somewhat denser residential environment than  
is characteristic of the RP-A Residence Zone.  Also characteristic of this zone are residential  
amenities adequate to maintain desirable residential neighborhoods.  The principal permitted uses  
in the R-1 Residence Zone shall be single family dwelling units and certain other public facilities  
which are necessary to promote and maintain stable residential neighborhoods.  No single lot,  
regardless of the status of platting in the R-1 Residence Zone shall contain more than one living  
unit. This zone falls under the medium density designation and does not allow density that will  
exceed 4.0 living units per acre.     
  
In order to accomplish the objectives and purposes of this ordinance and to promote the essential  
characteristics of this zone, the following regulations shall apply in the R-1 Residence Zone (see  
also §10-5 Supplementary Regulations to Zones, §10-7 Special Provisions Applying to  
Miscellaneous Uses, and §10-29 Subdivision Regulations).  
  
  
10-14-2: 
 USE REQUIREMENTS: The following uses shall be permitted in the R-1 Residence  
Zone:  
  
(A) Any use permitted in the RP Residence Zone and in the RP-A Residence Zone, excluding  
guest houses.    
  
  
10-14-3:  
AREA REQUIREMENTS:   Area requirements shall be determined as listed below:  
  
(A) For property annexed or zoned with the R-1 classification, prior to the adoption (6-27-13) of  
section 10-14-3-(B), the following area requirements shall apply;  
   
 An area of not less than eight thousand (8,000) square feet shall be provided and  
maintained for each dwelling.  No minimum area shall be required for other main buildings,  
except as may be required for conditional uses permitted in the zone.  
  
(B) For areas annexed with the R-1 classification and for land rezoned R-1 after the  
adoption date (6-27-13) of section 10-14-3-(B), the following area requirements shall  
apply:  
  
Page 1 of 3 REVISED 6-27-13  

  Loading....
 An area of not less than five thousand (5,000) square feet shall be provided and maintained  
for each dwelling.  No minimum area shall be required for other main buildings, except as  
may be required for conditional uses permitted in the zone.    
  
(C) Property zoned R-1 within the City prior to the adoption (6-27-13) of section 10-14-3-(B)  
may be permitted to apply section 10-14-3-(B) to an amended or new final plat after a  
Conditional Use Permit hearing has be held and all persons required to be notified in such a  
hearing have been given the opportunity to be heard.  
  
  
10-14-4: 
 WIDTH REQUIREMENTS: Width requirements shall be determined as listed below:  
  
(A) For property annexed or zoned with the R-1 classification, prior to the adoption (6-27-13) of  
section 10-14-4-(B), the following width requirements shall apply;  
  
 The minimum width of any building site or residential building lot not previously platted or  
subdivided according to the records of the City shall be eighty (80) linear feet (at the  
building setback line).  
  
(B) For areas annexed and zoned with the R-1 classification and for land rezoned R-1 after  
the adoption date (6-27-13) of section 10-14-4-(B), the following width requirements  
shall apply:  
 The minimum width of any building site or residential building lot not previously platted or  
subdivided according to the records of the City shall be fifty  (50) linear feet (At the building  
setback line).  
  
(C) Property zoned R-1 within the City prior to the adoption (6-27-13) of section 10-14-4-(B),  
may be permitted to apply section 10-14-4-(B) to an amended or new final plat after a  
Conditional Use Permit hearing has be held and all persons required to be notified in such a  
hearing have been given the opportunity to be heard.  
  
  
10-14-5: 
 LOCATION OF BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES:  
  
  
(A) Setback.  All buildings shall be set back a minimum distance of thirty (30)feet from the  
property line adjacent to any public street or from any granted easement of vehicular  
access, except as herein provided and required under the provisions of this ordinance.   No  
auxiliary building shall be located closer to the street (or granted easement of vehicular  
access) fronted by the main building, than the distance of the main building to the street (or  
granted easement of vehicular access).  
  
(B) Side Yards.  Subject to 10-14-5(A), there shall be a side yard on each side of a main  
building of not less than eight (8) inches for each foot of building height, except that no side  
yard shall be less than eight feet (8).     
  
1. Side yard requirements for accessory buildings shall be the same as for main  
buildings, except those subject to §10-14-5(A).  Any accessory building placed in  
the calculated side yard of the main building shall maintain the side yard  
requirements of the zone in which it is in.  The distance between the main  
building and the accessory building shall be subject to the requirements in the  
most recently adopted version of the International Building Code or International  
Residential Code as they may apply.  
  
  
Page 2 of 3 REVISED 6-27-13  

  Loading....
2. No side yard shall be required for accessory buildings which are located more  
than twelve (12) feet in the rear of the main building (calculated from the furthest  
point of extension of any part of the foundation), provided that the auxiliary  
building's drip line remains within the property.    
  
(C) Rear Yard.  Subject to §10-14-5(A), for main buildings, there shall be a rear yard of not less  
than twenty-five (25) feet.  Subject to §10-14-5(A), for accessory buildings, no rear yard  
shall be required, provided that the auxiliary building's drip line remains within the property,  
except where an alley is located at the rear of a lot, in which case a three (3) foot rear yard  
is required.  
  
  
10-14-6: 
 HEIGHT REQUIREMENTS: Maximum building height is subject to the Fire  
Department’s ability to provide adequate fire protection.  Roofs above the square of the building,  
chimneys, flag poles, television antennas, church towers and similar structures not used for human  
occupancy are excluded in determining height.  
  
  
10-14-7: 
 SIZE OF BUILDINGS: The floor area of the first story above grade of any one-family  
dwelling shall be not less than one thousand (1,000) square feet, excluding garage space and open  
porches and carports.  For dwellings containing more than one story above grade, the floor space  
of the first story above grade may be reduced below this level provided the total floor area of all  
stories located above grade is not less than one thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet.  (Only  
those stories which are more than fifty percent (50%) above grade shall be considered to be above  
grade.  See §10-2 for the definition of "grade".)   For other buildings, there shall be no minimum  
floor area requirements.  
  
  
Page 3 of 3 REVISED 6-27-13

  CHAPTER 14A  
  
R1-A    
  
  
10-14A-3: Area Requirements  
10-14A-4: Width Requirements  
10-14A-5: Location of Buildings and Structures  
10-14A-6: Height Requirements  
10-14A-7: Size of Buildings  
10-14A-8: Special Provisions Regarding Single Family Attached Dwellings  
  
  
10-14A-1:  
 GENERAL OBJECTIVES AND CHARACTERISTICS OF ZONE: The objective in  
establishing the R1-A Residence Zone is to provide a residential environment within the City which is  
characterized by somewhat smaller lot width than is characteristic of the RP-A Residence Zone and  
a somewhat denser residential environment than is characteristic of the R-1 Residence Zone.  Also  
characteristic of this zone are residential amenities adequate to maintain desirable residential  
neighborhoods.  The principal permitted uses in the R1-A Residence Zone shall be one family  
dwellings and one structure containing two (2) single one family dwellings as ordinarily referred to as  
townhouses and certain other public facilities which are necessary to promote and maintain stable  
residential neighborhoods.  This zone falls under the medium density designation and does not allow  
    
density that will exceed 4.0 living units per acre.  
  
In order to accomplish the objectives and purposes of this ordinance and to promote the essential  
characteristics of this zone, the following regulations shall apply in the R1-A Residence Zone (see  
also §10-5 Supplementary Regulations to Zones, §10-7 Special Provisions Applying to Miscellaneous  
Uses, and §10-29 Subdivision Regulations).  
  
  
10-14A-2:  
 USE REQUIREMENTS: The following uses shall be permitted in the R1-A Residence  
Zone:  
  
(A) Any use permitted in the RP Residence Zone, RP-A Residence Zone and in the R-1  
Residence Zone.  
  
(B) Single family attached dwellings with no more than two (2) single family units in any one  
structure and with no more than one (1) structure on any designated lot.  
  
  
10-14A-3:  
 AREA REQUIREMENTS:  For detached dwellings, the minimum requirements of the  
R-1 zone as specified in §10-14-3-(A) shall apply.  For buildings containing two (2) dwelling units, an  
area of not less than ten thousand (10,000) square feet shall be required.  No more than four (4.0)  
dwelling units shall be permitted per acre.  No minimum area shall be required for other main  
buildings, except as may be required for conditional uses permitted in the zone.  
  
  
  
Page 1 of 4 REVISED 6-27-13  

  Loading....
10-14A-4:  
 WIDTH REQUIREMENTS: The width requirements set forth in this section shall  
apply to the building setback line of the main structure.  
  
(A) The minimum width of any building site or residential building lot not previously platted or  
subdivided according to the records of the City shall be one hundred (100) linear feet.  
  
  
10-14A-5:  
 LOCATION OF BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES:  
  
  
(A) Setback.  All buildings shall be set back a minimum distance of thirty (30)feet from the  
property line adjacent to any public street, or except for alleys, from any granted easement of  
vehicular access, except as herein provided and required under the provisions of this  
ordinance.  
  
(B) Side Yard.  Subject to 10-14A-5(A), there shall be a side yard on each side of a main building  
of not less than eight (8) inches for each foot of building height, except that no side yard shall  
be less than eight feet (8).     
  
1. Side yard requirements for accessory buildings shall be the same as for main  
buildings, except those subject to §10-14A-5(A).  Any accessory building placed in  
the calculated side yard of the main building shall maintain the side yard  
requirements of the zone in which it is in.  The distance between the main building  
and the accessory building shall be subject to the requirements in the most  
recently adopted version of the International Building Code or International  
Residential Code as they may apply.  
  
2. No side yard shall be required for accessory buildings which are located more  
than twelve (12) feet in the rear of the main building (calculated from the furthest  
point of extension of any part of the foundation), provided that the auxiliary  
building's drip line remains within the property.    
  
3. There shall be no side yard setback requirement for the property line between  
zero lot line single family attached dwellings where the dwelling units are attached  
by party wall/common walls with the following requirements:    
  
a. At the point at the rear of any party wall/common wall where an  
attached dwelling becomes detached along the zero lot line, the side  
yard requirement shall be no less than four (4) feet from the foundation  
of the detachment to the property line.  
  
b. For detached portions that are at the front of an attached dwelling,  
there shall be no less than four (4) feet from the foundation of the  
detachment to the property line and there shall be no more than four  
(4) feet running front to back of the dwelling that shall be detached  
from the dwelling sharing the party wall/common wall.   
  
  
Page 2 of 4 REVISED 6-27-13  

  Loading....
c. There shall be an attached party wall/common wall of no less than  
twelve (12) feet between any attached dwellings permitted within this  
chapter or any subsequent chapter allowing single family attached  
dwellings.    
  
(C) Rear Yard.   Subject to §10-14A-5(A), for main buildings, there shall be a rear yard of not  
less than twenty-five (25) feet.  Subject to §10-14A-5(A), for accessory buildings, no rear  
yard shall be required, provided that the auxiliary building's drip line remains within the  
property, except where an alley is located at the rear of a lot, in which case a three (3) foot  
rear yard is required.  
  
  
10-14A-6  
 HEIGHT REQUIREMENTS: Maximum building height is subject to the Fire  
Department’s ability to provide adequate fire protection.  Roofs above the square of the building,  
chimneys, flag poles, television antennas, church towers and similar structures not used for human  
occupancy are excluded in determining height.  
  
  
10-14A-7:  
 SIZE OF BUILDINGS: The floor area of the first story above grade of any single-family  
dwelling unit shall be not less than one thousand (1,000) square feet, excluding garage space and  
open porches and carports.  For dwellings containing more than one story above grade, the floor  
space of the first story above grade may be reduced below this level provided the total floor area of  
all stories located above grade is not less than one thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet.  (Only  
those stories which are more than fifty percent (50%) above grade shall be considered to be above  
grade.  See §10-2 for the definition of "grade".)  For other buildings, there shall be no minimum floor  
area requirements.  
  
10-14A-8:  
 SPECIAL PROVISIONS REGARDING SINGLE FAMILY ATTACHED DWELLINGS:  
  
(A) No single family attached dwelling shall be located above another dwelling unit, either in  
whole or in part.  
  
(B) Each single family attached dwelling shall have at least one direct pedestrian access from  
the interior of the dwelling to the exterior boundaries of the lot and no pedestrian access may  
be held in common with another single family dwelling unit.  
  
(C) Except as noted below, a single family attached dwelling shall have no facilities or property in  
common with another single family attached dwelling and all dwellings shall be structurally  
and functionally independent from each other.  All singe family attached dwellings shall have  
separate electrical service, water service lines, and sanitary sewer service lines.  Common   
facilities or property are allowed for the following:  
  
1. Common party walls constructed in accordance with the International Building Code  
or International Residential Code as they may apply.  
  
2. Foundations supporting attached or party walls.  
  
3. Flashing at the termination of the roof covering over any attached walls.  
  
4. Roofs.  
  
Page 3 of 4 REVISED 6-27-13  

  Loading....
  
5. Vehicular access to a dedicated street for off street parking facilities or detached  
garages.  
  
(D) No certificate of occupancy shall be issued for a single family attached dwelling unless a  
common facility or party wall agreement or Declaration of Condominium, together with a  
separate legal description for each living unit has been filed with the Bonneville County  
Recorder's Office and a copy provided to the City of Ammon, for each such dwelling unit  
which shares common facilities with another unit.  Such agreement shall include a legal  
description of the individual dwelling units sharing common facilities and shall allocate  
responsibility as and between the owners of such lots for the use, maintenance, and  
ownership of all common facilities.  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Page 4 of 4 REVISED 6-27-13  

CHAPTER 15  
  
  
R-2 RESIDENCE ZONE  
  
SECTION:  
  
10-15-1: General Objectives and Characteristics of Zone  
10-15-2: Use Requirements  
10-15-3: Area Requirements  
10-15-4: Width Requirements  
10-15-5: Location of Buildings and Structures  
10-15-6: Height Requirements  
10-15-7: Size of Buildings  
10-15-8: Lot Coverage  
10-15-9: Special Provisions Regarding Single-Family Attached Dwellings 
  
  
  
10-15-1: 
 GENERAL OBJECTIVES AND CHARACTERISTICS OF ZONE: The objective in  
establishing the R-2 Residence Zone is to encourage the creation and maintenance of residential  
areas within the City which are characterized by smaller dwellings, somewhat more compact and  
denser residential development, and somewhat higher volumes of vehicular and pedestrian traffic  
than are characteristic of the RP, RP-A, R-1 and R1-A Zones.       
  
The principal permitted uses in the R-2 Residence Zone shall be one family detached dwellings,  
buildings containing two (2), three (3), or four (4) zero lot line attached dwelling units, and certain  
other public facilities which are necessary to promote and maintain stable residential areas.  
  
In order to accomplish the objectives and purposes of this ordinance and to promote the essential  
characteristics of this zone, the following regulations shall apply in the R-2 Residence Zone (see also  
§10-5 Supplementary Regulations to Zones, §10-7 Special Provisions Applying to Miscellaneous  
Uses, and §10-29 Subdivision Regulations).  
  
  
10-15-2:  
USE REQUIREMENTS: The following uses shall be permitted in the R-2 Residence  
Zone:  
  
(A) Any use permitted in the RP, RP-A, R-1 and R1-A Zones.    
  
(B) Buildings containing Two (2), Three (3), and Four (4) zero lot line single-family attached  
dwelling units.  
  
(C) Child Care Facilities allowing no more than twelve (12) children; which have received   
approval as a home occupation (Title 4, Chapter 13)  and are compliant and licensed as  
either a Family Child Care Facility or a Group Child Care Facility as defined in Title 6,  
Chapter 3 of the Ammon City Code.  Written permission from the property owner must be  
received when the child care facility is located within a dwelling unit of a building or complex  
considered to be an apartment complex or building.  
  
Page 1 of 5           REVISED 6-27-13  
  

  Loading....
  
  
10-15-3:  
 AREA REQUIREMENTS:  For detached dwellings, the minimum requirements of the  
R-1 zone as specified in §10-14-3-(A) shall apply.  For buildings containing no more than two (2)  
dwelling units, the minimum requirements of the R1-A Residence zone, Chapter 14A shall apply. For  
buildings containing three (3) or four (4) dwelling units, an area of not less than eighteen thousand  
(18,000) square feet shall be required.  This zone falls under the medium high density designation,  
no more than eight (8.0) dwelling units shall be permitted per acres.     
  
No minimum area shall be required for other main buildings, except as may be required for  
conditional use permitted in the zone.  
  
  
10-15-4:  
 WIDTH REQUIREMENTS: The minimum width of any building site or residential  
building lot not previously platted or subdivided according to the records of the City shall be one  
hundred (100) linear feet.  
  
10-15-5: 
     LOCATION OF BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES:  
  
  
(A) Setback.  All buildings shall be set back a minimum distance of thirty (30)feet from the  
property line adjacent to any public street or from any granted easement of vehicular access,  
except as herein provided and required under the provisions of this ordinance. No auxiliary  
building shall be located closer to the street (or granted easement of vehicular access)  
fronted by the main building, than the distance of the main building to the street (or granted  
easement of vehicular access).  
  
  
(B) Side Yards.  Subject to 10-15-5(A), there shall be a side yard on each side of a main building  
of not less than eight (8) inches for each foot of building height, except that no side yard shall  
be less than eight feet (8).     
  
1. Side yard requirements for accessory buildings shall be the same as for main  
buildings, except those subject to §10-15-5(A).  Any accessory building placed in  
the calculated side yard of the main building shall maintain the side yard  
requirements of the zone in which it is in.  The distance between the main building  
and the accessory building shall be subject to the requirements in the most  
recently adopted version of the International Building Code or International  
Residential Code as they may apply.  
  
2. No side yard shall be required for accessory buildings which are located more  
than twelve (12) feet in the rear of the main building (calculated from the furthest  
point of extension of any part of the foundation), provided that the auxiliary  
building's drip line remains within the property.    
  
3. There shall be no side yard setback requirement for the property line between  
zero lot line single family attached dwellings where the dwelling units are attached  
by party wall/common walls with the following requirements:    
  
Page 2 of 5           REVISED 6-27-13  
  

  Loading....
  
a. At the point at the rear of any party wall/common wall where an  
attached dwelling becomes detached along the zero lot line, the side  
yard requirement shall be no less than four (4) feet from the foundation  
of the detachment to the property line.  
  
b. For detached portions that are at the front of an attached dwelling,  
there shall be no less than four (4) feet from the foundation of the  
detachment to the property line and there shall be no more than four  
(4) feet running front to back of the dwelling that shall be detached  
from the dwelling sharing the party wall/common wall.   
  
c. There shall be an attached party wall/common wall of no less than  
twelve (12) feet between any attached dwellings permitted within this  
chapter or any subsequent chapter allowing single family attached  
dwellings.    
  
(C) Rear Yard.  Subject to §10-15-5(A), for main buildings, there shall be a rear yard of not less  
than twenty-five (25) feet.  Subject to §10-15-5(A), for accessory buildings, no rear yard shall  
be required, provided that the auxiliary building's drip line remains within the property, except  
where an alley is located at the rear of a lot, in which case a three (3) foot rear yard is  
required.  
  
  
10-15-6: 
 HEIGHT REQUIREMENTS: Maximum building height is subject to the Fire  
Department’s ability to provide adequate fire protection.  Roofs above the square of the building,  
chimneys, flag poles, television antennas, church towers and other similar structures not used for  
human occupancy are excluded in determining height.  
  
  
10-15-7:  
SIZE OF BUILDINGS: The floor area of the first story above grade of any detached  
one-family dwelling unit shall be not less than one thousand (1,000) square feet, and of any attached  
one-family dwelling unit shall be not less than nine hundred (900) square feet, excluding garage  
space and open porches and carports.  For dwellings containing more than one story above grade,  
the floor space of the first story above grade may be reduced below this level provided the total floor  
area of all stories located above grade of any detached one-family dwelling unit shall be not less than  
one thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet, and of any attached one-family dwelling unit shall be  
not less than one thousand three hundred (1,300) square feet.  (Only those stories which are more  
than fifty percent (50%) above grade shall be considered to be above grade.  See §10-2 for the  
definition of "grade".)  For other buildings, there shall be no minimum floor area requirements.  
  
  
  
Page 3 of 5           REVISED 6-27-13  
  

  Loading....
10-15-8: 
   LOT COVERAGE:  
  
(A) Maximum Lot Coverage.  Lot coverage, including all areas under roofs and paved or  
concrete surfaces, shall not exceed seventy percent (70%) of the total lot and parking  
area. The maximum lot coverage of single-family attached dwelling units shall be  
sixty-five percent (65%) for interior lots and fifty percent (50%) for corner lots.  The  
remaining lot area shall be landscaped in accordance with provisions of this ordinance.   
All landscaping outside of that immediately between any main building and any public  
street shall be located, designed, and developed for the benefit and enjoyment of the  
residents of the dwelling(s), including appropriate play areas for children.  
  
(B) Lot Coverage Exemption.  The landscaped area on a lot will be considered to include  
such hard-surface outdoor recreation facilities as tennis courts, basketball courts,  
shuffleboard courts, and swimming pools, provided that:  
  
1. The hard-surface outdoor recreation facilities make up no more than forty percent  
(40%) of the required landscaped area, and  
  
2. Those facilities are available for the use of all residents of the development.  
  
(C) Required Buffers.  Wherever a development in the R-2 Zone adjoins land zoned RP, RP- 
A, R-1, R1-A or RMH, or unincorporated land designated for single family residential use  
in the City's Comprehensive Plan, a minimum ten (10) foot wide landscaped buffer shall  
be provided.  This buffer may be included in the thirty percent (30%) minimum  
landscaped area required in (A) above.  
  
10-15-9: 
  SPECIAL PROVISIONS REGARDING SINGLE-FAMILY ATTACHED DWELLINGS.  
  
(A) All lots upon which a single-family attached dwelling is located shall have vehicular  
access to and frontage upon a dedicated street or upon a granted easement of access of  
not less than twenty-five (25) feet in width and of a distance from the public dedicated  
street of no longer than approved by the planning and zoning commission.  
  
(B) No single-family attached dwelling shall be located above another dwelling unit, either in  
whole or in part.  
  
(C) Each single-family attached dwelling shall have at least one direct pedestrian access from  
the interior of the dwelling to the exterior boundaries of the lot and no pedestrian access may  
be held in common with another single-family dwelling unit.  
  
(D) No more than four (4) single-family attached dwellings may be attached together.  
  
(E) Except as noted below, a single-family attached dwelling shall have no facilities or property in  
common with another single-family attached dwelling and all dwellings shall be structurally  
and functionally independent from each other.  All single-family attached dwellings shall have  
separate electrical service, water service lines, and sanitary sewer service lines.  Common  
facilities or property are allowed for the following:  
  
  
Page 4 of 5           REVISED 6-27-13  
  

  Loading....
1. Common party walls constructed in accordance with the International Building Code  
or International Residential Code as they may apply.  
  
2. Foundations supporting attached or party walls.  
   
3. Flashing at the termination of the roof covering over any attached walls.  
  
4. Roofs.  
  
5. Vehicular access to a dedicated street for off-street parking facilities or detached  
garages.  
  
(F) No certificate of occupancy shall be issued for a single family attached dwelling unless a  
common facility or party wall agreement or Declaration of Condominium, together with a  
separate legal description for each dwelling unit has been filed with the Bonneville County  
Recorder's Office and a copy provided to the City of Ammon, for each such dwelling unit  
which shares common facilities with another unit.  Such agreement shall include a legal  
description of the individual dwelling units sharing common facilities and shall allocate  
responsibility as and between the owners of such lots for the use, maintenance, and  
ownership of all common facilities.  
  
  
  
Page 5 of 5           REVISED 6-27-13  

CHAPTER 16  
  
R2-A RESIDENCE ZONE  
  
SECTION:  
  
10-16-1:  General Objectives and Characteristics of Zone  
10-16-2: Use Requirements  
10-16-3: Area Requirements  
10-16-4: Width Requirements  
10-16-5: Location of Buildings and Structures  
10-16-6: Height Requirements  
10-16-7:     Size of Buildings  
10-16-8: Lot Coverage  
10-16-9: Special Provisions Regarding Single-Family Attached Townhouse Dwellings  
10-16-10: Vehicular Access   
  
10-16-1: GENERAL OBJECTIVES AND CHARACTERISTICS OF ZONE:  The objective in  
establishing the R2-A Residence Zone is to designate appropriate areas within the City.      
  
In order to accomplish the objectives and purposes of this ordinance and to promote the essential  
characteristics of this zone, the following regulations shall apply in the R2-A Residence Zone (see  
also §10-5 Supplementary Regulations to Zones, §10-7 Special Provisions Applying to  
Miscellaneous Uses, and §10-29 Subdivision Regulations).  
  
  
10-16-2: USE REQUIREMENTS:  The following uses shall be permitted in the R2-A  
Residence Zone:  
  
(A) Any use permitted in the RP, RP-A, R-1, R1-A, AND R-2 Zones.  
  
(B) Assisted Living Centers, Foster family care homes or Convalescent Homes for not more  
than twenty (20) residents.  
  
(C) Townhome, condominium, and apartment buildings containing not more than eight (8)  
dwelling units.  No more than eight (8) such dwelling units are permitted on any designated  
lot, although the Planning and Zoning Commission may permit such dwelling units to be  
distributed between more than one building on the lot, provided each such building  
independently meets the area requirements, location of buildings and structures  
requirements, height requirements, and size of buildings requirements of the zone.  
  
  
10-16-3: AREA REQUIREMENTS: For detached dwellings, the minimum requirements of  
the R-1 zone as specified in §10-14-3 apply.  For buildings containing two (2) dwelling units, the  
minimum requirements of the R1-A zone as specified in §10-14A-3 apply.  For buildings  
  
Page 1 of 5 Revised 12-21-17  
  

  Loading....
  
containing three (3) to eight (8) dwelling units, an area of not less than fourteen thousand (14,000)  
square feet, plus an additional three thousand (3,000) square feet per dwelling unit for each  
dwelling unit above three (3) shall be required.  This zone falls under the medium high density  
designation, no more than twelve (12.0) dwelling units shall be permitted per acre.    
  
For Assisted Living Centers and Convalescent Homes, an area of at least six thousand (6000)  
square feet shall be provided, plus two (2) square feet of lot area for each square foot of floor  
space in the building in excess of one thousand (1000) square feet.  
  
  
10-16-4: WIDTH REQUIREMENTS:  The minimum width of any building site or residential  
building lot for each building containing one (1) dwelling unit shall be as specified in 10-14-4.  The  
minimum width of any building site or residential building lot for each building containing two (2)  
to eight (8) dwelling units shall be as specified in 10-14A-4.  The minimum width of any building  
site or lot for each child day care center shall be as specified in 10-15-4. The minimum width of  
any building site or lot, not previously platted or subdivided according to the records of the City,  
for use as an Assisted Living Center or Convalescent Home or similar main building shall be  
eighty (80) feet, plus five (5) feet of additional width for each one hundred (100) square feet of  
floor area devoted to bedrooms for the accommodation of patients or residents.  
  
  
10-16-5: LOCATION OF BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES:  
  
(A) Setback.  All buildings shall be set back a minimum distance of thirty (30) feet from the  
property line adjacent to any public street or from any granted easement of vehicular  
access, except as herein provided and required under the provisions of this ordinance.   
No auxiliary building shall be located closer to the street (or granted easement of vehicular  
access) fronted by the main building, than the distance of the main building to the street  
(or granted easement of vehicular access).  
  
(B) Side Yards.  Subject to 10-16-5(A), there shall be a side yard on each side of a main  
building of not less than eight (8) inches for each foot of building height, except that no  
side yard shall be less than eight feet (8).     
  
1. Side yard requirements for accessory buildings shall be the same as for main  
buildings, except those subject to §10-16-5(A).  Any accessory building placed in  
the calculated side yard of the main building shall maintain the side yard  
requirements of the zone in which it is in.  The distance between the main  
building and the accessory building shall be subject to the requirements in the  
most recently adopted version of the International Building Code or International  
Residential Code as they may apply.  
  
2. No side yard shall be required for accessory buildings which are located more than  
twelve (12) feet in the rear of the main building (calculated from the furthest point  
of extension of any part of the foundation), provided that the auxiliary building's  
drip line remains within the property.    
  
Page 2 of 5 Revised 12-21-17  
  

  Loading....
  
  
3. There shall be no side yard setback requirement for the property line between zero  
lot line single-family attached dwellings where the dwelling units are attached by  
party wall/common walls.  The side yard requirements shall be maintained for the  
exterior boundaries of any units, which are attached by party walls.  All accessory  
buildings shall comply with the setback requirements set forth above.  There shall  
be an attached party wall/common wall of no less than twelve (12) feet between  
any attached dwellings permitted within this chapter or any subsequent chapter  
allowing single family attached dwellings.  
  
  
(C) Rear Yard.  Subject to §10-16-5(A), for main buildings, there shall be a rear yard of not  
less than twenty-five (25) feet.  Subject to §10-16-5(A), for accessory buildings, no rear  
yard shall be required, provided that the auxiliary building's drip line remains within the  
 property, except where an alley is located at the rear of a lot, in which case a three  
(3) foot rear yard is required.  
  
  
10-16-6: HEIGHT REQUIREMENTS:  Maximum building height is subject to the Fire  
e fire protection.  Roofs above the square of the building,  
chimneys, flag poles, television antennas, church towers and similar structures not used for  
human occupancy are excluded in determining height.  
  
  
10-16-7: SIZE OF BUILDINGS:  For attached multiple family dwellings and other  
buildings, there shall be no minimum floor area requirements.  For single family detached or  
attached townhouses/condominium units the minimum square footage shall be 1100 square feet  
per living unit.    
  
  
10-16-8:   LOT COVERAGE:  
  
(A) Maximum Lot Coverage.  Lot coverage, including all areas under roofs and paved or  
concrete surfaces, shall not exceed seventy percent (70%) of the total lot and parking  
area. The maximum lot coverage of single-family attached dwelling units shall be  
sixty-five percent (65%) for interior lots and fifty percent (50%) for corner lots.  The  
remaining lot area shall be landscaped in accordance with provisions of this ordinance.   
All landscaping outside of that immediately between any main building and any public  
street shall be located, designed, and developed for the benefit and enjoyment to the  
residents of the dwelling(s), including appropriate play areas for children.  
  
(B) Lot Coverage Exemption.  The landscaped area on a lot will be considered to include  
such hard-surface outdoor recreation facilities as tennis courts, basketball courts,  
shuffleboard courts, and swimming pools, provided that:  
  
1. The hard-surface outdoor recreation facilities make up no more than forty percent  
  
Page 3 of 5 Revised 12-21-17  
  

  Loading....
  
(40%) of the required landscaped area, and  
  
2. Those facilities are available for the use of all residents of the development.  
  
(C) Required Buffers.  Wherever a development in the R2-A Zone adjoins land zoned RE, RP,  
RP-A, R-1, R1-A or RMH, or unincorporated land designated for single family residential  
use in the City's Comprehensive Plan, a minimum ten (10) foot wide landscaped buffer  
and  a minimum six (6) foot high site obscuring fence shall be provided.  This buffer may  
be included in the thirty percent (30%) minimum landscaped area required in (A) above.   
If an open space of at least thirty (30) feet is provided between all buildings (whether main  
or auxiliary) and the adjacent zone the requirement of a fence can be waived.  Said open  
space shall include some combination of planted trees, shrubs, vines, ground cover,  
flowers or lawns.    
  
  
10-16-9:  SPECIAL PROVISIONS REGARDING SINGLE-FAMILY ATTACHED  
TOWNHOUSE DWELLINGS:  These provisions apply to single-family attached townhouse  
dwellings (those attached to adjacent units via zero lot lines) only.   
(A) No single-family attached dwelling shall be located above another dwelling unit, either in  
whole or in part.  
  
(B) Each single-family attached dwelling shall have at least one direct pedestrian access from  
the interior of the dwelling to the property line of the dwelling unit and no pedestrian access  
may be held in common with another single-family dwelling unit.  
  
(C) No more than eight (8) single-family attached dwellings may be attached together.  
  
(D) Except as noted below, a single-family attached dwelling shall have no facilities or property  
in common with another single-family attached dwelling and all dwellings shall be  
structurally and functionally independent from each other.  All single-family attached  
dwellings shall have separate electrical service, water service lines, and sanitary sewer  
service lines.  Common facilities or property are allowed for the following:  
  
1. Common party walls constructed in accordance with the International Building  
Code.  
  
2. Foundations supporting attached or party walls.  
  
3. Flashing at the termination of the roof covering over any attached walls.  
  
4. Roofs.  
  
5. Vehicular access to a dedicated street for off-street parking facilities or detached  
garages.  
  
(E) No building permit shall be issued for the construction of a single-family attached dwelling  
unless a common facilities or party wall agreement or Declaration of Condominium has  
  
Page 4 of 5 Revised 12-21-17  
  

  Loading....
  
been filed with the Bonneville County Recorder's office for each such dwelling unit which  
shares common facilities with another unit.  Such agreement shall include a legal  
description of the lots sharing common facilities and shall allocate responsibility as  
between the owners of such lots for the use, maintenance, and ownership of all common  
facilities.  
  
  
10-16-10: VEHICULAR ACCESS: All lots upon which a dwelling is located shall have  
a vehicular access to and frontage upon a dedicated street or upon a granted easement of  
access of not less than twenty-five (25) feet in width and of a distance from the public dedicated  
street of no longer than approved by the planning and zoning commission.   
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Page 5 of 5 Revised 12-21-17  


  
CHAPTER 17 
  
  
  
R-3 RESIDENCE ZONE 
  
SECTION:  
  
General Objectives and Characteristics of Zone 
10-17-1:   
Use Requirements 
10-17-2:   
Area Requirements 
10-17-3:   
Width Requirements 
10-17-4:   
Location of Buildings and Structures 
10-17-5:   
Height Requirements 
10-17-6:   
Size of Buildings  
10-17-7:  
Lot Coverage  
10-17-8:  
Special Provisions Regarding Single-Family Attached Townhouse Dwellings 
10-17-9:   
Vehicular Access  
10-17-10:   
10-17-11: Special Provisions Applying To R-3 Zone  
  
  
  
10-17-1: 
 GENERAL OBJECTIVES AND CHARACTERISTICS OF ZONE: The objective in  
establishing the R-3 Residence Zone is to designate appropriate areas within the City for rental  
dwelling units, multiple family dwellings and similar buildings where living accommodations for  
groups may be located.  This zone is characterized by a variety of dwelling types having widely  
varying forms and shapes, with somewhat denser residential environment and a greater movement  
of vehicular traffic than is characteristic of the R2-A Residence Zone.  In general, this zone is  
situated where the need for rental units is greatest, along major streets and on the borders of  
neighborhoods where quiet, tranquil conditions are not as necessary as they are in the interior of low  
density residential neighborhoods.  
  
In order to accomplish the objectives and purposes of this ordinance and to promote the essential  
characteristics of this zone, the following regulations shall apply in the R-3 Residence Zone (see also  
10-5 Supplementary Regulations to Zone, 10-7 Special Provisions Applying to Miscellaneous Uses,  
and 10-29 Subdivision Regulations).  
  
  
10-17-2: 
 USE REQUIREMENTS:     The following uses shall be permitted in the R-3 Residence  
Zone:  
  
(A) Any use permitted in the RP, RP-A, R-1, R1-A, R-2 and R2-A Zones.  
  
  
(B) Boarding houses, lodging houses, and rooming houses.  
  
Page 1 of 5  Revised 12-19-13   

  Loading....
  
Incidental retailing of goods and services, such as newspapers, magazines, minimal food items,  
 ,  
grooming items, and the like, for the convenience of people wholive in apartment buildings 
assisted living centers and convalescent homes; provided the facilities therefor shall be located  
within the main building, and provided that no sign or display shall be used advertising the retail  
services offered within the building which can be seen from a public street.  Provided further, that  
the floor area devoted to the retailing of goods and services shall not exceed ten (10) square feet  
for each dwelling unit contained within the main building.    
  
  
10-17-3: 
 AREA REQUIREMENTS: For lots containing no more than two (2) dwelling units,  
the minimum requirements of the R1-A Residence zone, Chapter 14A shall apply. For buildings  
containing three (3) or more dwelling units, an area of not less than twelve thousand seven hundred  
fifty (12,750) square feet, plus an additional two thousand seven hundred fifty (2,750) square feet per  
dwelling unit for each dwelling unit above three (3) shall be required.  This zone falls under the high  
density designation, no more than sixteen (16.0) dwelling units shall be permitted per acre.  
  
For Assisted Living Centers and Convalescent homes, the minimum requirements of the R2-A zone  
as specified in 10-16-3 apply.  
  
For Boarding/Lodging Houses and Rooming Houses, an area of not less than five thousand (5,000)  
square feet shall be provided and maintained.  There shall be no area requirements for other  
buildings, except that which is required for off street parking space and yards.  
  
10-17-4: 
 WIDTH REQUIREMENTS: The minimum width of any building site or residential  
building lot for each building containing one (1) dwelling unit shall be as specified in 10-14-4.  The  
minimum width of any building site or residential building lot for each building containing two (2) or  
more dwelling units shall be as specified in 10-14A-4.  The minimum width of any building site or lot  
for each child day care center shall be as specified in 10-15-4.  The minimum width of any building  
site or lot, for use as an Assisted Living Center or Convalescent Home shall be as specified in 10-16- 
4.  The minimum width of any building site or lot for boarding houses, and lodging and rooming  
houses not previously platted or subdivided according to the records of the City shall be eighty (80)  
feet as measured from the building setback line.  
  
  
10-17-5: 
 LOCATION OF BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES:  
  
  
  
(A) Setback.  All buildings shall be set back a minimum distance of thirty (30)feet fromthe  
property line adjacent to any public street or from any granted easement of vehicular access,  
except as herein provided and required under the provisions of this ordinance.  No auxiliary  
building shall be located closer to the street (or granted easement of vehicular access)  
fronted by the main building, than the distance of the main building to the street (or granted  
easement of vehicular access).  
  
  
(B) Side Yards.  Subject to 10-17-5(A), there shall be a side yard on each side of a main building  
of not less than eight (8) inches for each foot of building height, except that no side yard shall  
be less than eight feet (8).     
  
1. Side yard requirements for accessory buildings shall be the same as for main  
buildings, except those subject to §10-17-5(A).  Any accessory building placed in  
Page 2 of 5  Revised 12-19-13   

  Loading....
  
the calculated side yard of the main building shall maintain the side yard  
requirements of the zone in which it is in.  The distance between the main building  
and the accessory building shall be subject to the requirements in the most  
recently adopted version of the International Building Code or International  
Residential Code as they may apply.  
  
2. No side yard shall be required for accessory buildings which are located more  
than twelve (12) feet in the rear of the main building (calculated from the furthest  
point of extension of any part of the foundation), provided that the auxiliary  
building's drip line remains within the property.    
  
3. There shall be no side yard setback requirement for the property line between zero  
lot line single-family attached dwellings where the dwelling units are attached by party  
wall or walls.  The side yard requirements shall be maintained for the exterior  
boundaries of any units, which are attached by party walls.  All accessory buildings  
shall comply with the setback requirements set forth above.  There shall be an  
attached party wall/common wall of no less than twelve (12) feet between any  
attached dwellings permitted within this chapter or any subsequent chapter allowing  
single family attached dwellings.  
  
  
(C) Rear Yard.  Subject to 10-17-5(A), for main buildings, there shall be a rear yard of not less  
than twenty-five (25) feet.  Subject to 10-17-5(A), for accessory buildings, no rear yard shall  
be required, provided that the auxiliary building's drip line remains within the property, except  
where an alley is located at the rear of the lot, in which case a three (3) foot rear yard is  
required.  
  
10-17-6: 
 HEIGHT REQUIREMENTS:  Maximum building height is subject to the Fire  
Department’s ability to provide adequate fire protection.  Roofs above the square of the building,  
chimneys, flag poles, television antennas, church towers and other similar structures not used for  
human occupancy are excluded in determining height.  
  
10-17-7: 
 SIZE OF BUILDINGS:  For attached multiple family dwellings and other buildings,  
there shall be no minimum floor area requirements.  For single family detached or attached  
townhouses/condominium units the minimum square footage shall be 1000 square feet per living  
unit.    
  
10-17-8: 
 LOT COVERAGE:  
  
(A) Maximum Lot Coverage.  Lot coverage, including all areas under roofs and paved or  
concrete surfaces, shall not exceed seventy percent (70%) of the total lot and parking  
area. The maximum lot coverage of single-family attached dwelling units shall be  
sixty-five percent (65%) for interior lots and fifty percent (50%) for corner lots.  The  
remaining lot area shall be landscaped in accordance with provisions of this ordinance.   
All landscaping outside of that immediately between any main building and any public  
street shall be located, designed, and developed for the benefit and enjoyment of the  
Page 3 of 5  Revised 12-19-13   

  Loading....
  
residents of the dwelling(s), including appropriate play areas for children.  
  
(B) Lot Coverage Exemption.  The landscaped area on a lot will be considered to include  
such hard-surface outdoor recreation facilities as tennis courts, basketball courts,  
shuffleboard courts, and swimming pools, provided that:  
  
1. The hard-surface outdoor recreation facilities make up no more than forty percent  
(40%) of the required landscaped area, and  
  
2. Those facilities are available for the use of all residents of the development.  
  
(C) Required Buffers.  Wherever a development in the R2-A Zone adjoins land zoned RE, RP,  
RP-A, R-1, R1-A or RMH, or unincorporated land designated for single family residential use  
in the City's Comprehensive Plan, a minimum ten (10) foot wide landscaped buffer and  a  
minimum six (6) foot high site obscuring fence shall be provided.  This buffer may be  
included in the thirty percent (30%) minimum landscaped area required in (A) above.  If an  
open space of at least thirty (30) feet is provided between all buildings (whether main or  
auxiliary) and the adjacent zone the requirement of a fence can be waived.  Said open space  
shall include some combination of planted trees, shrubs, vines, ground cover, flowers or  
lawns.    
  
10-17-9: 
  SPECIAL PROVISIONS REGARDING SINGLE-FAMILY ATTACHED TOWNHOUSE  
DWELLINGS:  These provisions apply to single-family attached townhouse dwellings (those attached  
to adjacent units only via zero lot lines) only.  
  
(A) No single-family attached dwelling shall be located above another dwelling unit, either in  
whole or in part.  
  
(B) Each single-family attached dwelling shall have at least one direct pedestrian access from  
the interior of the dwelling to the property line of the dwelling unit and no pedestrian access  
may be held in common with another single-family dwelling unit.  
  
(C) Except as noted below, a single-family attached dwelling shall have no facilities or property in  
common with another single-family attached dwelling and all dwellings shall be structurally  
and functionally independent from each other.  All single-family attached dwellings shall have  
separate electrical service, water service lines, and sanitary sewer service lines.  Common  
facilities or property are allowed for the following:  
  
1. Common party walls constructed in accordance with the International Building Code.  
  
2. Foundations supporting attached or party walls.  
  
3. Flashing at the termination of the roof covering over any attached walls.  
  
4. Roofs.  
  
5. Vehicular access to a dedicated street for off-street parking facilities or detached  
garages.  
  
Page 4 of 5  Revised 12-19-13   

  Loading....
  
(D) No certificate of occupancy shall be issued for a single family attached dwelling unless a  
common facility or party wall agreement or Declaration of Condominium, together with a  
separate legal description for each living unit has been filed with the Bonneville County  
Recorder's Office and a copy provided to the City of Ammon, for each such dwelling unit  
which shares common facilities with another unit.  Such agreement shall include a legal  
description of the individual dwelling units sharing common facilities and shall allocate  
responsibility as and between the owners of such lots for the use, maintenance, and  
ownership of all common facilities.  
  
  
10-17-10: 
VEHICULAR ACCESS: All lots upon which a dwelling is located shall have a  
vehicular access to and frontage upon a dedicated street or upon a granted easement of access  
of not less than twenty-five (25) feet in width and of a distance from the public dedicated street of  
  
no longer than approved by the planning and zoning commission.  
  
10-17-11: 
 SPECIAL PROVISIONS APPLYING TO R-3 ZONE: Landscaping shall be as set forth  
  
in section 10-5-24. 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Page 5 of 5  Revised 12-19-13   

  
CHAPTER 18  
  
R3-A RESIDENCE ZONE  
  
SECTION:  
  
10-18-1: General Objectives and Characteristics of Zone  
10-18-2: Use Requirements  
10-18-3: Area Requirements  
10-18-4: Width Requirements  
10-18-5: Location of Buildings and Structures  
10-18-6: Height Requirements  
10-18-7: Size of Buildings  
10-18-8: Lot Coverage  
10-18-9: Special Provisions Regarding Single-Family Attached Townhouse Dwellings  
10-18-10: Vehicular Access   
10-18-11:        Special Provisions Apply to R3-A Zone  
  
  
10-18-1: GENERAL OBJECTIVES AND CHARACTERISTICS OF ZONE:  The objective in  
establishing the R3-A Residence Zone is to establish an area within the City in which the primary  
use of the land is for residential purposes.  Characteristic of this zone is a greater amount of  
automobile traffic, greater density and a wider variety of dwelling types and uses than is  
characteristic of the R-3 Residence Zone. The R3-A Zone is essentially residential in character;  
therefore, all uses must be developed and maintained in harmony with residential uses.  Also,  
while a greater volume of automobile and pedestrian traffic is characteristic of this zone, attractive  
lawns, shrubs, trees, both on the street and around the buildings, is also characteristic of this  
zone.  
  
In order to accomplish the objectives and purposes of this ordinance and to promote the  
characteristics of this zone, the following regulations shall apply in the R3-A Residence Zone (see  
also §10-5 Supplementary Regulations to Zones, §10-7 Special Provisions Applying to  
Miscellaneous Uses, and §10-29 Subdivision Regulations).  
  
  
10-18-2: USE REQUIREMENTS:  The following uses shall be permitted in the   
R3-A Residence Zone:  
  
(A) Any use permitted in the RP, RP-A, R-1, R1-A, R-2, R2-A and R-3 Residence Zones.  
  
(B) Off street parking lots.  
  
(C) For property zoned R3-A prior to April 1, 2004, ONLY, with no subsequent change to  
another zone:  Office buildings for professional persons, such as doctors, dentists,  
accountants, attorneys, architects.  
  

  Loading....
  
(D) For property zoned R3-A prior to December 1, 2017, ONLY with no subsequent change  
to another zone:     Mortuaries, Crematories and funeral parlors, pursuant to a conditional  
use permit issued by the Board of Adjustment.   
  
(E) Other uses which have been ruled by the City Council to be similar to the uses  
hereinabove listed.  
  
  
10-18-3: AREA REQUIREMENTS: For lots containing two (2) dwelling units, the  
minimum requirements of the R1-A Residence zone, Chapter 14A shall apply. For buildings  
containing three (3) or more dwelling units, an area of not less than twelve thousand two hundred  
(12,200) square feet, plus an additional two thousand two hundred (2,200) square feet per  
dwelling unit for each dwelling unit above three (3) shall be required.  This zone falls under the  
high density designation, No more than twenty (20) shall be permitted per acre.    
  
For Assisted Living Centers and Convalescent Homes, the minimum requirements of the R2-A  
zone as specified in §10-16-3 apply.  
  
For boarding houses, lodging houses and rooming houses, the minimum requirements of the R- 
3 zone as specified in §10-17-3 apply.  
  
There shall be no area requirements for other buildings, except that which is required for off street  
parking space and yards.  
  
  
10-18-4: WIDTH REQUIREMENTS: The minimum width of any building site or residential  
building lot for each building containing one (1) dwelling unit shall be as specified in §10-14-4.   
The minimum width of any building site or residential building lot for each building containing two  
(2) or more dwelling units shall be as specified in §10-14A-4.  The minimum width of any building  
site or lot for each child day care center shall be as specified in §10-15-4.  The minimum width of  
any building site or lot, for use as an Assisted Living Center or Convalescent Home shall be as  
specified in §10-16-4.  The minimum width of any building site or lot for boarding houses, lodging  
houses and rooming houses shall be as specified in §10-17-4.  
  
  
10-18-5: LOCATION OF BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES:  
  
(A) Setback.  All buildings shall be set back a minimum distance of thirty (30) feet from the  
property line adjacent to any public street or from any granted easement of vehicular  
access, except as herein provided and required under the provisions of this ordinance.   
No auxiliary building shall be located closer to the street (or granted easement of vehicular  
access) fronted by the main building, than the distance of the main building to the street  
(or granted easement of vehicular access).  
  
(B) Side Yards.  Subject to 10-18A-5(A), there shall be a side yard on each side of a main  
building of not less than eight (8) inches for each foot of building height, except that no  
side yard shall be  less than eight (8) feet.       
  

  Loading....
  
1. Side yard requirements for accessory buildings shall be the same as for main  
buildings, except those subject to §10-18A-5(A).  Any accessory building placed  
in the calculated side yard of the main building shall maintain the side yard  
requirements of the zone in which it is in.  The distance between the main  
building and the accessory building shall be subject to the requirements in the  
most recently adopted version of the International Building Code or International  
Residential Code as they may apply.  
  
2. No side yard shall be required for accessory buildings which are located more  
than twelve (12) feet in the rear of the main building (calculated from the furthest  
point of extension of any part of the foundation), provided that the auxiliary  
building's drip line remains within the property.    
  
3. There shall be no side yard setback requirement for the property line between zero  
lot line single-family attached dwellings where the dwelling units are attached by  
party wall/common walls.  The side yard requirements shall be maintained for the  
exterior boundaries of any units, which are attached by party walls.  All accessory  
buildings shall comply with the setback requirements set forth above. There shall  
be an attached party wall/common wall of no less than twelve (12) feet between  
any attached dwellings permitted within this chapter or any subsequent chapter  
allowing single family attached dwellings.  
  
(C) Rear Yard.  Subject to §10-18-5(A), for main buildings, there shall be a rear yard of at  
least twenty-five (25) feet.  Subject to §10-18-5(A), for accessory buildings, no rear yard  
shall be required, provided that the auxiliary building's drip line remains within the property,  
except where an alley is located at the rear of the lot, in which case a three (3) foot rear  
yard is required.  
  
  
10-18-6: HEIGHT REQUIREMENTS:  Maximum building height is subject to the Fire  
Roofs above the square of the building,  
chimneys, flag poles, television antennas, church towers and other similar structures not used  
for human occupancy are excluded in determining height.  
  
  
10-18-7: SIZE OF BUILDINGS:  For attached multiple family dwellings and other buildings,  
there shall be no minimum floor area requirements.  For single family detached or attached  
townhouses/condominium units the minimum square footage shall be 1000 square feet per living  
unit.    
  

  Loading....
  
10-18-8:   LOT COVERAGE:  
  
(A) Maximum Lot Coverage.  Lot coverage, including all areas under roofs and paved or  
concrete surfaces, shall not exceed seventy percent (70%) of the total lot and parking  
area. The maximum lot coverage of single-family attached dwelling units shall be sixty-five  
percent (65%) for interior lots and fifty percent (50%) for corner lots.  The remaining lot  
area shall be landscaped in accordance with provisions of this ordinance.  All landscaping  
outside of that immediately between any main building and any public street shall be  
located, designed, and developed for the benefit and enjoyment of the residents of the  
dwelling(s), including appropriate play areas for children.  
  
(B) Lot Coverage Exemption.  The landscaped area on a lot will be considered to include such  
hard-surface outdoor recreation facilities as tennis courts, basketball courts, shuffleboard  
courts, and swimming pools, provided that:  
  
1. The hard-surface outdoor recreation facilities make up no more than forty percent  
(40%) of the required landscaped area, and  
  
2. Those facilities are available for the use of all residents of the development.  
  
(C) Required Buffers.  Wherever a development in the R3-A Zone adjoins land zoned RE, RP,  
RP-A, R-1, R1-A or RMH, or unincorporated land designated for single family residential  
use in the City's Comprehensive Plan, a minimum ten (10) foot wide landscaped buffer  
and  a minimum six (6) foot high site obscuring fence shall be provided.  This buffer may  
be included in the thirty percent (30%) minimum landscaped area required in (A) above.   
If an open space of at least thirty (30) feet is provided between all buildings (whether main  
or auxiliary) and the adjacent zone the requirement of a fence can be waived.  Said open  
space shall include some combination of planted trees, shrubs, vines, ground cover,  
flowers or lawns.    
  
  
10-18-9:  SPECIAL PROVISIONS REGARDING SINGLE-FAMILY ATTACHED  
TOWNHOUSE DWELLING:  These provisions apply to single-family attached townhouse  
dwellings (those attached to adjacent units via zero lot lines) only.  
  
(A) No single-family attached dwelling shall be located above another dwelling unit, either in  
whole or in part.  
  
(B) Each single-family attached dwelling shall have at least one direct pedestrian access from  
the interior of the dwelling to the property line of the dwelling unit and no pedestrian access  
may be held in common with another single-family dwelling unit.    
  
(C) Except as noted below, a single-family attached dwelling shall have no facilities or property  
in common with another single-family attached dwelling and all dwellings shall be  
structurally and functionally independent from each other.  All single-family attached  
dwellings shall have separate electrical service, water service lines, and sanitary sewer  
service lines.  Common facilities or property are allowed for the following:  
  

  Loading....
  
1. Common party walls constructed in accordance with the International Building  
Code.  
  
2. Foundations supporting attached or party walls.  
  
3. Flashing at the termination of the roof covering over any attached walls.  
  
4. Roofs.  
  
5. Vehicular access to a dedicated street for off-street parking facilities or detached  
garages.  
  
(D) No certificate of occupancy shall be issued for a single family attached dwelling unless a  
common facility or party wall agreement or Declaration of Condominium, together with a  
separate legal description for each living unit has been filed with the Bonneville County  
Recorder's Office and a copy provided to the City of Ammon, for each such dwelling unit  
which shares common facilities with another unit.  Such agreement shall include a legal  
description of the individual dwelling units sharing common facilities and shall allocate  
responsibility as and between the owners of such lots for the use, maintenance, and  
ownership of all common facilities.  
  
  
10-18-10: VEHICULAR ACCESS: All lots upon which a dwelling is located shall have  
a vehicular access to and frontage upon a dedicated street or upon a granted easement of  
access of not less than twenty-five (25) feet in width and of a distance from the public dedicated  
street of no longer than approved by the planning and zoning commission.   
  
  
10-18-11: SPECIAL PROVISIONS APPLYING TO R-3A ZONE:  Landscaping shall be as set  
forth in section 10-5-24.  
  
  
  
CHAPTER 19  
  
RSC-1 RESIDENTIAL SHOPPING CENTER ZONE  
  
SECTION:  
  
  
10-19-1:General Objectives and Characteristics of Zone  
10-19-2: Use Requirement  
10-19-3: Area Requirements  
10-19-4: Frontage Width requirements  
10-19-5: Location Requirements  
10-19-6: Height Requirements  
10-19-7: Size of Building  
10-19-8: Special Provisions  
  
  
10-19-1: 
 GENERAL OBJECTIVES AND CHARACTERISTICS OF ZONE: The objective in  
establishing the RSC-1 Residence Shopping Center Zone is to encourage shopping facilities which  
supply residential needs.  Inasmuch as this zone is usually surrounded by dwellings, it shall be  
characterized by a harmonious grouping of stores, shops and professional buildings surrounded by  
lawns, trees and shrubs planted and maintained in harmony with the surrounding residential areas.   
The architecture, exterior, and roofing of all buildings shall be harmonious with and similar or  
comparable in material, appearance, and color to the predominant material, appearance, and color of  
dwellings in the community, and particularly of those dwellings surrounding the development.  Clean  
parking lots and attractively-maintained business buildings shall also be characteristics of this zone.  
  
In general, each new RSC-1 Residential Shopping Center Zone should be located at least one (1)  
mile from any other zone where business is permitted.  However, new non-RSC-1 business zones  
may be located at any distance from an RSC-1 zone.  
  
In order to accomplish the objectives and purposes of this ordinance, the following regulations shall  
apply in the RSC-1 Residential Shopping Center Zone (see also Supplementary Regulations to  
Zones).  
  
10-19-2: 
 USE REQUIREMENTS:  Only the following uses shall be permitted in the RSC-1  
Residential Shopping Center zone:  
  
(A) Any use permitted in the P-B Professional Business Office Zone.  
(B) Antique shops.  
(C) Appliance sales, service, and repair shops.  
(D) Art galleries, museums and athletic clubs.  
(E) Automobile supply shops.  
(F) Bakeries & Confectionery -- on site retail only.  
(G) Banks and financial institutions  
(H) Beds and Breakfasts with a conditional use permit.  
(I) Book stores.  
  
19-1            
 10/31/2013  

  Loading....
  
(J) Camera and photo supply shops.  
(K) Cellular and wireless phone dealerships.  
(L) Cleaners, dry cleaners, laundries (excluding cleaning, dry cleaning, and laundry plants),  
and pressers, alterers, and repairers of wearing apparel.  
(M) Clothing stores.  
(N) Clubs and fraternal societies.  
(O) Computer sales, service, and maintenance.  
(P) Copy centers.  
(Q) Craft Shops.  
(R) Dairy product stores.  
(S) Delicatessens.  
(T) Drug stores and pharmacies.  
(U) Dry goods stores.  
(V) Electronic device repair shops.  
(W) Florist shops.  
(X) Food catering services.  
(Y) Furniture repair shops.  
(Z) Garden supply stores.  
(AA) Gift shops.  
(BB) Grocery stores.  
(CC) Hair salons, barbershops, beauty parlors.  
(DD) Hobby supply stores.  
(EE) Jewelry Stores.  
(FF) Laundry mats.  
(GG) Music studios and other music related businesses.  
(HH) Paint and wallpaper stores.  
(II) Pawn shops.  
(JJ) Pet shops.  
(KK) Restaurants, excluding the sale and/or offering of liquor, beer, or wine, and any seating  
limited to less than thirty (30) people.  
(LL) Service stations (excluding super service stations) and Convenience Stores.  
(MM) Shoe sales and shoe repair shops.  
(NN) Sporting goods stores.  
(OO) Stationary stores.  
(PP) Variety Stores.  
(QQ) Video outlets.  
(RR) A Store selling or offering any combination of the aforementioned uses.  
(SS) Other uses ruled by the City Council to be similar to the above listed uses and in harmony  
with the objectives and characteristics of this zone.  
  
10-19-3: 
 AREA REQUIREMENTS: There shall be no minimum or maximum lot size  
requirements for any individual lot within the RSC-1 Zone, except as required for setback and off- 
street parking space.  
  
10-19-4: 
 FRONTAGE WIDTH REQUIREMENTS: There shall be no maximum or minimum  
frontage width requirements for any individual lot in the City's RSC-1 Residential Shopping Center  
Zone.  
  
10-19-5: 
 LOCATION REQUIREMENTS: All buildings shall be set back a minimum distance of  
  
19-2            
 10/31/2013  

  Loading....
  
thirty (30) feet from the property line adjacent to any public street or granted easement of vehicular  
access, except as herein provided and required under the provisions of this ordinance.  All buildings'  
drip lines must remain within the property.  All buildings must be set back a minimum of ten (10) feet  
from any property line dividing the property from a residential zone.  
  
10-19-6: 
 HEIGHT REQUIREMENTS:  No building may be less than one story in height (that is,  
no basement-only buildings are permitted).  In addition to International Building Code requirements,  
any building where the eaves of the roof, or for roofs without eaves where the top of the building  
walls are greater than twenty-five (25) feet above the average natural grade of the land, must be  
reviewed by the Fire Marshall, and approved by City Council.  
  
10-19-7: 
 SIZE OF BUILDINGS:  The total floor space of all buildings within an RSC-1  
development shall not exceed ten thousand (10,000) square feet.  
  
10-19-8: 
 SPECIAL PROVISIONS:  
  
(A)  Landscaping shall be as set forth in section 10-5-24.  
  
(B) Storage.  All storage and activities, except loading and unloading and automobile parking and  
refueling, shall be conducted entirely within a building, provided that Christmas trees and  
other seasonal items may be stored and sold outside a building.  
  
(C) Maintenance of Premises.  No dust, odor, smoke, vibration or intermittent light, glare, or  
noise shall be permitted which is discernable beyond the premises, except from normal  
movement of automobile traffic.  
  
(D) Off-Street Parking Space.  Off street parking shall be provided, as required in this ordinance,  
and shall be hard surfaced.  
  
(E) Residential buildings, churches, schools, and industrial uses and buildings shall not be  
permitted in any RSC-1 zone.  
  
(F) Lighting.  All lighting shall be indirect or shielded and so designed as to reflect away from  
adjoining residences.  Parking lots must be safely lit during nighttime business hours, but no  
direct lighting may extend outside the property boundaries.  
  
  
CHAPTER 20  
  
C-1 LIMITED BUSINESS ZONE  
  
SECTION:  
  
10-20-1: General Objectives and Characteristics of Zone  
10-20-2: Use Requirements  
10-20-3: Area Requirements  
10-20-4: Width Requirements  
10-20-5: Location of Buildings and Structures  
10-20-6:Special Provisions 
   
  
  
10-20-1: 
 GENERAL OBJECTIVES AND CHARACTERISTICS OF ZONE: The C-1 Limited  
Business Zone has been established as a district in which the primary use of the land is for retail  
stores and service establishments which supply residential needs of the people living in the  
surrounding area.  This zone is usually located at specific locations along major streets and is  
characterized by buildings having a wide variety of architectural forms and shapes.  
  
The objectives in establishing this zone are:  
  
To encourage the development and continued use of the land within the zone for business  
purposes.  To promote the development of serviceable and convenient retail and service facilities.  
To provide appropriate areas for the development of business uses within the City and to prevent  
the scattering of business uses into surrounding zones.  To prohibit industrial uses within the zone  
and to discourage any other use which tends to thwart or militate against the continued use and  
development of the land within the zone for its primary purpose.  
  
In order to accomplish the objectives and purposes of this ordinance, the following regulations shall  
apply in the C-1 Limited Business Zone (see also Supplementary Regulations to Zones).  
  
  
10-20-2: 
 USE REQUIREMENTS: The following uses shall be permitted in the C-1 Limited  
Business Zone.  
  
(A) Any use permitted in the RSC-1 Residence Shopping Zone.  
  
(B) Appliance shops and appliance service establishments.  
  
(C) Bakeries. (retail)   
  
(D) Indoor shooting range (with conditional use permit approval)  
  
(E) Businesses and establishments with vehicular drive-in and drive-through pickup facilities.  
  
  
Page 1 of 2 REVISED 6-27-13  

  Loading....
  
(F) Other uses ruled by the City Council to be similar to the above listed uses and in harmony  
with the objectives and characteristics of this zone.  
  
  
10-20-3: 
 AREA REQUIREMENTS: There shall be no lot area requirements for commercial  
buildings and structures constructed in accordance with the building code of Ammon, except as  
may be required in paragraph 10-5-9 of this ordinance. There shall be no area requirements for  
other main buildings, except that which is required for off-street parking and yards.  
  
  
10-20-4: 
 WIDTH REQUIREMENTS: There shall be no lot width requirements for commercial  
buildings and structures constructed in accordance with the Building Code of Ammon.  
  
  
10-20-5: 
 LOCATION OF BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES:   
  
  
(A) Setback.  All buildings shall be set back a minimum distance of thirty (30)feet from the  
property line adjacent to any public street or from any granted easement of access, except  
as herein provided and required under the provisions of this ordinance.  
  
(B) Side Yards.  There shall be no side yards required.  
  
  
10-20-6: 
   HEIGHT REQUIREMENTS: Maximum building height is subject to the Fire  
Department’s ability to provide adequate fire protection.  
  
  
10-20-7: 
  SPECIAL PROVISIONS:  
  
(A) Off street parking shall be provided, as required in this ordinance, and shall be hard  
surfaced.  
  
(B) All merchandise, equipment, and other materials, except seasonal merchandise such as  
nursery stock, fruits, vegetables, and vehicles in running order, shall be stored within an  
enclosed building.  
  
(C) No dust, odor, smoke, vibration, or intermittent light, glare, or noise shall be emitted which  
is discernible beyond the premises, except for normal movement of automobile traffic.  
  
(D) Landscaping shall be as set forth in section 10-5-24.  
  
Page 2 of 2 REVISED 6-27-13  

 CHAPTER 21  
  
HC-1 HIGHWAY COMMERCIAL ZONE  
  
SECTION:  
  
General Objectives and Characteristics of Zone 
10-21-1:   
Use Requirements 
10-21-2:   
Area, Width, Location, Height, and Size Requirements 
10-21-3:   
Special Provision 
10-21-4:   
  
  
10-21-1: 
  GENERAL OBJECTIVES AND CHARACTERISTICS OF ZONE: The HC-1 Highway  
Commercial Zone has been established as a district in which the primary use of the land is for retail  
stores and service establishments to serve the traveling public.  This zone is usually located at  
specific locations along arterial roadways throughout the City, and is characterized by buildings set  
back from the right-of-way line and having a wide variety of architectural forms and shapes.  
  
The objectives in establishing this zone are:  
  
(A) To encourage the development and continued use of the land within the zone for business  
purposes.  
  
(B) To promote safety on the roadways.   
  
(C) To maintain maximum use of high right-of-way for travel purposes.  
  
(D) To prohibit uses which tend to prevent the continued use and development of the land  
within the zone for its primary purpose.  
  
In order to accomplish the objectives and purposes of this ordinance and to promote the essential  
characteristics of this zone, the following regulations shall apply in the HC-1 Highway Commercial  
Zone (see also Supplementary Regulations to Zones).  
  
  
10-21-2: 
 USE REQUIREMENTS: The following uses shall be permitted in the HC-1 Highway  
Commercial Zone:  
  
(A) Any use permitted in the RSC-1 Residential Shopping Center Zone and in the C-1 Limited  
Business Zone.  
  
(B) Super service stations.  
  
(C) New car lots (by conditional use permit).  
  
(D) Used car lots (by conditional use permit).  
  
(E) Machinery sales establishments (by conditional use permit).  
  
Page 1 of 3 6-27-13  

  Loading....
  
(F) Amusement enterprises, such as merry-go-rounds, penny arcades, etc (by conditional use  
permit).  
  
(G) Retail establishments with incidental wholesaling, but excluding establishments, the  
principal activity of which is a storage warehouse.  
  
(H) To serve liquor by the drink, and beer and wine by the drink, at retail upon premises as a  
secondary use only wherein the primary operation of the premises is as a restaurant/café in  
the business of preparing, serving and dispensing food and beverages wherein such  
premises do not have an age restriction imposed by any chapter within Title 23 of the Idaho  
State Code.  Secondary use as used in this Chapter shall mean:  The sale of liquor shall be  
second in sales when compared to food sales.  Secondary use shall also mean at minimum  
liquor sales shall not exceed forty (40) percent of total sales in said establishment.  Upon  
request of the City Council, an establishment shall provide to the Planning Director a detail  
of total sales and comparisons by category.  Sales should be substantiated by computer  
generated reports obtained by a cash register or other electronic device used for tracking  
sales in an establishment.  
  
(I) Commercial garages, but not including the storage of wrecked or dismantled automobiles.  
  
(J) Furniture Stores  
  
(K) Public garages and public parking lots for pay.  
  
(L) Motels and Hotels.  
  
(M) Radio and TV studios, but excluding antenna towers greater than thirty (30) feet in height  
above the average terrain.  
  
(N) Billboards (by conditional use permit) (refer to Chapter 34 for regulations)  
  
.  
(O) Semi-public swimming pools, including water parks 
  
(P) Amusement Parks.  
  
(Q) Taxi stands and Bus Stops.  
  
(R) Other uses ruled by the City Council to be similar to the above listed uses, and in harmony  
with the objectives and characteristics of this zone.  
  
  
10-21-3: 
 AREA, WIDTH, LOCATION, AND SIZE REQUIREMENTS: No requirements, except  
that all buildings shall be set back a minimum distance of thirty (30) feet from the property line  
adjacent to any public street, except as herein provided and required under the provisions of this  
ordinance.  
  
10-21-4: 
 HEIGHT REQUIREMENTS: Maximum building height is subject to the Fire  
Department’s ability to provide adequate fire protection.  
  
  
Page 2 of 3 6-27-13  

  
  
10-21-5: 
 SPECIAL PROVISIONS:    
  
(A) No dust, odor, smoke, vibration or intermittent light, glare, or noise shall be emitted which is  
discernible beyond the premises, except for normal movement of automobile traffic.  
  
(B) Landscaping shall be as set forth in section 10-5-24.  
  
(C) All merchandise, equipment, and other materials, except seasonal merchandise such as  
nursery stock, fruits, vegetables, and vehicles in running order, shall be stored within a solid  
  
structure fenced site obscuring enclosure IE. Vinyl or block fencing.    
  
(D) Off street parking shall be provided, as required in this ordinance, and shall be hard  
  
surfaced. 
  
  
Page 3 of 3 6-27-13  

CHAPTER 22  
  
CC-1 CENTRAL COMMERCIAL ZONE  
  
SECTION:  
  
Objectives and Characteristics of Zone 
10-22-1:   
Use Regulations 
10-22-2:   
Area, Frontage, Location, Height, and Size Requirements 
10-22-3:   
Special Provisions 
10-22-4:   
  
  
10-22-1:  
OBJECTIVES AND CHARACTERISTICS OF ZONE: The objectives in establishing  
the CC-1 Central Commercial Zone is to create and maintain a dominant shopping and financial  
center.  For this reason, the zone has been located where the street pattern makes the business  
buildings readily accessible to all parts of the City and surrounding region, and where business and  
shopping activities can be carried on with maximum convenience.  The CC-1 Central Commercial  
Zone is characterized by clean, well-lighted streets, ample pedestrian ways and vehicular parking  
lots for the convenience and safety of the public.  Attractive, inviting and well-maintained shops,  
stores, offices and other buildings are also characteristic of this zone.  
  
In order to accomplish the objectives and purposes of this ordinance and to promote the  
characteristics of this zone, the following regulations shall apply in the CC-1 Central Commercial  
Zone.  
  
  
10-22-2: 
 USE REGULATIONS: The following uses shall be permitted in the CC-1 Central  
Commercial Zone:  
  
  
(A) Any use permitted in the HC-1 Zones.  
  
  
(B) Commercial HVACservice establishments.    
  
(C) Amusement enterprises, such as penny arcades, carrousels, swimming pools and  
dance halls.   
  
(D) Assembly of appliances from previously prepared parts.  
  
(E) Auto body and fender shops.  
  
(F) Auto painting.  
  
(G) Auction houses.  
  
(H) Boat sales and repair (By Conditional Use Permit)  
  
(I) Bakeries (commercial)   
  
(J) Broadcasting studios.  
  
Page 1 of 3 REVISED 6-27-13  

  Loading....
  
(K) Building supply stores, except material sales yards and accessory storage buildings.  
  
(L) Canvas products sales and fabrication (on site, retail only).  
  
(M) Engraving, Print shops (excluding those print presses that are half size or larger)    
  
(N) Glass cutting and installation.    
  
(O) Garages (commercial, but not including the storage of more than ten (10) wrecked or  
dismantled automobiles).  
  
(P) Laundries (commercial).  
  
(Q) Parking lots and structures.  
  
(R) Plumbing and carpenter shops and similar craft shops.  
  
(S) Bus depots.   
  
(T) Heliport and passenger railroad stations.  (By Conditional Use Permit)   
  
(U) Upholstery stores and repair shops.  
  
(V) Wholesale establishments with stock on premises, but excluding establishments, the  
principal activity of which is a storage warehouse.  
  
(W) Other uses similar to the foregoing uses, which are ruled by the City Council to be in  
harmony with the intent of this zone.  
  
  
10-22-3:  
AREA, FRONTAGE, LOCATION, AND SIZE REQUIREMENTS:  No requirements,  
except that all buildings shall be set back a minimum distance of thirty (30) feet from the property  
line adjacent to any public street, except as herein provided and required under the provisions of  
this ordinance.   
  
  
10-22-4: 
 HEIGHT REQUIREMENTS: Maximum building height is subject to the Fire  
Department’s ability to provide adequate fire protection.  
  
   
10-22-5: 
 SPECIAL PROVISIONS:  
  
(A) All off-street parking spaces shall be hard surfaced.  
  
(B) All merchandise, equipment, and other material, except for seasonal items on a temporary  
basis such as nursery stock and except for vehicles in running order, shall be stored within  
an enclosed building or within a sight-obscuring enclosure.  
  
(C) No dust, odor, smoke, vibrations, glare, or noise shall be emitted which is discernible  
beyond the premises, except from normal movement of automobile traffic.  
  
Page 2 of 3 REVISED 6-27-13  

  Loading....
  
(D) Landscaping shall be as set forth in section 10-5-24.  
  
(E) Off street parking shall be provided, as required in this ordinance, and shall be hard  
surfaced.  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Page 3 of 3 REVISED 6-27-13  

CHAPTER 23  
  
GC-1 GENERAL COMMERCIAL ZONE  
  
SECTION:  
  
10-23-1: General Objectives and Characteristics of Zone  
10-23-2: Use Requirements  
10-23-3: Area, Frontage, Location, Height and Size Requirements  
  
  
10-23-1: 
 GENERAL OBJECTIVES AND CHARACTERISTICS OF ZONE: The GC-1 General  
Commercial Zone has been established as a district in which the primary use of the land is for  
heavy commercial establishments and for non-nuisance industries.  The objectives in establishing  
this zone are:  
  
(A) To designate the most appropriate land within the City for retail and wholesale  
establishments and to prevent the scattering of commercial uses into surrounding zones.  
  
(B) To encourage the construction of and continued use of the land for commercial and  
industrial buildings.  
  
(C) To discourage the use of the land for dwellings and for nuisance industries or any other use  
which would thwart or substantially interfere with the use of the land for its primary purpose.  
  
This zone is characterized by a mixture of businesses, warehouses, craft shops and manufacturing  
and industrial enterprises which are incidental to retail and wholesale establishments.  Since the  
zone permits such a wide variety of uses, owners and developers of property should bear in mind  
that many of the protective features which zoning normally affords are largely nonexistent and  
should develop and maintain their property in recognition thereof.  
  
Representative of the uses within this zone are retail and wholesale establishments, plumbing,  
carpentry and other craft shops, warehousing, equipment yards and equipment sales yards.  
  
In order to accomplish the objectives and purposes of this ordinance and to promote the  
characteristics of this zone, the following regulations shall apply in the GC-1 General Commercial  
Zone (see also Supplementary Regulations to Zones).  
  
  
10-23-2: 
 USE REQUIREMENTS: The following uses shall be permitted in the GC-1 General  
:    
Commercial Zone 
  
Any use permitted in the CC-1 Central Commercial Zones.  
  
(A) Wholesale distributing houses and warehouses.  
  
(B) Service establishments, such as dyeing, cleaning or laundry plants, printing plants, machine  
shops, blacksmith shops.  
  
  
Page 1 of 2 REVISED 6-27-13  

  Loading....
(C) Food preparation plants, the operation of which is not obnoxious by reason of emission of  
odors, smoke, or noise.  
  
(D) Milk distribution stations, creameries, bottling works and similar businesses.  
  
(E) Assembling and the sale of farm equipment, mining machinery, vehicles and similar  
articles, but excluding junk yards and auto wrecking yards.  
  
(F) Large animal practice veterinary hospitals.  
  
(G) Building materials storage yards.  
  
(H) Radio and TV studios, with antenna towers greater than thirty (30) feet in height above the  
average terrain permitted.  
  
(I) Other uses ruled by the City Council to be similar to the foregoing uses, provided that such  
other uses are not inconsistent with the objectives and characteristics of this zone.  
  
  
10-23-3: 
 AREA, FRONTAGE, LOCATION, AND SIZE REQUIREMENTS: No requirements,  
except that all buildings shall be set back a minimum distance of thirty (30) feet from the property  
line adjacent to any public street, except as herein provided and required under the  
provisions of this ordinance.  
  
  
10-23-4:  
HEIGHT REQUIREMENTS: Maximum building height is subject to the Fire  
Department’s ability to provide adequate fire protection.  
  
  
10-23-5: 
     SPECIAL PROVISIONS:  
  
(A) Landscaping shall be as set forth in section 10-5-24.  
  
(B) Off street parking shall be provided, as required in this ordinance, and shall be hard  
surfaced.  
  
  
  
Page 2 of 2 REVISED 6-27-13  

CHAPTER 24  
  
M-1 MANUFACTURING ZONE  
  
SECTION:  
  
10-24-1: General Objectives and Characteristics of Zone  
10-24-2: Use Requirements  
10-24-3: Area Requirements  
10-24-4: Width Requirements  
10-24-5: Location Requirements  
10-24-6: Height Requirements  
10-24-7: Size Requirements  
10-24-8:Special Provisions  
  
  
  
  
10-24-1: 
 GENERAL OBJECTIVES AND CHARACTERISTICS OF ZONE: The M-1  
Manufacturing Zone has been established as a district in which the primary use of the land is for  
manufacturing purposes.  
  
 This zone is characterized by relatively flat, open land, conveniently located close to  
transportation, public utilities and other facilities necessary for successful manufacturing  
operations.  This zone is also characterized by building and off-street parking lots situated among  
spacious lawns, trees, shrubs and other landscape features.  Most distinguishing about the  
characteristics of this zone, however, is the attractively designed buildings and park-like  
appearance of the grounds surrounding the buildings.  
  
 Representative of the uses within this zone are manufacturing establishments, office  
buildings, educational buildings and research laboratories.  
  
 As a means of attracting manufacturing establishments into this zone, regulations designed  
to encourage and maintain an attractive park-like environment has been adopted.  Also, dwellings  
and other uses, which tend to thwart or prevent the use of land for manufacturing purposes, have  
been excluded. The objectives in establishing the M-1 Zone are:  
  
(A) To provide space for certain types of manufacturing establishments, which require location  
among spacious landscaped surroundings, free from smoke, noise, fumes vibrations, etc.  
  
(B) To broaden the tax base.  
  
(C) To encourage new industry to locate within the City to the end that the economic and social  
well being of the city and its inhabitants may be enhanced thereby.  
  
In order to accomplish the objectives and purposes of this ordinance and to promote the  
characteristics of this zone, the following regulations shall apply in the M-1 Manufacturing Zone  
(see also Supplementary Regulations to Zones).  
  
10-24-2: 
 USE REQUIREMENTS: The following uses shall be permitted in the M-1 Zone:  
  
Page 1 of 3 REVISED 6-27-13  

  Loading....
  
(A) Manufacturing, processing and fabricating establishments except those in which explosives  
or other dangerous materials are used.  
  
(B) Assembling of material from previously prepared parts.  
  
(C) Research laboratories, excluding activities hazardous to explosion or fire.  
  
(D) Office buildings and parking lots incidental to uses otherwise permitted in the zone.  
  
(E) Parking lots.  
  
(F) Buildings accessory to and incidental to uses permitted in the zone.  
  
(G) Other uses similar to the foregoing uses, which are ruled by the City Council to be in  
harmony with the intent of this zone.  
  
10-24-3: 
 AREA REQUIREMENTS: No single M-1 Zone shall contain less than thirty (30)  
acres; however, there shall be no requirements for individual buildings or lots, except that the area  
shall be sufficient to provide for setbacks, landscaping and off-street parking.  
  
10-24-4: 
 WIDTH REQUIREMENTS:  There shall be no requirements for individual buildings  
or lots.  
  
10-24-5: 
 LOCATION REQUIREMENTS:  All buildings shall be set back a minimum distance  
of thirty (30) feet from any public street, except as herein provided and required under the  
provisions of this ordinance.  
  
10-24-6: 
 HEIGHT REQUIREMENTS:  Maximum building height is subject to the Fire  
Department’s ability to provide adequate fire protection.  
  
  
10-24-7: 
 SIZE REQUIREMENTS:  No requirements.  
  
10-24-8: 
 SPECIAL PROVISIONS:  
  
(A) Maintenance of Premises:  The entire lot shall be kept free from refuse, debris and  
waste material; and all such refuse, debris and waste material shall be kept in  
approved containers and stored so that the containers cannot be seen from any  
public street.  No dust, odors, smoke, vibrations, intermittent lights, glare, noise,  
fumes, ash or sound shall be emitted which is discernible beyond the premises  
except that which arises due to normal traffic movement.  
  
(B) All storage and activities, except loading and unloading and automobile parking  
shall be conducted within a building.  
  
(C) Landscaping shall be as set forth in section 10-5-24.  
  
(D) The required setback space shall not be used for automobile parking but shall be  
landscaped and maintained with lawns and trees and shrubs, except for permitted  
  
Page 2 of 3 REVISED 6-27-13  

  Loading....
driveways.  
  
(E) All buildings on any lot shall not occupy more than thirty (30) percent of the total  
area of any lot.  
  
(F) Off street parking shall be provided, as required in this ordinance, and shall be hard  
  
surfaced. 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Page 3 of 3 REVISED 6-27-13  

 CHAPTER 25  
  
I&M-1 INDUSTRIAL AND MANUFACTURING ZONE  
  
SECTION:  
  
10-25-1: General Objectives and Characteristics of Zone  
10-25-2: Use Requirements  
10-25-3: Area Requirements  
10-25-4: Width Requirements  
10-25-5: Location Requirements  
10-25-6: Height Requirements  
10-25-7:Size of Buildings  
  
10-25-8: Landscaping  
10-25-9: Special Provisions 
  
  
  
10-25-1: 
 GENERAL OBJECTIVES AND CHARACTERISTICS OF ZONE: The I&M1 Industrial  
and Manufacturing Zone has been established as a district in which the primary use of the land is  
for manufacturing, fabricating, processing and warehousing establishments.  This zone is  
characterized by relatively flat land peculiarly suited for industrial uses because of the proximity to  
railroad tracks and streets and the availability of utilities necessary for successful industrial use.   
While much of the land within this zone is currently devoted to agriculture and other open-land  
uses, it is intended that manufacturing and industrial uses shall be directed into this zone as the  
needs arise.  
  
Representative of the uses within this zone are manufacturing and fabrication and  
processing, storage, warehousing and wholesale distribution and railroad trackage, switchyards  
and terminal facilities.  Uses which give rise to excessive noise, vibration, smoke, odor or dust,  
fumes or danger of explosion have been excluded from this zone.  As a means of attracting  
manufacturing and industrial establishments into this zone, certain regulations concerning the  
external appearance of building and structures and the maintenance and use of land have been  
adopted.  Also, dwellings and other uses, which tend to thwart or prevent the use of the land for its  
primary purposes have been excluded from this zone.  The objectives in establishing the I&M-1  
Zone are:  
  
(A) To provide space for manufacturing and industrial uses within the City in appropriate  
locations and to discourage uses which tend to thwart the use of land for industrial  
purposes from locating within this zone.  
  
(B) To encourage the expansion of industrial establishments already existing within the zone.  
  
(C) To encourage new industry to locate within the zone to the end that the economic well  
being of the City and its inhabitants shall be enhanced thereby.  
  
(D) To prevent the encroachment of industrial uses into non-industrial zones.  
  
  
Page 1 of 3           REVISED 6-27-13  

  Loading....
(E) To prevent the commingling of incompatible uses and the attending depreciation of property  
values and the unwholesome social conditions resulting therefrom.  
  
(F) In order to accomplish the objectives and purposes of this ordinance and to encourage the  
most appropriate use of land within this zone, the following regulations shall apply in the  
I&M-1 Industrial and Manufacturing Zone (see also Supplementary Regulations to Zones).  
  
  
10-25-2:  
 USE REQUIREMENTS: Land within the I&M-1 Zone may be devoted to any use,  
with the following guidelines and exceptions:  
  
(A) That outdoor shooting ranges shall be first approved as a conditional use by the Board of  
Adjustment.  
  
(B) Sexually oriented businesses shall be allowed, provided that no business be located within  
twenty-five hundred (2500) feet of any religious institution, school, public park or building or  
residentially zoned property.  
  
(C) The following uses shall be prohibited in the I&M-1 Zone:    
  
All residential uses, except the residence of a caretaker of industrial plant; apartment  
houses, trailer courts and tourist courts, cement, lime, gypsum, rock wool or plaster of   
paris manufacture; acid manufacture; explosive manufacture and storage; glue  
manufacture; fat rendering; distillation of bones and organic fertilizer manufacture;  
petroleum refining and refining of crank case oil; rubber manufacture; milling or smelting of  
ores; garbage dumps or dead animal reduction; stock yards, feed yards or slaughter of  
animals; hotels and hospitals for human care; activities or businesses allowing the serving  
of alcohol.  
  
    
10-25-3: 
 AREA REQUIREMENTS: There shall be no area requirements except as set forth in  
Title 10, Chapters 5 and 29 of this code.  An area sufficient to accommodate off-street parking,  
loading and unloading and vehicular access shall be provided and maintained.  
  
  
10-25-4:  
WIDTH REQUIREMENTS: No requirements.  
  
  
10-25-5: 
 LOCATION REQUIREMENTS: All buildings shall be set back a minimum distance of  
thirty (30) feet from any public street, except as herein provided and required under the provisions  
of this ordinance.  
  
  
10-25-6: 
      HEIGHT REQUIREMENTS: Maximum building height is subject to the Fire  
Department’s ability to provide adequate fire protection.  
  
10-25-7: 
 SIZE OF BUILDING: No requirements.  
  
  
10-25-8:  
     LANDSCAPING: Landscaping shall be as set forth in section 10-5-24.   
  
Page 2 of 3           REVISED 6-27-13  

  
  
  
10-25-9:  
SPECIAL PROVISIONS:  All off-street parking spaces shall be hard surfaced except  
as provided below:  
  
(A) A designated portion of the property used exclusively as a heavy truck yard, or  
  
(B) For vehicle repair facilities only – storage of vehicles currently under repair, or  
  
(C) An alternative “green” parking surface proven to be compatible with east Idaho weather  
conditions (including snow plow operations), when approved by the City Engineer and the  
City Planning Director.  
  
(D) Properties where the entire property is enclosed by a fence may, by approval of the City  
Engineer provide gravel base parking under the guidelines of the City Engineer.  
  
(E) All entry driveways from public roads to all parking areas shall be hard surfaced.     
  
(F) Off street parking shall be provided, as required in this ordinance, and shall be hard  
surfaced.  
  
  
  
Page 3 of 3           REVISED 6-27-13  

CHAPTER 26  
  
I&M-2 INDUSTRIAL AND MANUFACTURING ZONE  
  
  
SECTION:  
  
10-26-1: General Objectives and Characteristics of Zone  
10-26-2: Use Requirements  
10-26-3:  Area Requirements  
10-26-4: Width Requirements  
10-26-5: Location Requirements  
10-26-6: Height Requirements  
10-26-7: Size of Building  
10-26-8: Landscaping  
10-26-9: Special Provisions  
  
  
10-26-1: 
 GENERAL OBJECTIVES AND CHARACTERISTICS OF ZONE: The I&M2 Industrial  
and Manufacturing Zone has been established as a district in which the primary use of the land is for  
the selling of livestock.  
  
In order to accomplish the objectives and purposes of this ordinance, the following  
regulations shall apply in the I&M-2 Industrial and Manufacturing Zone.  
  
10-26-2: 
 USE REQUIREMENTS: The following uses shall be prohibited in the I&M-2 Zone:  
  
(A) Except for livestock auctions and activities related to the handling, transporting and selling of  
livestock; any use prohibited in the I&M-1 Industrial and Manufacturing Zone.    
  
(B) Amusement enterprises, bowling alleys, clubs and fraternal societies, dance halls, night  
clubs, pool and billiard halls, dancing and music schools, gymnasium and physical culture  
establishments.    
  
10-26-3: 
 There shall be no area requirements except as set forth in  
AREA REQUIREMENTS:   
Title 10, Chapters 5 and 29 of this code.  An area sufficient to accommodate off-street parking,  
loading and unloading and vehicular access shall be provided and maintained.  
  
10-26-4:  
WIDTH REQUIREMENTS: No requirements.  
  
10-26-5: 
 LOCATION REQUIREMENTS: All buildings shall be set back a minimum distance of  
thirty (30) feet from any public street, except as herein provided and required under the provisions of  
this ordinance.  
  
10-26-6: 
      HEIGHT REQUIREMENTS: Maximum building height is subject to the Fire  
Department’s ability to provide adequate fire protection.  
  
10-26-7: 
 SIZE OF BUILDING: No requirements.  
  
Page 1 of 2           REVISED 6-27-13  

  Loading....
  
10-26-8: 
 LANDSCAPING: Landscaping shall be as set forth in section 10-5-24.  
  
10-26-9: 
 SPECIAL PROVISIONS:  All off-street parking spaces shall be hard surfaced except  
as provided below:  
  
(A) A designated portion of the property used exclusively as a heavy truck yard, or  
  
(B) For vehicle repair facilities only – storage of vehicles currently under repair, or  
  
(C) An alternative “green” parking surface proven to be compatible with east Idaho weather  
conditions (including snow plow operations), when approved by the City Engineer and the  
City Planning Director.  
  
(D) Properties where the entire property is enclosed by a fence may, by approval of the City  
Engineer provide gravel base parking under the guidelines of the City Engineer.  
  
(E) All entry driveways from public roads to all parking areas shall be hard surfaced.  
  
(F) Off street parking shall be provided, as required in this ordinance, and shall be hard  
surfaced.  
  
  
  
Page 2 of 2           REVISED 6-27-13  

  
Symbol Name  
  
CUP-R-1 Conditional Use Permit – R-1 Residence Zoning  
CUP-HC-1 Conditional Use Permit – C-1 Commercial Zoning  
  
(C) PUBLIC HEARING REQUIREMENT:  After the required public hearing for a Conditional Use Permit  
and upon approval of the governing body, the CUP- designation shall be placed on the zoning map  
with the appropriate overlay designation.  
  
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT OVERLAY (PUD-):  
10-27-4:   
  
  
(A)STATEMENT OF INTENT OF PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT (PUD) OVERLAY: The  
purpose of the PUD Overlay is to create a process to promote diversity and creativity in site  
design, and protect and enhance natural and community features. The process is provided to  
encourage unique developments which may combine a mixture of uses. The PUD process  
permits departures from the conventional siting, setback, buffers etc. of a particular zoning  
district in the interest of achieving superior site development, creating open space, and  
encouraging imaginative design by permitting design flexibility. By using flexibility in the  
application of development standards, this process will promote developments that will benefit  
citizens that live and work within the city.  A planned unit development shall be granted  
through the conditional use permit authority of the City and shall be an overlay to the zoning of  
the requested property.    
   
(B)GENERAL OBJECTIVES AND CHARACTERISTICS OF THE PUD OVERLAY:  
  
1. To allow for the design of developments that are architecturally and environmentally  
innovative and that achieve better utilization of land than is possible through strict  
application of standard zoning and subdivision controls.  An application for a PUD may be  
applied for in any zoning district within the City.  
  
2. To encourage land development that, to the greatest extent possible preserves natural  
vegetation, respects natural topographic and geologic conditions, and refrains from  
adversely affective flooding, soil, drainage and other natural ecologic conditions.  
  
3. To combine and coordinate architectural styles, building forms and structural/visual  
relationships within an environment that allows mixing of different land uses in an  
innovative and functionally efficient manner.  
  
4. To provide for abundant, accessible and properly located open space, recreation space  
and other facilities.  
  
5. To promote the efficient use of land resulting in networks of utilities, streets and other  
infrastructure features that maximize the allocation of fiscal and natural resources.  
  
6. To enable land developments to be compatible and congruous with adjacent and nearby  
land developments.  
  
7. To ensure that development occurs at proper locations away from environmentally  
sensitive areas and on land physically suited to construction.  
  
8. To allow unique and unusual land uses to be planned for and located in a manner that  
  
27-4 10/31/2013  

  Loading....
  
ensures harmony with the surrounding community. 
(C) OVERLAY SYMBOL AND NAME:  The symbol for the designation of this overlay shall be (PUD-).  
 The name shall be “Planned Unit Development Overlay”.  Following each PUD designation the  
zoning that the property has been granted.  Examples follow (but are not limited to):  
Symbol         Name_____________________________________________________  
PUD-R-1 Planned Unit Development – R-1 Residence Zone  
PUD-RSC-1 Planned Unit Development – Residential Shopping Center Zone  
  
(D) DIMENSIONAL AND USE RESTRICTIONS:  In acting upon the application, the Planning and  
Zoning Commission may recommend to the Board of Adjustment, a requested modification to lot  
size, required facilities, buffers, open space areas, setback requirements, building size limits, off- 
street parking regulations, landscaping rules or other miscellaneous regulations where such  
regulations or changes are consistent with the intent of this section and the standard set forth  
herein.   
The following restrictions shall apply to all PUD development within the City of Ammon:  
1. No residential building within a PUD shall have a side yard distance between buildings of  
less than six (6.0) feet.  
2. A minimum of twenty (20.0) percent of dedicated open space shall be dedicated as  
common use within the PUD and be maintained by a designated entity in control of the  
PUD.  Allowable entities would include but not be limited to a home owners association or  
organization named in the deed of the PUD as the controlling body.  Allowable open  
space shall include trail-ways, parks and dedicated landscaping including but not limited  
to dedicated sports facilities such as tennis courts, basketball courts or skate parks.    
3. All allowable and calculated common use open space shall be under one ownership  
and/or meet the requirements the State of Idaho Condominium Act as defined in Idaho  
Statutes, Title 55, Chapter 15.  Covenants defining ownership of common areas shall  
become a part of the Planned Unit Development (PUD) plan as approved by the City  
Council of the City of Ammon.    
4. Development within a non-residential area of a PUD may be limited for development in  
relation to a percentage of residential development.  Limitations to non-residential  
development shall be set by a recommendation of the Planning and Zoning Commission  
and approved by the City Council.  
  
(E)QUALIFYING CONDITIONS:  A planned unit development is intended to accommodate  
developments; (a) with mixed or varied uses, (b) sites with unusual topography or unique settings  
within the community, or (c) on land which exhibits difficult and costly development problems.  
Approval will not be granted when the planned unit development is sought primarily to avoid the  
imposition of standards and requirements of existing zoning classifications rather than to achieve  
the objectives of this Ordinance. Additionally, no planned unit development shall be approved  
unless it appears that the land use and development meet the following standards:   
1. That in the opinion of the Planning and Zoning Commission and the City Council, the use  
will be compatible with adjacent land use, the natural environment, and the capacities of  
  
27-5 10/31/2013  

  Loading....
affected public services and facilities, and that such use is consistent with the public  
health, safety and welfare of the City residents.  
  
2. All land for which application is made must be owned or under control of the applicant,  
the parcel must be capable of being planned and developed as one integral land use unit  
and shall contain no less than twenty (20.0) acres.     
  
3. The use and development is warranted by the design of additional amenities made  
possible with and incorporated by the development proposal.   
  
4. The development maximizes useable open space.   
  
5. Landscaping is provided to insure that proposed uses will be adequately buffered from  
one another and from surrounding public and private property and to create a pleasant  
pedestrian scale outdoor environment.   
  
6. Vehicular and pedestrian circulation, allowing safe, convenient, uncontested and well  
defined circulation within and access to the development shall be provided.   
  
7. It is encouraged that existing important natural, historical and architectural features be  
preserved.   
  
  
(F)PUD APPLICATION: A PUD application shall be submitted in two stages as described below:   
(Both stages (preliminary and final) shall follow the procedure for conditional use permit applications  
including public hearings which shall be held in compliance with the current requirements of the City of  
Ammon).  
1. PRELIMINARY PUD APPLICATION APPROVAL:  The preliminary PUD application  
request shall include a conceptual plan showing the PUD boundaries; proposed areas for  
structure locations, existing and proposed utilities, parking areas, pedestrian and  
vehicular circulation, landscape massing, open spaces and their intended use, recreation  
facilities, and such other features as might be requested. A land use tabulation summary  
shall be provided in the margin of the plan indicating types of uses, acreage for each land  
use, number of units, densities and land use intensities. The conceptual plan shall show  
details of access to adjacent roadways and existing or future trail systems.  
Necessary requests for zone changes and/or comprehensive plan changes shall be  
determined in this phase of the request.  Any necessary changes shall be included in the  
next phase of the PUD Application Approval process.  
2. FINAL PUD APPLICATION APPROVAL:  The final PUD application request shall include:  
(a) A detail site plan showing the PUD boundaries, proposed structure locations,  
existing and proposed utilities, parking areas, pedestrian and vehicular circulation,  
landscape massing, mass grading, open spaces and their intended use,  
recreation facilities, and such other features as might be requested.     
  
(b) A land use tabulation summary shall be provided in the margin of the plan  
indicating types of uses, acreage for each land use, number of units, densities  
and land use intensities.   
  
  
27-6 10/31/2013  

  Loading....
(c) A description of the type, character and proposed use of all land and structures  
within the PUD including square feet per unit, floor area for each use type, height  
of all structures and any other information as required to describe the character of  
the proposed use or activity.   
  
(d) Residential lots that meet the minimum size of the residential zoning within the  
PUD and containing a maximum of one residential main structure/living unit shall  
be shown on the final PUD application as a residential lot without final placement  
of residential building.  Residential lots that are approved on the PUD final plan as  
a clustered home area must show on the PUD final plan with the maximum  
building envelope allowed per structure.     
  
(e) Additional Required Information: Upon request of the Zoning Administrator,  
Planning and Zoning Commission or the City Council, the applicant shall provide  
the following information:   
  
i. Developer intent and objectives (physical, social and environmental).   
  
ii. A description of all exterior building materials.   
  
iii. Projected Population profile for the development.   
  
iv. Impact of development on local streets (traffic study), natural features,  
schools and utilities.  
  
v. Such other information pertinent to the development or use.   
Failure of the applicant to provide such requested information in a timely  
manner may be grounds for denial of the application.   
3. FINAL PLAT AND PUD RECORDING:  After an approval of the final PUD application the  
developer shall record a final plat showing all details of the PUD development including  
placement of building, roadways, trails and all information that would be a part of a final  
plat recording within the City of Ammon.  No building permits shall be issued for  
development within the PUD until all documentation has been filed and recorded at the  
Bonneville County Recorders Office and all documentation has been received in hard  
copy and electronic form from the developer.  All documentation requirements shall follow  
the process of the filing of a final plat as described in 10-29-8 of the City of Ammon Title  
X codified ordinances.  
  
(G)DEVELOPMENT ALLOWED ONLY AS APPROVED:  After approval of a PUD (planned unit  
development), the land to which it pertains shall be developed and used in its entirety only as  
authorized and described in the conditional use permit approving the planned unit development.    
  
  
(H)PHASED PUD:  
  
1. Each phase of a PUD may be required to be planned, developed and approved to exist  
as an independent PUD.     
  
2. Development within a non-residential area of a PUD may be limited for development in  
relation to a percentage of residential development.    
  
  
  
27-7 10/31/2013  

  Loading....
  
(I)EXPIRATION OF CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT:  The PUD conditional use shall expire one year  
from date of final approval if the applicant has not commenced substantial construction. The City  
Council shall have the right to extend an order for one (1) additional year. After substantial  
construction has begun the Conditional Use Permit shall continue indefinitely.  
  
  
(J)AMENDMENTS TO A PUD: Any significant change to a PUD may require a public hearing as  
deemed necessary by a review of the requested change by the Planning and Zoning  
Commission.  Relocation of buildings within the same zoning classification that results in no  
decrease of green space shall not be considered a significant change unless determined by the  
Planning and Zoning Commission to be a significant change.   
  
(K) MAINTAINANCE OF COMMON AREA, GREENSPACE AREA AND OTHERS PUD MAINTAINED  
AREAS:  It shall be the responsibility of the designated Home Owners Association or PUD  
Organization to maintain the common areas, greenspace areas and other PUD maintained areas  
within all PUD developments.  In the event said Home Owners Association or PUD Organization or  
other responsible party fails to maintain said areas, the City may contract and/or do any necessary  
repair or maintenance.  To allow for costs incurred by the City for said repair or maintenance, there  
shall be a charge of two (2) times the invoice or billed amounts for said repair or maintenance.  Such  
costs shall be assessed as a lien against all privately owned parcels within the PUD on a square  
footage prorata basis against all individually owned property.  Said lien may be collected separately  
from each property owner by the City and/or the same shall be attached to the real property tax roll  
assessment of each individually owned property.  
  
27-8 10/31/2013  

  
CHAPTER 28  
  
INTERPRETATION, APPLICABILITY,  
SEVERABILITY, AND PENALTY  
  
  
SECTION:  
  
10-28-1: Interpretation  
10-28-2: Applicability  
10-28-3: Effect on Previous Ordinances and Maps  
10-28-4: Severability  
10-28-5: Violations--a Public Nuisance  
10-28-6: Responsibility for Violations  
10-28-7: Penalty for Violation of Ordinance  
  
10-28-1: 
 INTERPRETATION: In interpreting and applying the provisions of this ordinance, they  
shall be held to be the minimum requirements for promoting the public health, safety, convenience,  
comfort and general welfare of the community.  When the requirements of this ordinance impose  
higher requirements that are imposed or required by existing provisions of law or ordinance, the  
provisions of this ordinance shall govern.  
  
It is the intent of this ordinance not to interfere with or nullify any easement, covenants or  
agreements which are not in conflict with the provisions of this ordinance.  
  
10-28-2: 
 APPLICABILITY: The provisions of this ordinance are applicable not only to private  
persons, agencies and organizations, but also to all public agencies and organizations to the full  
extent that they may be enforceable in connection with the activities of any such public agencies or  
organizations.  
  
10-28-3: 
 EFFECT ON PREVIOUS ORDINANCES AND MAPS: The existing ordinances  
covering the zoning of the property within the limits of Ammon, Idaho, and all subsequent ordinances  
amending said ordinance, together with all maps which are a part of such ordinances, be and the  
same are hereby superseded, amended, changed and modified to read as set forth herein.  Any  
illegal or unauthorized use of land, buildings or structures and any illegal building or structure which  
was illegal or unauthorized under the terms of said ordinances, or any subsequent amendment  
thereto, be, and the same shall remain, illegal and unauthorized unless specifically permitted under  
the terms of this ordinance.  
  
10-28-4: 
 SEVERABILITY: This ordinance and the various parts, sections and clauses are  
hereby declared to be severable.  If any part, section, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase is  
adjudged unconstitutional or invalid, it is hereby declared that the remainder of the ordinance shall  
not be affected thereby.  The City Council of Ammon hereby declares that it would have passed this  
ordinance, and each part, section, paragraph, sentence, clause and phrase thereof, irrespective of  
the fact that only one or more portions thereof be declared invalid.  
  
  
28-1          ADOPTED 7-20-2012  

  Loading....
  
10-28-5: 
  VIOLATIONS-A PUBLIC NUISANCE: Any building or structure which has been set up,  
erected, constructed, altered, enlarged, converted, moved, remodeled or maintained contrary to the  
provisions of this ordinance, and any use of land or building or premises established, conducted,  
maintained or operated contrary to the provisions of this ordinance, are hereby declared to be  
unlawful and opposed to the orderly development of the community and shall therefore be  
considered a public nuisance.  
  
10-28-6: 
  RESPONSIBILITY FOR VIOLATIONS: It shall be the duty of all architects,  
contractors, subcontractors, builders and other persons having to do with the establishment of any  
use of land or the erection, altering, changing or remodeling of any building or structure to see that a  
proper permit has been granted before such work is begun.  Any such architect, builder, contractor  
or other person doing or performing any such work without a permit having been issued is in conflict  
with the requirements of this ordinance in the same manner and to the same extent that the owner of  
the premises or the persons for whom the use is established, or for whom such buildings are erected  
or altered, and shall be subject to the penalties herein prescribed for violation.  
  
10-28-7: 
  PENALTY FOR VIOLATION OF ORDINANCE: Any person, firm or corporation,  
whether as principal, agent, employee or otherwise, who fails to comply with any Notice to  
Correct within the time specified, or who shall erect, construct or reconstruct any building in any  
zone within Ammon without first obtaining a permit therefor from the Building Department, or who  
fails to maintain or comply with conditions as required herein, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.   
Any person, firm or corporation, whether as principal, agent, employee or otherwise, who shall  
change the use of any building or other structure or use of any land, or shall fail to comply with  
conditions applicable to the use of any land within the City of Ammon in violation of the  
provisions of this ordinance, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be subject to  
penalties prescribed for such violations under section 1-4-1 of this code.  Any person, firm or  
corporation, whether as principal, agent, employee or otherwise who fails to comply with the  
conditions and or requirements of an adopted policy of the City of Ammon Planning Department  
shall be guilty of an infraction and shall be subject to penalties prescribed for such violations  
under section 1-4-2 of this code.  
  
Such person, firm or corporation violating this ordinance, or any part thereof, shall be deemed to be  
guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during which said violation is committed,  
continued or permitted by such person, firm or corporation and shall be punishable as provided by  
law as a separate offense.  
  
  
  
  
28-2          ADOPTED 7-20-2012  

  
(B) Staff shall review all site plans for compliance to the requirements of the site plan submission  
standards.  All requirements will be forwarded to the developer for compliance.  
  
(C) Staff review of site plans shall be completed prior to final approval of any site plan.  Only  
after signatures from all departments of the City relating to site plan approval shall the site  
plan become considered a “final site plan”.    
  
(D) All final site plan drawings shall comply with the Site Plan Requirement sheet available from  
the City Building and Planning Department.  Additional documentation may be required as  
necessary for complete review of any site plan.   
  
(E) Upon request for a certificate of occupancy each applicable department shall review the site  
for compliance with the approved final site plan. The Building Official shall not approve the  
issuance of a certificate of occupancy until the site has been found to be in compliance with  
the approved final site plan, unless it is determined by each reviewing Department Head that  
a temporary certificate of occupancy is appropriate for non-safety issues.  Prior to the  
expiration of a temporary certificate of occupancy all non-compliance issues shall be brought  
into compliance.  
  
(F) Approval of a site plan shall be valid for a period of twenty-four (24) months.  
  
  
10-29-14: Split Zoned Lots: The following shall address split zoned lots within the City of  
Ammon.  
  
(A) Split zoned lots are prohibited in the City of Ammon.    
  
(B) Upon submission of a request for final plat approval a separate document shall be submitted  
for staff review showing the zoning of each lot within the requested final plat.    
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
10-29-15:  GUARANTEE OF COMPLETION:  The developer of a subdivision within the City shall  
be required to construct and install all Public improvements as required by the approved  
improvement drawings for each subdivision or division thereof prior to the issuance of any  
building permit for said subdivision or produce a guarantee of completion.  This guarantee of  
completion shall be provided in lieu of completing all infrastructure improvements prior to  
issuance of building permits within a subdivision as required in the City of Ammon annexation  
and development agreements or any other agreements approved by the City of Ammon.    
  
  
  
Page 12 of 16    SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS  REVISED 08-16-2018  
  

  Loading....
  
(A) Financial Guarantee Arrangements: Prior to commencing construction on or approving  
financial guarantees for any public improvements, the Final Plat and Development  
Agreement shall be approved and recorded.  The City shall require the developer to  
provide a financial guarantee of performance in one or a combination of the following  
arrangements which said requirements shall be in addition to the requirements of any  
other agency responsible for the administration, operation and maintenance of the  
applicable public improvement. Public improvements shall include but not be limited to:  
roads, phone, electric, public water, natural gas, public sewer, fire protection, cable,  
lighting and required landscaping, curb, gutter, sidewalks and drainage systems.  
  
1. Surety Bond:  
  
a. Accrual:  The bond shall accrue to the City of Ammon covering all  
costs of construction, of the specific public improvements.  
  
b. Amount:  The bond shall be in the amount equal to one hundred fifty  
percent (200%) of the total estimated cost based on the development cost  
agreement in item 10-29-15-(A)-1-e below, for completing construction of  
the specific public improvement, as recommended and approved by the  
City Engineer.  
  
c. Term Length:   The bond shall be in force and held by the City for a  
period of 24 months after the public improvements are completed and  
accepted by the City. Any repairs or replacements to the public  
infrastructure during the initial warranty period shall automatically extend  
the warranty period 12 additional months beyond the initial 24 months and  
the bond or value related to said replacement or repair shall be extended  
with the warranty period and the bond in unusual circumstances beyond  
the afore mentioned 24-month period.   
  
d. Bonding for Surety Company:  The bond shall be with a surety  
company authorized to do business in the State of Idaho and acceptable  
to the City Council.  
  
e. Development Cost Agreement:  The Development cost agreement  
shall be provided by the developer’s registered engineer and approved by  
the City Engineer.  Said agreement shall reflect actual cost estimates plus  
ten (10) percent of the improvements needed to complete subdivision.    
  
2. Cash Deposit, Certified Check, Negotiable Bond or Irrevocable Bank Letter of  
Credit:  
  
a. Treasurer, Escrow Agent or Trust Company: A cash deposit, certified  
check, negotiable bond or an irrevocable bank letter of credit, such surety  
acceptable by the City, shall be deposited with an escrow agent, City  
Treasurer, or trust company;  
  
b. Dollar Value: The dollar value of the cash deposit, certified check,  
  
  
Page 13 of 16    SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS  REVISED 08-16-2018  
  

  Loading....
  
negotiable bond or an irrevocable bank letter of credit shall be equal to two  
hundred percent (200%) of the estimated cost based on the development  
cost agreement in item 10-29-15-(A)-2-d below, for completing  
construction of the specific public improvement, as recommended and  
approved by the City Engineer.  
  
c. Escrow Time: The bond shall be in force and held by the City for a  
minimum period of 24 months with automatic renewal until such time as  
after the public improvements are completed and accepted by the City,  
and shall further continue until all contractual warranty periods are  
completed. Any repairs or replacements to the public infrastructure during  
the initial warranty period shall automatically extend the warranty period 12  
additional months beyond the initial 24 months and the bond or value  
related to said replacement or repair shall be extended with the warranty  
period. The City Engineer may extend the warranty period and the bond in  
unusual circumstances beyond the afore mentioned 24-month period.   
  
d. Development Cost Agreement: The Development cost agreement shall be  
provided by the developers registered engineer and approved by the City  
Engineer.  Said agreement shall reflect actual cost estimates plus ten (10)  
percent of the improvements needed to complete subdivision.    
  
(B) Approval of As Built Site Improvements: With respect to financial guarantees, the  
approval of all as built site improvements within a subdivision or PUD shall be conditioned  
on the accomplishment of the following:   
  
1. The improvements as required in the construction improvement drawings  
required by this title have been completed by the developer and approved by  
the City.   
2. All completed improvements must be approved by the developer’s engineer  
with an acknowledged/notarized letter.   
  
(C)  Inspection of Public Improvements Under Construction:   
  
1.   Before recording of a final plat, and before construction plans, and specifications for  
public improvements, an agreement shall be made in writing between the developer  
and the City to provide for inspecting the construction and its conformity to the  
submitted plans.    
  
2. Prior to construction of public improvements, a pre-construction meeting shall be held  
with the appropriate City of Ammon departments’ staff, the project engineer and the  
contractor or the contractor’s designated representative.    
  
  (D) Penalty in Case of Failure to Complete Construction of Public Improvements: In the event  
the developer shall, in any case, fail to complete such work within the period of time as  
required by the conditions of the guarantee for the completion of public improvements, it  
shall be the responsibility of the City Council to proceed to have such work completed. In  
order to accomplish this, the City Council shall reimburse itself for the cost and expense  
  
  
Page 14 of 16    SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS  REVISED 08-16-2018  
  

  Loading....
  
thereof by appropriating the cash deposit, certified check, irrevocable letter of credit, or  
negotiable bond which the developer may have deposited in lieu of surety bond, or may  
take such steps as necessary to require performance by the bonding or surety company,  
and as included in a written agreement between the Council and the developer.  
  
  (E) Reduction and Release of Guarantee: Only after the inspecting engineer certifies that  
improvements are complete and free from defect, after receipt of notarized statement,  
and itemized bill, the City shall release the developer from the subdivision improvements  
agreement upon completion of all warranty periods.  
  
1. In subdivisions where a cash deposit, certified check, or negotiable bond  
for guarantee of sidewalk installation only has been presented; and after  
completion of a minimum of fifty (50) percent of the required infrastructure  
improvements within the subdivision, the Developer may request up to fifty  
(50) percent of the deposit to be refunded.  Any deposit refund request  
must be made in writing to the City Engineer who shall than inspect the  
subdivision for completion of sidewalks and notify the Developer in writing  
of the results of the inspection.  If the City Engineer determines a refund  
may be processed, he/she shall then issue a request to the City Treasurer  
that all or a portion of the funds being held in escrow be released to the  
Developer dependent on the percent of completion.  Calculations for  
refund shall be done on a lot by lot basis in the same method as the  
deposit amount was calculated.   
2. The City Engineer shall be authorized to release portions of any financial  
guarantees and waive remaining warranty periods after finding that public  
infrastructure is completed, fully meets city standards, and that withholding  
the financial guarantee associated with the public infrastructure would  
provide no public benefit.    
  
(F) Phasing Allowed:  Any existing plat which was approved and recorded on or before  
December 31, 2011, shall be allowed to phase development under the following  
conditions:  
  
1. Any proposed phase shall be approved by the City Engineer and Planning  
Director.  
2. No phase shall be allowed on any recorded plat with less than twenty (20)  
buildable lots.  
3. No phase shall be allowed with less than ten (10) adjacent lots.  
4. The developer shall be responsible for providing a final phased development plan  
showing each phase of the plat.  
5. All other requirements of this section shall be met within each phased portion of a  
recorded plat.  
  
  
10-29-16: Judicial Orders: The following shall address judicial orders in regards to lots and  
buildings affected by judicial order:   
  
  
  
Page 15 of 16    SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS  REVISED 08-16-2018  
  

  
  
(A) Any non-complying lot created within the City by a judicial order shall be considered a non- 
buildable lot until such time the lot is brought into conforming status.  
  
(B) Any non-complying lot created within the City by a judicial order containing an existing  
building that is made non-conforming by said judicial order shall be considered a non- 
conforming building until such time as the building is brought into conforming status.  
  
  
10-29-17: Fees for Review: Reasonable fees sufficient to recover incurred costs may be  
charged.  The City Council may, by resolution, adopt fees for services associated with review,  
processing and inspection of subdivisions.  Such fees shall be reasonably related to the costs of  
services provided by the City with respect to the subdivision of land.  
  
  
10-29-18: Penalty: Any person, firm or corporation, whether as principal, agent,  
employee or otherwise who fails to comply with the conditions and or requirements of this  
chapter shall be guilty of an infraction and shall be subject to penalties prescribed for such  
violations under section 1-4-2 of this code.  
  
  
Page 16 of 16    SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS  REVISED 08-16-2018  

Travel Trailer Courts 
  
Section:  
  
Code Established. 
10-30-20:   
Travel Trailer Courts - Approval Plans and Documents Necessary. 
10-30-21:   
Preliminary Plan and Documents 
10-30-22:   
Review and Approvals 
10-30-23:   
Final Site Plan 
10-30-24:   
Stage Construction Permitted 
10-30-25:   
Development Agreement 
10-30-26:   
Guarantee of Performance 
10-30-27:   
   License Required 
10-30-28:   
  
  
10-30-20:  
CODE ESTABLISHED: The sections herein following shall be designated as the  
Travel Trailer Court Code for the City of Ammon. - Travel trailer courts subject to this Code shall be  
allowed only in RMH zones and commercial zones.  
  
10-30-21:  
TRAVEL TRAILER COURTS – APPROVED PLANS AND DOCUMENTS  
NECESSARY:  Any person wishing to construct a travel trailer court shall obtain from the Zoning  
Administrator information pertaining to the City's Plan of Land Use, streets, public facilities and  
other requirements affecting the land within the development.  Before a permit can be issued for  
any construction connected with a travel trailer court, the preliminary plans, required documents  
pertaining to the development and the final plan shall have been approved as hereinafter set forth.  
  
10-30-22:  
PRELIMINARY PLAN AND DOCUMENTS: The preliminary plan and documents  
shall be prepared and submitted as follows:  
  
.   
(A) Plan RequirementsSix (6) copies of the preliminary plan must be submitted to the  
Zoning Administrator at least two (2) weeks prior to the meeting of the Planning  
Commission at which the plan will considered.  The preliminary plan shall be drawn  
to a scale not smaller than one (1) inch equals one hundred (100) feet, or as  
recommended by the Zoning Administrator, and shall show the following  
information:  
  
1. Proposed road and trailer space layout.  
  
2. Proposed reservation for parks, playgrounds and other open space.  
  
3. Proposed location for service facilities.  
  
4. A generalized landscape plan.  
    
5. Location of existing and proposed utility lines and easements, water and  
sewer lines, fire hydrants, storm drains and facilities, curbs and other  
improvements.  
  
6. Any other data that the Planning Commission may require.  
  
  
30-12            5/7/03  

  Loading....
  
(B) Standards and Requirements. Each travel trailer court shall be held in one  
ownership and shall contain at least two (2) acres of land.  
  
1. All travel trailer courts shall abut upon a collector or arterial street, as set  
forth in the major street plan of Ammon, Idaho.  
  
2. All travel trailers shall be set back at least thirty (30) feet from any public  
street.  
  
3. The roadway system shall provide convenient circulation through the travel  
trailer court and provide access to each travel trailer space.  No travel  
trailer space will be permitted direct access to a public street, road, or  
highway other than by means of the travel trailer court roadway system.  All  
entrances and exits from the travel trailer court shall be by forward motion  
  
only.  No exit or entrance from atravel trailer court shall be through a  
  
residential zone and no entrance or exit shall be located closer than fifty 
(50) feet to the intersection of two streets.  
  
4. All one-way roadways shall be at least fifteen (15) feet in width and all two- 
way roadways at least thirty (30) feet in width, and all roadways shall be  
hard surfaced.  
  
5. All areas within the court which are not hard surfaced shall be landscaped  
and maintained with lawns, trees and shrubs designed to provided privacy  
and noise containment and shall be equipped with adequate sprinkling  
devices as approved by the Zoning Administrator.  
  
6. Each travel trailer space shall be at least twenty (20) feet in width and at  
least forty (40) feet in length.  
  
7. No travel trailer space shall be rented for a period of more than six (6)  
months to the same tenant.  
  
8. All travel trailer spaces shall be served by an approved water and sewage  
disposal system.  
  
9. In addition to meeting the above requirements, all travel trailer courts shall  
conform to the requirements of the State and City health regulations  
relating to travel trailer courts.  
  
10. The site of any travel trailer court shall be graded and/or filled and  
maintained so as to prevent the accumulation of storm or wastewater of  
any kind.  A travel trailer court shall not be permitted where there is  
inadequate drainage.  Adequate drainage shall be provided and maintained  
for all patios, travel trailers stands and buildings.  
  
11. Signs, as may be required by the City, shall be placed in all travel trailer  
courts indicating the direction of travel and the area where no automobile  
parking will be permitted on the roadways.  
  
  
30-13            5/7/03  

  Loading....
12. No permit to construct or enlarge a travel trailer court shall be issued until  
the plans for the proposed construction or enlargement have been  
approved by the State Health Department.  
  
13. Both dependent and independent travel trailers shall be allowed to occupy  
travel trailer spaces in a travel trailer court.  
  
14.  
A strip of land at least eight (8) feet wide surrounding the travel trailer court  
shall be left unoccupied by travel trailers and shall be planted and  
maintained in lawn; shrubs and trees designed to afford privacy to the  
  
development. 
  
10-30-23:   
REVIEW AND APPROVALS:  The Planning Commission shall review the plan to  
determine its compliance with any portion of the City's Land Use Plan and Zoning Ordinance.  In  
considering the development, the Planning Commission shall, among other things, make sure that  
such development will mesh harmoniously with the surrounding area; that it will  not produce a  
volume of traffic beyond the capacity of the surrounding street system; that requirements for  
utilities, off-street parking, traffic circulation and other public requirements will be adequately met  
and that the standards and intent of this section shall be adequately complied with.  The Planning  
Commission may require changes to be made in the plan.  They may also require additional yards  
or buffers or other improvements to be installed, along with greater amounts of landscaping or  
parking spaces.  Said changes may be imposed as conditions of approval where it is determined  
by the Planning Commission that such changes are necessary to insure that the development will  
mesh harmoniously with adjoining or nearby uses.  
  
An application for approval of a travel trailer court shall be granted or denied only after a  
public hearing before the Planning Commission.  Notice of the hearing shall be given in a  
   
newspaper of general circulation atleast fifteen (15) daysprior to said hearing.  After review by the  
Planning Commission, the application, with the Planning Commission's recommendations, shall be  
  
submitted to the City Council, which may conduct atleast one public hearing in addition to the  
hearings conducted by the Commission, using the same notice and hearing procedures as the  
Commission, and shall adopt, amend, or reject the plan.  An application denied by the Council may  
be appealed pursuant to the State of Idaho administrative procedure policy.  Approval of   
   
the preliminary plan shall bevalid for aperiod of one (1) year.  
  
10-30-24:  
FINAL SITE PLAN:Upon approval of the preliminary plan by the City Council, the  
developer shall submit to the Planning Commission in a final site plan of either the entire travel  
trailer court or the first stage of such development that is to be constructed.  Such plan shall be  
drawn to scale and provide, in detail, the information required under this section.  
  
10-30-25:  
STAGE CONSTRUCTION PERMITTED:Development may be carried out in  
progressive stages, in which event each stage shall be so planned that the requirements and intent  
of this ordinance shall be fully complied with at the completion of each stage.  No final plan for the  
initial stage shall cover less than two (2) acres.  
  
10-30-26: 
      DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENT:Prior to the granting of the final approval, and the  
  
granting of any building permits, the developer shall enter into aDevelopment Agreement with the  
City in which all conditions of construction, completion of performance, performance of conditions,  
and other requirements shall be specified and detailed.  
  
  
30-14            5/7/03  

  Loading....
10-30-27: 
 GUARANTEE OF PERFORMANCE:  
  
   
(A) Possession and Occupancy.No possession or occupancy of the travel trailer court  
  
shall be allowed until the improvements asplanned shall be fully constructed;  
   
provided, however that if adeveloper desires to have any occupancy of aportion of  
   
apartially-developed staged construction, he shall furnishevidence and proof of  
the ability to complete the performance and that such performance shall include all  
improvements, including, but not limited to, landscaping, road improvements,  
pedestrian ways, curbs, gutters, road surfacing, water and sewer lines, and  
common facilities shown on the final site plan, and that the occupancy of such  
portion, then completed, could not be affected by the lack of completion of the other  
portions.  
  
   
(B) Default.In the event the developer defaults or fails or neglects to satisfactorily  
install the required improvements within the time limitation, the Council may declare  
default and the City may, after notice and hearing given to the developer, to show  
cause why such should not be declared, may install or cause to be installed the  
required improvements using as security the lien upon the land as provided in the  
Development Agreement.  
  
.   
(C) Release of ObligationThe developer shall be responsible for the quality of all  
materials and workmanship.  Upon the completion of installation of all such  
improvements, the City Engineer shall make an inspection of the improvements  
and shall submit a report to the Council.  If the improvements do not meet the  
standards and the plans, the engineer shall so report; and the developer shall be  
obligated to correct the improvements and complete the installations to meet all  
such plans and to be approved by the City Engineer.  Upon the engineer's approval  
of the installation or improvements, the City shall release the lien imposed by the  
Development Agreement for the completion and installation of all improvements.  
  
   
(D) Continuing Obligation.Any failure on the part of the developer or his assigns to  
maintain the trailer travel court in accordance with the approved Development  
Agreement, the covenants, conditions, restrictions, and agreements shall be  
deemed a public nuisance endangering the health, safety and general welfare of  
the public and a detriment to the surrounding area, and shall give the City a right of  
entry under the Development Agreement to correct any such condition and  
complete any such improvements and have a lien thereon for the cost and expense  
incurred.  
  
In addition to any other remedy provided by law for the abatement or removal of such  
public nuisance, the City may remove or abate the nuisance and charge the cost thereof, including  
reasonable attorney fees, to the owners.  
  
10-30-28: 
 LICENSE REQUIRED:  Prerequisite to the operation of any travel trailer court, or the  
occupancy of any travel trailer outside of a travel trailer court, shall be the obtaining of an annual  
license which shall be issued only after inspection by the Zoning Administrator.  It shall be unlawful  
to operate any travel trailer court or to occupy any travel trailer outside of a travel trailer court  
without first obtaining a license, and said license shall be refused or revoked upon failure of the  
owner and/or operator to maintain the court or travel trailer in accordance with the standards and  
requirements as herein set forth.  
  
  
30-15            5/7/03  

  Loading....
If the Zoning Administrator finds that such requirements have been met, he shall issue a  
permit to such applicant upon payment of a fee to said Zoning Administrator.  A  permit shall be  
valid for the entire calendar year for which issued and until midnight on the 3l day of January of the  
following year.  
  
The fee for a permit shall be established by resolution of the Council and may be  
amended from time to time by resolution of the Council.  If the Zoning Administrator shall find that  
any person to whom a permit has previously been issued is no longer in compliance with the  
requirements of this ordinance for the issuance of such permit, the Zoning Administrator shall give  
such person written notice stating the nature of such noncompliance and notify him that if, after  
fifteen (15) days, the requirements of this ordinance have not been met; such permit shall be  
revoked.  At the end of such fifteen (15) day period, the Zoning Administrator shall revoke such  
permit if he finds that such person is not in compliance with the requirements of this ordinance.  
  
  
  
CHAPTER 31  
  
PROFESSIONAL BUSINESS OFFICE ZONE  
  
SECTION:  
  
10-31-1: Establishment of Zone  
10-31-2: General Objectives and Characteristics of Zone  
10-31-3: Use Requirements  
10-31-4: Area Requirements  
10-31-5: Width Requirements  
10-31-6: Location of Buildings  
10-31-7: Height Requirements  
10-31-8: Size of Buildings  
10-31-9:        Supplementary Regulations  
10-31-10: Special Provisions  
  
  
10-31-1: ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONE: There is hereby established within the City of  
Ammon and within the zoning laws of the City of Ammon, a Professional Business Office Zone,  
known as a P-B Zone.  
  
  
10-31-2: GENERAL OBJECTIVES AND CHARACTERISTICS OF ZONE: The objective in  
establishing a P-B Professional-Business Zone is to provide for business, professional  
governmental and municipal offices, cultural facilities, church and school offices and structures  
and certain other type uses of a semi-commercial nature.  This zone is characterized by a  
relatively high traffic volume and a wide variety of office-type buildings.  
  
In order to accomplish the objectives and purposes of this ordinance and to promote the  
characteristics of this zone, the following regulations shall apply in the P-B Office Zone.  
  
  
10-31-3: USE REQUIREMENTS: Only the following uses shall be permitted in this zone:  
  
(A) Business and professional offices, including incidental storage, but excluding wholesale  
and retail shops or markets.  
  
(B) Off-street parking lots in conjunction with permitted uses.  
  
(C) Medical and dental clinics and offices.  
  
(D) Government offices, excluding those where storage of materials or equipment is a  
primary purpose.  
  
(E) Non-profit community halls and lodges, fraternal and benevolent meeting halls and  
  

  Loading....
  
church or school offices and structures.  
  
(F) Mortuaries, Crematories and funeral parlors    
  
(G) Non-flashing signs advertising the services performed within the structure as permitted  
by the ordinance of the City of Ammon.  
  
(H) Directional signs not to exceed two (2) square feet; also signs advertising parking space,  
providing the signs advertising such use shall not exceed eight (8) square feet and shall  
not be constructed to a height greater than four (4) feet.  
  
(I) Small animal practice veterinary hospitals.  
  
(J) Storage Units (by Conditional Use Permit)    
  
(K) Other uses which have been ruled by the City Council to be similar to the uses  
hereinabove listed.  
  
  
10-31-4:  AREA REQUIREMENTS: No area requirement, except that which is required for  
off-street parking and yards are established for the P-B Zone.  
  
  
10-31-5:  WIDTH REQUIREMENTS: The minimum width of any building site for a main  
building shall be fifty (50) linear feet, measured at the building setback line, except that the  
minimum width of lots for mortuaries or funeral parlors shall be one hundred (100) feet.  
  
  
10-31-6:  LOCATION OF BUILDING AND STRUCTURES:  
   
(A) Setback.  All buildings shall be set back a minimum distance of thirty (30) feet  
from the property line adjacent to any public street, except as herein provided  
and required under the provisions of this ordinance.  
  
(B) Side Yards.  For main buildings, there shall be side yards of not less than eight  
(8) feet. Side yard requirements for accessory buildings shall be the same as for  
the main buildings, except that no side yard shall be required for accessory  
buildings which are located more than twelve feet in the rear of the main building.  
  
(C) Rear Yard.  Ten (10) feet for all buildings, except as herein provided and required  
under the provisions of this ordinance.  
  
  
10-31-7: HEIGHT REQUIREMENTS: Maximum building height is subject to the Fire  
    
  
  
  
  

  Loading....
  
10-31-8: SIZE OF BUILDINGS: There shall be no requirements as to the size of buildings.  
  
  
10-31-9: SUPPLEMENTARY REGULATIONS: The Supplementary Regulations to Zones,  
as established by the ordinances of the City of Ammon, shall apply to the PB Zone.  
  
  
10-31-10:         SPECIAL PROVISIONS:  
  
(A) Landscaping shall be as set forth in section 10-5-24.  
  
(B) Off street parking shall be provided, as required in this ordinance, and shall be hard  
surfaced.  
  

  
10-32-13: 
 INTERFERENCE AND EMISSIONS STANDARDS. All transmitting antennas and  
devices must stay in compliance with FCC regulations governing electromagnetic interference  
and radio frequency interference.  In the event the City has reason to believe a tower or antenna  
within the City is causing interference or emissions out of compliance with the FCC; the City shall  
first notify the tower owner of the possible problem.  The tower owner shall then be responsible  
for testing to verify all emissions from the tower are in compliance with the FCC regulations.  In  
the event the tower owner fails to verify compliance within 90 days of notification by the City; then  
the City shall take the necessary steps to verify compliance and the tower owner shall then be  
responsible for all costs incurred including but not limited to attorney fees.  No renewal of a  
business license or conditional use permit shall be granted until such time as required  
compliance letters are received by the City Clerk and all costs incurred by the City have been  
paid in full.     
  
  
10-32-14: 
 SAFETY AND HEALTH.  The tower owner bears full legal responsibility for any harm  
the tower or its associated facilities may cause to any person, any property, or the environment.   
The antenna owner bears full legal responsibility for any harm the antenna or its associated  
facilities may cause to any person, any property, or the environment.    
  
(A) Every tower shall be protected to discourage climbing of the tower by unauthorized  
persons.  Preferably, the tower design itself will discourage climbing.  This may not be  
achieved, however, by placing barbs or similar devices which would cause bodily harm on  
or near the tower.  In some cases the City Council may require a fence to secure a specific  
  
site.   
  
(B) Metal towers must be constructed of, or treated with, corrosive resistant material.  Wooden  
towers must be impregnated with rot resistant substances.  
  
(C) The tower and associated facilities must be covered by liability insurance.  
  
(D) All towers, antennas, and signals transmitted from them must comply with current Federal  
Aviation Administration (FAA) regulations, State of Idaho Code Title 21 Chapter 5, State of  
Idaho Administrative Rule 39.04.02, Federal Communications Commission (FCC)  
regulations, and all other regulations issued by federal and State of Idaho agencies  
governing communications towers, antennas, and signals transmitted from them.  For the  
lifetime of the tower and each antenna, any new or changed federal or state regulation  
governing it must be complied with within the time frame mandated by the new or changed  
regulation, or if no time frame is provided, within six months of the new or modified  
regulation's effective date.  Failure to comply with federal and state regulations is in  
violation of this ordinance and constitutes a misdemeanor, punishable as described in the  
"Penalty" section of this ordinance.    
  
  
10-32-15: 
 MAINTENANCE.  Under some circumstances the City may require an  
inspection from an independent professional engineering firm certified in the State of Idaho  
certifying:    
  
(A) What damage (if any) was sustained by the tower since the previous inspection report, and  
the repairs made to correct it;  
  
Page 14 of 18   COMMUNICATION TOWERS AND ANTENNAS   REVISED 6-27-13  
              
  
  
  

  Loading....
(B) That the tower is free from rust, rot, pealing, flaking, blisters, and similar defects, and is  
appropriately treated to remain so through the coming year.  
  
(C) That the tower has been thoroughly inspected and the inspection verifies that the structural  
integrity of the tower meets applicable standards.  
  
  
10-32-16: 
 BACKHAUL NETWORK.  All providers of backhaul service for each antenna on the  
tower must be identified to the City, and must hold a current franchise with the City.  
  
  
10-32-17: 
 NON-CONFORMING USE.  Any permanent tower and any antenna mounted  
thereon, which was legally established and in use at the effective date of this ordinance, which  
does not meet the requirements of this ordinance (except it must still meet the business license,  
interference, maintenance, backhaul networks, and most of the safety and health requirements),  
and cannot be economically modified to meet the requirements of this ordinance, shall be  
deemed to be a non-conforming use, and such non-conforming use may be continued  
notwithstanding the fact that it may not comply with the provisions of this ordinance.  No tower or  
antenna which is in conformance with the provisions of this ordinance is allowed to come out of  
conformance.  Non-conforming uses are subject to the following requirements:  
  
(A) All non-conforming tower owners must maintain a valid business license as required in the  
business licensing section of the City code.  
  
(B) Each service provider using the tower must be brought into conformance with the backhaul  
network requirements of this ordinance.  
  
(C) Any tower found to be out of compliance with the maintenance, and safety and health  
provisions of this ordinance shall be brought into compliance prior to the issuance or  
renewal of a business license.    
  
(D) Routine maintenance is permitted on non-conforming towers and antennas.  However, a  
non-conforming tower or antenna may not be structurally altered or replaced by another  
tower which is different in use, physical dimensions, or location, without complying in all  
respects with this ordinance.  
  
(E) If the cost of repairing a damaged or destroyed non-conforming tower or its components to  
its former use, physical dimensions, and location would be greater than the cost of a new  
tower of like kind and quality, then the tower may not be repaired or restored except in full  
compliance with this ordinance.  Otherwise, a damaged or destroyed non-conforming  
tower may be repaired and restored to its former use, location, and physical dimensions  
upon obtaining a building permit therefore, and continue in its non-conforming state,  
provided all other provisions of this ordinance, and all other applicable City ordinances and  
building codes are met, and provided the building permit is obtained within sixty (60) days  
from the date the tower was damaged or destroyed, and completion of repairs to or  
replacement of the tower  is completed within ninety (90) days of issuance of the building  
permit.  Otherwise the tower shall be deemed to be abandoned, and shall fall under the  
  
provisions of the Abandoned Towers section of this ordinance. 
  
  
10-32-18: 
 ABANDONED TOWERS.    
Page 15 of 18   COMMUNICATION TOWERS AND ANTENNAS   REVISED 6-27-13  
              
  
  
  

  Loading....
  
(A) In the event a tower contains no licensed antenna for a period of six (6) months the tower  
shall be considered abandoned and all regulations governing abandoned towers shall  
apply.    
  
(B) At such time the tower owner plans to abandon or discontinue operation of a wireless  
communication facility, the owner shall notify the City by first-class US mail of the proposed  
date of abandonment or discontinuation of operations.  Such notice shall be given no less  
than thirty (30) days prior to abandonment or discontinuation of operations.  In the event  
that a tower owner fails to give such notice the tower shall be considered abandoned on  
the date the City becomes aware of said abandonment.  
  
(C) The tower owner shall remove the tower and all components of the tower use no later than  
ninety (90) days after the date of abandonment or discontinuation, properly disposing of all  
waste materials from the site in accordance with local and state solid waste disposal  
regulation, and restore the location to its before use state, landscaping and grading  
excepted.  Removal shall include, but not be limited to, removal of antennas, support  
structures, equipment enclosures and security barriers from the subject property.  
  
(D) If a tower owner fails to remove the wireless communication facility in accordance with this  
section, the City may cause the facility to be removed and all expenses of removal,  
disposal and restoration shall be paid by the current owner of record of the property where  
the facility is located.  In the event the City is required to take this step a property lien shall  
be placed on the property until such time as the property owner satisfies all costs incurred  
by the City including any attorney fees related to the abandonment of the facility.  
    
  
10-32-19: 
  CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT REQUIRED:  No new tower shall be allowed within  
the City without a conditional use permit.  Conditional use permit applications shall follow the  
procedure in place for public hearings at the time of the request with the following additions:      
  
(A) At the public hearing a determination shall be made to the number of co-location antennas  
that shall be required on any permitted tower.  
  
(B) For a type 3 tower, starting three calendar days prior to the Planning and Zoning public  
hearing, continuing through the day of the Planning and Zoning meeting; the applicant will  
float a balloon of the standard size used in aerial line of site surveys, such that the top of  
the balloon is at the same height as the highest point of the proposed tower, including any  
item that may be attached to the tower (lightning rod, etc.).  This balloon shall be removed  
each night and replaced each morning no later than 8:00 AM on each day required.  Notice  
shall be visibly posted at the site, and all public notices announcing the public hearing for  
the tower will include language explaining the balloon placement dates and times.  The  
Planning and Zoning Commission shall make a recommendation in regards to the  
requested site location, number of antennas to be allowed and any additional requirements  
of the conditional use permit to the City Council.  
  
(C) Each application for a tower conditional use permit shall contain the following items:  
  
1. The name and contact information for the current owner of record for the property.  
  
Page 16 of 18   COMMUNICATION TOWERS AND ANTENNAS   REVISED 6-27-13  
              
  
  
  

  Loading....
2. A notarized copy of the current lease with the property owner of record at the time  
the submission is made.    
  
3. A map showing the location and noting the height, design, and if applicable, type  
of all existing towers, and all approved but not yet constructed towers, both in and  
within one mile of the City of Ammon and its impact area, and must also show on  
this map which of these towers are or will be used by the applicant, and where the  
applicant proposes to locate any new towers.  The City of Ammon will provide to  
the applicant, the location of approved but not yet constructed towers.    
  
4. A statement indicating the number of co-located antennas that can be supported  
as part of the tower conditional use permit.  
  
5. A statement of the current Idaho market rate for co-location fees.  
  
6. A site plan showing the location of the tower in relation to setbacks as required by  
this ordinance.  This site plan shall contain the placement of the required support  
equipment building.  The site must provide enough area to meet the requirements  
for the size of building required for the maximum number of co-located antennas  
identified in item 4 above.  
  
7. If the conditional use is approved, a business license must be applied for prior to  
the issuance of the conditional use permit.  
  
(D) No decision made by the City may:  
  
1. Prohibit or have the effect of prohibiting the provision of a particular type of  
wireless service;  
  
2. Unreasonably discriminate among wireless service providers competing with one  
another;  
  
3. Deny a request or impose any provisions which would require stricter emission  
standards than those imposed by the FCC.  
  
(E) If substantial construction of a tower facility has not begun within six (6) months of  
issuance of the conditional use permit, the conditional use permit becomes null and void.  
  
(F) When a Conditional Use Permit is granted, the continuation of that permit is conditioned on  
compliance with all terms of this chapter as well as any requirements set forth by the City  
Code in other Titles of the City Code included but not limited to business licensing.  Failure  
to comply with City Code requirements may result in the termination of a conditional use  
permit requiring removal of the tower as set forth in section 10-32-18 of this chapter.    
  
  
10-32-20: 
 BUSINESS LICENSE. All towers must be licensed annually meeting the  
requirements of the business licensing section of the City Code.  At the time of business license  
renewal there shall be a staff review of the renewal application.  Staff shall consider the current  
condition and maintenance of the tower and tower site.  The renewal of both the conditional use  
permit and business license shall be approved only after maintenance or repair items have been  
completed as required by staff. An appeal of the City Staff determination shall be directed to the  
Page 17 of 18   COMMUNICATION TOWERS AND ANTENNAS   REVISED 6-27-13  
              
  
  
  

  Loading....
City Council within a reasonable timeframe after receipt in writing of a request for appeal.  The  
following items shall be submitted on an annual basis with the business license renewal  
application:   
  
(A) The name of the current owner of the tower.  
  
(B) The name of a contact person designated by the tower owner to address issues in regards  
to the tower.  
  
(C) The name and contact information of all antenna owners located on the tower.  
  
(D) Current FCC licensing documents extending to a period no less than the expiration date of  
the business license being requested for renewal.  
  
(E) Certificate of insurance of liability showing coverage for the tower and all its associated  
facilities.  
  
(F) The name and contact information of all backhaul networks serving the tower.    
  
(G) The name and contact information of the current property owner of record of the site that  
the tower is located on.  
  
  
10-32-21:  
BUSINESS LICENSE FEES.  The fees for towers and antennas shall be  
established by resolution of the City Council, which may be amended and modified from time to  
time by resolution.  
  
(A) Business license tower and antenna fees shall be paid by the tower owner on an annual  
basis.  
  
(B) Fees must be paid annually prior to the expiration of the current business license.  
  
(C) New tower and antenna fees must be paid prior to or at the time of application for a  
building permit for construction of a tower or antenna.  
  
  
10-32-22:  
PROPERTY OWNER RESPONSIBLE:  It shall be the responsibility of the property  
owner of record of any tower site within the City of Ammon to maintain a current contact with the  
tower owner.  In event of default by the tower owner for business license fees the current  
property owner of record shall be billed.  In the event of non-payment the FCC shall be notified  
that the current tower/antenna(s) are out of compliance with the City of Ammon licensing  
procedures and a request for non-renewal of the FCC license to operate shall be sent to the  
FCC.  
  
  
10-32-23: 
 PENALTY.  Any violation of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed to be a  
  
misdemeanor subject to penalties prescribed for such violations under section 1-4-1 of this code.  
  
Page 18 of 18   COMMUNICATION TOWERS AND ANTENNAS   REVISED 6-27-13  
              
CHAPTER 33  
  
RE RESIDENCE ESTATE ZONE  
  
SECTION:  
  
General Objectives and Characteristics of Zone  
10-33-1:  
Use Requirements  
10-33-2:  
Area Requirements  
10-33-3:  
Width Requirements 
10-33-4:   
Location of Buildings, Structures, and Animal Areas and Enclosures  
10-33-5:  
Height of Buildings  
10-33-6:  
Size of Buildings  
10-33-7:  
  
  
10-33-1: 
 GENERAL OBJECTIVES AND CHARACTERISTICS OF ZONE: The objective in  
establishing the RE Residence Estate Zone is to encourage the creation and maintenance of  
residential areas in the City for single family residential use, with spacious landscaping surrounding  
the residence or other main building occupied by humans, and lots sufficiently large to permit the  
limited keeping of animals.  This zone shall be granted in lieu of the overlay zone for the keeping of  
animals.  No single lot, regardless of the status of platting in the RE Residence Zone shall contain  
more than one living unit, except as specifically allowed by this Title of the City code.  This zone falls  
   
under the low density designation, with a lot size requirement of one (1) unit per acre.  
  
In order to accomplish the objectives and purposes of this ordinance and to promote the  
characteristics of the zone, the following regulations shall apply in the RE Residence Estate Zone  
(see also §10-5 Supplementary Regulations to Zones, §10-7 Special Provisions Applying to  
Miscellaneous Uses, and §10-29 Subdivision Regulations).  
  
  
10-33-2: 
 USE REQUIREMENTS: The following uses shall be permitted in the RE Residence  
Estate Zone:  
  
(A) Any use permitted in the RP Residence Park Zone, RP-A Residence Zone, and R-1  
Residence Zone.  
  
(B) Any use permitted by Section 5-3-8, Keeping or Maintaining Animals.  
  
(C) Pasturage is allowed on any part of the lot outside of the landscaping area surrounding  
the dwelling or other main building occupied by humans.  
  
(D) Feeding, resting, or loafing areas, and pens, corrals, runs, or other open air animal,  
livestock, or fowl enclosures more restrictive in nature than a pasture, and barns, stables,  
coops, sheds, or other buildings for animals, livestock and/or fowl.  
  
(E) No animal, livestock, or fowl may be fed, maintained, pastured, or kept in or on any part  
of the landscaped area surrounding the dwelling or other main building occupied by  
humans.  
  
Page 1 of 3 REVISED 6-27-13  

  Loading....
(F) Guest Houses (as allowed in section 10-13-2-(F).  
  
10-33-3: 
 AREA REQUIREMENTS:  
  
(A) A lot with an area of not less than one (1) acre (forty-three thousand five hundred sixty  
[43,560] square feet) shall be provided and maintained for each one family-dwelling or other  
main building and uses accessory thereto.  No lot may be less than one (1) acre.  
  
(B) An area of not less than twelve thousand five hundred (12,500) square feet, or 20,000  
square feet for lots containing a guest house, shall be used for the dwelling or other main  
building occupied by humans, and for landscaping surrounding the dwelling or other main  
building.  The landscaping surrounding the dwelling or other main building occupied by  
humans shall minimally include the minimum required front yard, minimum required side  
yards, and minimum required rear yard.    
  
10-33-4:   
 WIDTH REQUIREMENTS:Any building site for a dwelling or other main building  
must be wholly contained on one or more whole lots.  The minimum width for any lot shall be one  
hundred twenty-five (125) feet.  
  
  
10-33-5: 
 LOCATION OF BUILDINGS, STRUCTURES, AND ANIMAL AREAS AND  
ENCLOSURES: All buildings and structures, all feeding, resting, or loafing areas, and all pens,  
corrals, runs, or other open air animal, livestock, or fowl enclosures more restrictive in nature than a  
pasture, shall meet the most restrictive combination of the following:  
  
(A) SETBACK: A minimum distance of fifty (50) feet from any public street or from any  
granted easement of access, except as herein provided and required under the  
provisions of this ordinance. No auxiliary building shall be located closer to the street (or  
granted easement of vehicular access) fronted by the main building, than the distance of  
the main building to the street (or granted easement of vehicular access).  
  
(B) FRONT YARD: There shall be a front yard of not less than fifty (50) feet.  
  
  
(C) SIDE YARDS:There shall be a side yard on each side of any building or structure, any  
feeding, resting, or loafing area, and any pen, corral, run, or other open air animal, livestock,  
or fowl enclosure more restrictive in nature than a pasture, of not less than twenty (20) feet.    
  
1. Side yard requirements for accessory buildings shall be the same as for main  
buildings, except those subject to §10-33-5(A).  Any accessory building placed in  
the calculated side yard of the main building shall maintain the side yard  
requirements of the zone in which it is in.  The distance between the main building  
and the accessory building shall be subject to the requirements in the most  
recently adopted version of the International Building Code or International  
Residential Code as they may apply.  
  
2. No side yard shall be required for accessory buildings which are located more  
than twelve (12) feet in the rear of the main building (calculated from the furthest  
point of extension of any part of the foundation), provided that the auxiliary  
building's drip line remains within the property.    
Page 2 of 3 REVISED 6-27-13  

  Loading....
(D) REAR YARD.  There shall be a rear yard behind any main building, and between the rear  
property line and any building or structure, feeding, resting, or loafing area, and any pen,  
corral, run, or other open air animal, livestock, or fowl enclosure more restrictive in nature  
than a pasture, of not less than twenty-five (25) feet.  For accessory buildings not occupied  
by animals, no rear yard shall be required, provided that the auxiliary building's drip line  
remains within the property, except where an alley is located at the rear of a lot, in which  
case a three (3) foot rear yard is required.  
  
  
10-33-6: 
 HEIGHT OF BUILDINGS: Maximum building height is subject to the Fire Department’s  
ability to provide adequate fire protection.  Roofs above the square of the building, chimneys, flag  
poles, television antennas and similar structures not for human occupancy are excluded in  
determining height.  In addition to International Building Code requirements, any building where the  
eaves of the roof, or for roofs without eaves the top of the building walls, is greater than twenty-five  
(25) feet above the average natural grade of the land, must be reviewed by the Fire Marshall, and  
  
approved by City Council. 
  
  
10-33-7: 
 SIZE OF BUILDINGS:  The floor area of the first story above grade of any one-family  
dwelling shall be not less than one thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet, excluding garage  
space and open porches and carports.  For dwellings containing more than one story above grade,  
the floor space of the first story above grade may be reduced below this level provided the total floor  
area of all stories located above grade is not less than two thousand six hundred (2,600) square feet.  
 (Only those stories which are more than fifty percent (50%) above grade shall be considered to be  
above grade.  See §10-2 for the definition of "grade".)  For other buildings, there shall be no  
minimum floor area requirements.  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Page 3 of 3 REVISED 6-27-13  

  
(C)  Additional regulations on existing/approved billboards:  
  
1. No increase in size of any existing/approved billboard shall be allowed.  
  
2. No conversion to message changing or electronic message billboard  
shall be allowed.  
  
3. Repair or Reconstruction of Billboards:  Should any billboard be  
damaged by acts of God, weather, unintentional harm or negligence or  
should any billboard deteriorate due to failure to properly maintain or  
ordinary wear and tear, said billboard to the point that the cost of repair is  
greater than fifty (50) percent of its current fair market value, the City  
shall not grant any permits for the repair or reconstruction of the sign.   
Repair shall be only the maintenance of the existing structure not the  
replacement of any structural component.  This prohibition does not  
apply to signs damaged by vandalism or other criminal acts.  
  
a. No increase in height for any repaired or reconstructed billboard  
shall be allowed.  
  
b. No change of lighting which shall increase the lighting from the  
previously existing lighting on a repaired or reconstructed  
billboard shall be allowed.  
  
4. Lighting:  No Lighting shall be allowed between the hours of 11PM and  
6AM; said lighting shall not contain a fixture(s) with bulbs brighter than a  
single 250 watt halogen bulb on each side. Lighting shall be confined to  
the sign face and shall not illuminate the night sky.  
  
5. No modification of an existing billboard other than the normal upkeep and  
maintenance and advertising changes shall be allowed, including but not  
limited to items C-3-a and b above.  
  
  
10-34-13 
:           TEMPORARY/PORTABLE SIGNS:  For the purpose of this code a portable  
sign shall be defined as any sign not permanently attached to a permanent structure. 
    
  
Requirements and regulations for temporary signs apply to all zones within the city. Temporary  
signs shall be regulated as follows: 
  
  
(A) Types:  Temporary signs shall be limited to the following: Banners, portable signs,        
A-frame signs, inflatable signs, and wind driven signs, excluding real estate,  
  
garage/yard sale and political signs addressed separately within this chapter.  
  
(B) Civic, Service, and/or Registered Non-Profit Organization:  Temporary signs advertising  
events sponsored by tax exempt civic, and/or registered non-profit organizations may be  
permitted to place offsite advertising for events to be held within the City of Ammon.   
  
Permit must be obtained at least ten (10) days prior to any event.  No permit will be  
issued for requests not submitted within the required time frame.  Signs permitted by  
this section shall be placed only on property with the property owner permission.  Signs  
permitted must be removed within three (3) days after the event or the permitee may be  
held responsible for the cost of removal and denial of future permit applications.     
  
  
Page 5 of 9 REVISED 6-27-13  

  Loading....
  
1. A permit may be issued after a complete application has been received and  
processed by the City Clerk’s office on a form approved by the City Clerk.    
2. There shall be no charge for said permit.    
3. A copy of the applicant’s non-profit federal EIN number shall be submitted with  
the application.  
  
(C) Illumination:  Temporary signs shall not be illuminated.    
  
(D) Height:  All signs above three (3) feet in height from ground level must meet the setback  
requirements within this code pertaining clear view of intersecting streets and ways,  
section 10-5-8 of this code.    
  
(E) Right Of Way Areas:  Temporary signs are not allowed in any right of way area and are  
subject to removal and disposal by city staff.  
  
(F) Banner signs shall comply with the following provisions in addition to all other provisions  
for temporary signs:  
  
1. Banner signs must be maintained in a neat, clean, repaired condition.  
  
2. Banner signs that are tattered, torn or in disrepair or allowed to blow freely shall  
not be allowed under any circumstances and shall be removed immediately.  
  
(H) Temporary Sign Placement:    
  
1. Temporary signs shall be placed on the property of the business which is being  
advertised. No temporary sign as defined in this section shall be permitted to be  
placed off premise.   
  
2. Temporary signs shall not be placed at locations which impede the vision or  
travel of vehicular traffic or pedestrian traffic (See section 10-5-8 of the City  
Code).  
  
3. Any temporary sign placed illegally may be removed by city staff without  
notification.  
  
(I) Removal of Temporary/Portable Signs:  At the time of removal of any temporary or  
portable sign all devices and equipment used to fasten or position the sign in place shall  
be removed.  This shall include but not be limited to posts and holders located above  
  
grade. 
  
10-34-14 
:          POLITICAL SIGNS:  Political signs shall comply with the following regulations  
as well as any State of Idaho code on election signs:    
  
  
(A) Election signs are not permitted within a public right of way.   
EXCEPTIONS:    
1. Areas within residential zones where placement is in the area  
between the curb or swale area and a detached sidewalk with  
  
permission of homeowner and sign is no taller than 3 feet.  
(B) All signs must comply with section 10-5-8 clear view of intersection streets and  
  
  
section 10-7-10 fencesof the City Code.   
  
  
Page 6 of 9 REVISED 6-27-13  

  Loading....
  
(C) Election signs shall be posted no more than sixty (60) days prior to an election  
and removed within (10) days following Election Day.   
  
(D) Prior to placement of any political signage on any private property, permission  
from the private property owner shall be obtained.  
  
(E) Unlighted temporary signs promoting any candidate for public office or measure  
on the ballot are permitted in any zone.    
  
(F) In areas that have no curb, sidewalk or designated swale area, election signs  
  
shall be set back a minimum of fifteen (15) feet from the edge of road asphalt.  
  
10-34-15 
:          GARAGE / YARD SALE SIGNS:  Garage/yard sale signs shall not be posted  
   
earlier than noonthe day before the sale and must be taken down by noonthe day after.  
  
(A) Signs shall not be posted in the public right of ways or on utility poles, street sign  
poles, traffic control poles or on any other object located within the right of way.  
  
(B) Garage/Yard Sale signs may be placed on private property but must have  
consent from property owner and shall be removed no later than one (1) day  
after the sale ends.  
  
(C) Signs must have address and date of sale affixed to it.  
  
(D) The maximum size of the sign is 18” X 24” and the top of the sign must be no  
more than three (3.0) feet above ground level.  
  
10-34-16 
:          REAL ESTATE SIGNS:  Requirements for real estate signage apply to all  
zones within the city.  
  
(A) Real estate signs advertise property and/or buildings on property that are        for  
sale, lease, rent or trade.  
  
(B) Real estate signs are exempt from the permit requirement.  
  
(C) Except as may be permitted by this section, real estate signs must be located on  
the lot or building that is for sale, lease or rent and must be placed completely on  
or within the property being advertised.  
  
(D) A real estate sign advertising an open house or home show may be placed  
within the requirements of this chapter for a maximum of three (3) days.  
  
(E) Real estate signs may remain on the property until a final transaction for the  
ownership or lease agreement has been completed, at which time all real estate  
signage must be removed.    
  
(F) One real estate sign is allowed per street frontage.  
  
(G) Except as permitted by this section, real estate signs are prohibited from being  
placed:  
  
1. On any site or property other than what is being sold, leased, rented        
or traded.  
  
2. In any right of way or right of way area.  
  
Page 7 of 9 REVISED 6-27-13  

  Loading....
  
  
EXCEPTIONS:    
a. Areas within residential zones where placement is within  
the area between the curb or swale area and a detached  
sidewalk with permission of homeowner and sign is no  
  
taller than 3 .0 feet.  
b. Real estate signs advertising for an open house within a  
residential zone shall be allowed for a maximum of three  
days.  Placement shall be allowed only at the entrance of  
the subdivision that the house is located in.  Sign shall be  
a minimum of fifteen (15.0) feet from edge of asphalt.  No  
  
sign shall be taller than three (3.0) feet.   
  
3. On any other objectlocated in the right of way area.  
  
4. On utility poles and street or traffic poles.  
  
(H) A developed or developing subdivision is permitted one (1) real estate sign per  
street frontage in the street landscape buffer area/common lot to advertise the  
subdivision or development as a whole.  The sign size shall not exceed a total of  
forty (40) square feet.  
  
10-34-17:   
ADVERTISING SIGNS IN RESIDENTIAL ZONES: Signs advertising an allowed  
and licensed home occupation within a residential zone and on the property of the allowed  
home occupation shall not exceed the size allowed in the Home Occupation Licensing Chapter  
of the City Code 4-13-9-(E).      
  
10-34-18:   
DEVELOPMENT IDENTIFICATION SIGNS:  A residential development  
shall be allowed entrance signs showing the name of the development within private property.   
Signs must be placed within a lot dedicated for the sign or within a sign easement.  All  
permanent signs shall comply with the requirements of this chapter and shall be required to  
obtain a permit and comply with all requirements of the adopted building codes.  
  
10-34-19: 
 COMMERCIAL DEVELOPMENT SIGNS:  All development of commercial  
property within the City shall provide for at least one sign along the adjacent arterial roadway(s)  
that lists the names and/or logos of the businesses located within the development.    
  
No commercial/professional business located within the interior of a development shall be  
allowed to place a sign off the immediate site that the business is located other than the sign(s)  
listing the businesses within the development.  Developments, buildings and businesses that  
are located and have legal ownership of the property directly adjacent to the required  
landscaping strips along the frontage of an arterial shall be allowed to place a sign in the  
  
landscape strip providing all setbacks and requirements of this chapter have been met. 
  
No commercial development/lot with less than one hundred fifty (150) feet of frontage on an  
adjacent roadway shall be permitted to install more than one sign on or adjacent to the frontage  
of the roadway.    
  
All required signs used for identification of businesses within a development where title is not  
held by the development within an association, shall be required to be placed in a permanent  
sign easement on the property.  
  
10-34-20:    
ELECTRONIC MESSAGE SIGNS: 

  
A. Each message on the sign must be displayed for a minimum of four (4) seconds.  
  
B. Each message transition must be accomplished within 0.5 seconds.  
  
C. Each electronic message center shall be equipped with a photocell dimmer to  
automatically dim with changes in ambient light. When requesting a permit for an  
electronic message center, the applicant shall submit documentation certifying  
the sign is equipped with a photocell dimmer and the dimmer shall be used at all  
times the sign is in operation.  
  
10-34-21: 
 VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES:  Any violation of the provisions of this chapter  
shall be deemed an infraction and shall be subject to penalties prescribed for such violations  
under section 1-4-2 of this code.  Each day such violation continues, shall be a separate  
violation, which shall be deemed as a separate infraction and a citation may be issued  
therefore. Violations shall be assessed on a per violation per day basis.  
    
  
CHAPTER 35  
MULTI-USE ZONE  
  
  
10-35-1: 
 GENERAL OBJECTIVES AND CHARACTERISTICS:  The purpose of the  
Multi-Use zone is to provide for a variety and mixture of uses, such as professional offices,  
small scale retail, restaurants, recreational, personal services including public facilities, and  
residential both single family and multi-family. Large scale commercial development may be  
allowed pursuant to the master plan allowances and in most cases should be allowed only along  
arterial roadways or on major collector streets.  This zone is intended to ensure compatibility of  
new development with existing and future development. It is also intended to ensure  
development of properties into a plan with coordinated and harmonious development.  The zone  
is intended to integrate both existing and new land uses within close proximity to one another,  
providing for the daily shopping needs and often the recreational needs of the residents.   
Connection within the development to the different uses should be of prime consideration as  
well as connections to pedestrian friendly sidewalks and/or trails from outside of the  
development.  The general area of service for easy travel and access would generally be within  
a one to two (1-2) mile traveling distance from any residential property.  
  
10-35-2:only the uses designated as  
 ALLOWED USES:  Pursuant to 10-35-6  
permitted uses or those shown as permitted with master plan approval on the zoning use  
table located in 10-5-26 shall be allowed within the Multi-Use zone. 
  Those uses shown as  
allowed by master plan approval are not an assumed right within the Multi-Use zone and shall  
be considered on a case by case basis and allowed in the sole discretion of the City Council  
with a recommendation by the Planning & Zoning Commission.  For information on master plan  
approval see 10-35-6.  
  
10-35-3: 
 RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY REQUIREMENTS: All properties used for  
residential purposes within the zone shall require platting for each residential structure or  
grouping of residential structures within the zone.  Setbacks for all residential structures shall be  
applied based on the size of the lot and the related residential zone within the City Code that  
would allow the same size parcel and type of structure.  For those residential structures that are  
platted and developed in a group setting where the property and/or structure may not be fronting  
on a public street, the setback from the side of the building containing the main doorway shall  
be a minimum of twenty (20) feet from any adjacent property line and/or required setback of any  
adjacent building (A minimum of forty (40) feet between facing residential structures shall be  
required).  When the main entrance of one building faces the side of another building the  
minimum distance shall be determined by using the required setback for the front of one  
building and the required side yard requirement of the second building(s).  The resulting open  
space shall be landscaped as greenspace, necessary sidewalks/trails shall be allowed within  
the greenspace area.   
  
10-35-4: 
 SHARED COMPONENT PROPERTY REQUIREMENTS: All development  
activities within the zone are permitted only on platted lots.   All adjoining lots used for  
commercial and/or residential purposes that have shared access to a public street, and any  
single lot containing more than one commercial entity and/or residence must comply as follows:  
  
(A) All structures and grounds must   
  
1. Be under a single ownership or   
Page 1 of 5           MULTI-USE ZONE  ADOPTED 12-15-16  

  Loading....
  
2. Meet the requirements of a condominium property pursuant to Title 55,  
Chapter 15, Idaho State Code, or   
  
3. Have an agreement which shall be recorded at the time of plat recording for  
maintenance and maintenance costs which specifies the responsible  
party/parties for any and all costs not associated to a specific building lot or  
unit in the development     
  
(B) All properties sharing parking with adjacent commercial and/or residential  
development shall provide a recorded cross access agreement for all parking  
facilities within the shared parking area.  Said agreement shall be recorded with  
the final plat or if recorded prior to the final plat a copy shall be submitted with the  
final plat request for recording.  
  
(C) Landscaping and sprinkler systems shall be incorporated within individual  
properties or shall comply with the ownership requirements as described within  
this section or by any other ordinance within the City. All required landscaping  
within an area designated for commercial and/or shared residential development  
on an approved master plan shall be cohesive in nature and shall be uniform  
throughout the areas within the master plan.  All landscaping requirements shall  
comply with all policies and codes as adopted by the City of Ammon  
  
(D) Remodeled and converted structures and properties shall comply with all  
requirements of this section.  
  
10-35-5: 
 DEVELOPMENT OR ANNEXATION AGREEMENT REQUIRED:   
  
(A) Multi-Use zoning that is approved based on a request for re-zone shall be subject to any  
existing  development agreement and any additional requirements that may be included  
as a condition for approval of the rezone.  
  
(B) Multi-Use zoning which is incorporated as part of an initial annexation and zoning shall  
be subject to both an annexation agreement and future development agreements as  
property is platted.  
  
10-35-6: 
 MASTER PLANS: A master plan incorporating the entirety of a property in a  
Multi-Use zone, shall be submitted to the Planning and Zoning Commission for recommendation  
and action of approval or denial by the City Council.    
  
All master plans shall require a public hearing prior to approval.  The master plan may be  
submitted for approval as part of a public hearing for an annexation with the multi-use zone  
requested as the designated zone, or for a re-zone request hearing.  As part of a master plan  
approval, those uses listed as allowed by master plan approval shall be included as part of the  
master plan request documentation.  The public hearing requirement for any master plan  
approval shall meet the requirements of Idaho Code 67-6509 and any additional requirements  
for hearings adopted by the City of Ammon.  An application for a master plan shall be submitted  
on a form approved by the City of Ammon and shall include all documentation required on the  
application form prior to assignment of a hearing date.  Master plans are not required to show  
the exact locations of commercial and residential areas, rather it will be required to provide  
general locations of these areas within the master plan.  It is the intent of the City to allow  
Page 2 of 5           MULTI-USE ZONE  ADOPTED 12-15-16  

  Loading....
flexibility for placement and boundaries between other uses within the property designated as  
multi-use.    
  
Amendments to a master plan shall be approved through the same requirements as an original  
approval for said master plan.  Any approval of an amended master plan may be subject to the  
revision of the special conditions within an existing annexation/development agreement.  
  
10-35-7: 
 QUALIFICATIONS RELATED TO USE OF THIS ZONE:  The following shall be  
guidelines for the approval of a property to be zoned multi-use:  
  
(A) Prior to platting of property in a multi-use zone, a master plan approval showing the  
general areas of the different types of uses within the zone shall be received by the  
Planning and Zoning Commission with final approval of the City Council.  
  
(B) If it is determined that the development will service an existing area or development  
adjacent to the zone and meet the intent of the multi-use zone designation, use of  
the multi-use zone may be allowed to be entirely one type of use designation  
(commercial or residential).  Access to adjacent zoning uses and development shall  
be a consideration in granting this type of multi-use zoning request.   
  
10-35-8:  
USE OF PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT OVERLAY (PUD): In some cases  
the developer within the Multi-Use zone may wish to apply a PUD Overlay to a Multi-Use zone.   
In those cases the developer shall be required to follow and adhere to all requirements of the  
PUD Overlay approval process as outlined within the City Code.    
  
10-35-9:  
LIGHTING:  Exterior lighting within the mixed use zone shall be required to meet  
the following standards:       
  
(A) Light overlap or trespass onto adjacent properties shall be taken into consideration  
as part of the review of all master plans.  While lighting is not required to be provided  
on a master plan both the Planning and Zoning Commission and City staff may  
provide input in areas where such light overlap or trespass may be a concern.    
Lighting types to be considered include, but are not limited to, street lighting, parking  
lot lighting, building exterior lighting, landscape lighting, plaza, walkway and trail  
lighting.    
  
(B) Any lights used to illuminate a site shall be arranged to reflect light away from the  
adjoining property.  
  
(C) Lighting design shall promote dark sky principles which seek to minimize light  
pollution and degradation of the nighttime skies by incorporating lighting practices  
that minimize the amount and area of illumination. Such practices include:  
1. Providing lighting fixtures with lamp wattages designed for the minimum level  
required by the use.  
2. Providing energy efficient light sources.  
3. Minimizing light trespass and glare by aiming fixtures downward and shining  
light only where it is needed and providing appropriate shielding as  
necessary to ensure that little or no unwanted light falls directly onto  
adjacent property.  
4. Minimizing the duration of illumination of certain light sources by having  
lights out as long as practical.  Owners and tenants will be encouraged to  
limit the times of lighting within a development whenever practical.  
Page 3 of 5           MULTI-USE ZONE  ADOPTED 12-15-16  

  Loading....
5.  Special attention shall be given by the developer regarding mixed use  
buildings that may provide both commercial and residential uses within the  
same building.  At site plan review time, City Staff may make  
recommendations to the developer regarding possible lighting conflicts  
accommodations when lighting may conflict between uses.  
  
(D) The developer shall install streetlights at locations required by the City Engineer and  
shall meet any standards or policies adopted by the City for street lighting.  All street  
lighting shall continue to follow the requirements set forth in this ordinance regarding  
light overlap or trespass.  
  
(E) All street and public open space lighting required as part of a mixed use  
development shall be included into a lighting district prior to the final approval of any  
roadways or acceptance of any park/streets within the development.  Said lighting  
district shall assess the cost of maintenance and power to all properties within the  
development on an equal per lot basis, unless at the time of formation of a lighting  
district the Board of Directors of the lighting district agrees and orders an  
assessment considered to be more equitable to the property owners within said  
district.  
  
10-35-10:  
SIGNAGE:  Signage that is within a mixed use development should be a major  
consideration of the Commission and the developer at the time of a master plan application.   
The following items shall be considered for any signage other than the required streets and  
traffic control signage which shall be as required by the City Engineer.  
  
(A) Poles signs above twenty (20) feet in height from grade level shall be reviewed for  
placement and encouraged to be within the development on the exterior boundaries  
of the mixed use development or as approved on the master plan along arterial  
roadways.  
  
(B) Poles signs within the interior of a mixed use development are discouraged and the  
developer encouraged to plan for a standardized interior signage requirement.  
  
(C) Consideration on interior signage should be given where commercial and residential  
buildings are adjacent to or part of the same building.  
  
(D) All signage is encouraged to be energy efficient.  
  
(E) All signage lighting should be designed to keep lighting overlap into adjacent  
properties at a minimum, especially residential use properties.  
  
(F) All signage requested on buildings within the multi-use zone where both a  
commercial and residential use is contained shall follow the dark sky principals and  
should be designed to alleviate up lighting and lighting into residential portions of the  
building. The developer shall be required to provide a lighting analysis showing the  
dark sky principals have been followed in the design of any on-building signs used  
for commercial business location or for building identification signage.    
  
10-35-11: 
 SPECIAL PROVISIONS:  
  
Page 4 of 5           MULTI-USE ZONE  ADOPTED 12-15-16  

  Loading....
(A) No dust, odor, smoke, vibration or intermittent light, glare, or noise shall be emitted  
which is discernible beyond the premises, except for normal residential activities and  
movement of automobile traffic.  
  
(B) Landscaping shall be as set forth in section 10-5-24.  
  
(C) All merchandise, equipment, and other materials, except vehicles in running order and  
seasonal merchandise such as nursery stock, fruits and vegetables within a  
commercial area, within a commercial/residential area or any multi-use residential  
area with more than four (4) attached living units, shall be stored within a fenced site  
which shall be a sight obscuring enclosure constructed of block fencing or similar as  
  
approved by the City Engineer.    
  
(D) All commercial sanitation dumpsters shall be required to be stored within a fenced site  
which shall be a sight obscuring enclosure constructed of block fencing or similar as  
  
approved by the City Engineer.    
  
(E) Off street parking shall be provided, as required in this ordinance, and shall be hard  
surfaced.  
  
  
  
  
Page 5 of 5           MULTI-USE ZONE  ADOPTED 12-15-16  

  
CHAPTER 36  
  
LIGHT COMMERCIAL/PROFESSIONAL BUSINESS ZONE   
LC/PB  
  
SECTION:  
  
10-36-1: General Objectives and Characteristics of Zone  
10-36-2: Allowed Uses  
10-36-3: Area Requirements  
10-36-4: Width Requirements  
10-36-5: Location of Buildings  
10-36-6: Height Requirements  
10-36-7: Size of Buildings  
10-36-8:        Buffering  
10-36-9: Supplementary Regulations  
10-3610: Special Provisions  
  
  
   
10-36-1: GENERAL OBJECTIVES AND CHARACTERISTICS OF ZONE: The objective in  
establishing a LC/PB, Light Commercial and Professional Business Zone is to provide for  
professional offices and small light commercial business adjacent to or near residential zones.   
Usually this zone would be in areas along arterial roadways that may be surrounded by or very  
near single family residential zones. This zone is characterized by uses that generate relatively  
moderate traffic volume and a wide variety of building types.  The nature of this zone would  
normally lend itself to parcels of property in size of one (1) to five (5) acres although this could  
vary by location of property and adjacent residentially zoned properties.  
  
In order to accomplish the objectives and purposes of this ordinance and to promote the  
characteristics of this zone, the following regulations shall apply in the LC/PB Light  
Commercial/Professional Business Zone.  
  
10-36-2: ALLOWED USES:  The uses allowed (or permitted by conditional use) within this  
zone shall be those listed in the table of allowed uses in 10-5-26 of the Ammon City Code.  O nly  
uses designated as allowed or permitted, or reviewed by the Planning Commission and  
determined by the City Council to be similar to designated allowed or permitted uses  
shall be allowed or permitted within the LC/PB zone.    
  
The following restrictions apply to uses within this zone:  
  
(A) Subject to item (C) of this section, no use designated as allowed or permitted within this  
zone shall exceed 5000 square feet per unit.  A unit consists of all rooms within a building  
that can be accessed from one or more of the other rooms within the unit without having  
to pass through a door to the exterior and without having to pass through a door to a  
  
Page 1 of 3           ADOPTED 5-4-2017  

  Loading....
  
common hallway such as found in a mall. Each unit within the building shall be required  
to meet individual business license requirements and shall include separate utility  
services.  
  
(B) Buildings with multiple units and adjacent buildings separated by zero lot lines are allowed  
subject to item (A) of this section.    
  
(C) Professional Business within this zone shall be allowed to exceed 5000 square feet when  
not within any structure containing any other allowed use.  
  
(D) No restaurant with a drive through window shall be allowed.  
  
10-36-3:  AREA REQUIREMENTS: There shall be no minimum or maximum lot size  
requirements for any individual lot within the LC/PB Zone, except as required for setbacks,  
required buffers, and off-street parking spaces.  
  
10-36-4:  WIDTH REQUIREMENTS: There shall be no maximum or minimum frontage width  
requirements for any individual lot in the LC/PB Zone.  
  
10-36-5:  LOCATION OF BUILDING AND STRUCTURES:  
   
(A) Setback.  All buildings shall be set back a minimum distance of thirty (30) feet from  
the property line adjacent to any public street, except as herein provided and  
required under the provisions of this ordinance.  
  
(B) Side Yards.  There shall be no side yard requirement, except for those required by  
setback from public streets or for required buffering.  
  
(C) Rear Yard.  There shall be a minimum twenty-five (25) feet for all buildings from  
the rear property line from any structure within this zone where it abuts a residential  
zone.  This rear yard may include the required buffering as part of the calculated  
setback.  On property where the rear property line abuts only another commercially  
zoned property, no rear yard shall be required.  
  
10-36-6: HEIGHT REQUIREMENTS: Maximum building height is subject to the Fire  
ection.    
  
10-36-7: SIZE OF BUILDINGS: There shall be no requirements as to the size of buildings.  
  
10-36-8: BUFFERING:  Any property adjacent to any single family residential zone shall  
meet the following buffering requirements:  
  
(A) A minimum six (6) foot high site obscuring fence built of vinyl, wood, block, pressed  
concrete or similar fencing material (approved by the City Engineer) shall be  
installed at the boundary line of property located within this zone.    
  
(B) A minimum ten (10) foot wide landscape strip shall be installed in conjunction with  
the buffering fence in item (A) of this section.  Trees shall be included in all  
  
Page 2 of 3           ADOPTED 5-4-2017  

  Loading....
  
landscaping required in this section.  Landscape watering shall be provided into all  
buffering areas required by this section.  
  
(C) Requirements of this section shall be installed along the entire boundary(s)  
bordering any single family residential zone prior to or in conjunction with the first  
building permit issued within a plat or approved site plan in this zone.  No final  
certificate of occupancy or business license shall be issued until all requirements  
of this section have been met.    
  
10-36-9: SUPPLEMENTARY REGULATIONS: Title 10, Chapter 5, Supplementary  
Regulations, shall apply to the LC/PB Zone.  
  
10-36-10:         SPECIAL PROVISIONS:  
  
(A) All commercial sanitation dumpsters shall be required to be stored within a fenced  
site which shall be a sight obscuring enclosure constructed of block fencing or  
similar as approved by the City Engineer.     
  
(B) No outside storage of merchandise other than that merchandise which may be  
displayed daily and moved into the building at closing shall be allowed.  
  
(C) No dust, odor, smoke, vibration or intermittent light, glare, or noise shall be emitted  
which is discernible beyond the premises, except for normal residential activities  
and movement of automobile traffic.  
  
(D) In most cases, access to developments within this zone will be limited to the  
adjacent collector or local street with no direct access to an arterial street being  
allowed.  
  
(E) The location of any access into a development required from a local or collector  
street shall be located outside of any required buffer and at the furthest point from  
the arterial roadway as feasible as determined and approved by the City Engineer.  
  
(F) Revolving, animated or roof signs shall be prohibited within this zone.  No pole  
sign shall be allowed except along the frontage of an arterial roadway and shall be  
no closer to an intersecting local or residential collector street than the required  
thirty (30) foot building setback from the local or residential collector.    
  
(G) In addition to any other landscape areas required by this City Code, there shall be  
a thirty (30) foot landscaped area along the frontage of any local or residential  
collector street for the entirety of the development.  EXCEPTION:  Any required  
access from a local or residential collector street shall be allowed to cross  
landscape areas.  
  
(H) No more than eighty percent (80%) of a lot may be covered by buildings, parking  
spaces and drive aisles.  The balance of the property must be landscaped per the  
requirements of §10-5-24.  
  
  
Page 3 of 3           ADOPTED 5-4-2017  





