6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 1/503
ORDINANCES PENDING CODIFICATION
Ordinances listed under this folder in the table of contents to the left, have been passed, but
have not been incorporated in the actual code. Please contact the office of the clerk if there are
any questions concerning the ordinances listed.
Disclaimer:
This is provided for informational purposes only. The formatting of this ordinance may vary from the official hard copy. In the case of any
discrepancy between this ordinance and the official hard copy, the official hard copy will prevail.
Ordinance NO. ORD-11-19
BY THE COUNCIL CLEGG, LUDWIG, MCLEAN, SANCHEZ, THOMSON AND WOODINGS
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING TITLE 6, CHAPTER 10A, SECTION 24, BOISE CITY CODE TO UPDATE THE PARKBOI E-PERMIT APPLICATION AND
REQUIREMENTS, TO ADD A SYSTEM BY WHICH THE CITY MAY SET AND ADJUST THE BOUNDARIES OF THE PARKBOI E-PERMIT
BOUNDARIES, TO UPDATE THE AREA OF SHUTTLE SERVICE, TO PROVIDE A BASIS FOR THE SETTING OF PARKBOI E-PERMIT FEES, AND TO
REPEAL THE SUNSET DATE; AND PROVIDING AN EFFECTIVE DATE.
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE MAYOR AND COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF BOISE CITY, IDAHO:
Section 1. That existing Boise City Code Title 6, Chapter 10A, Section 24, shall be, and hereby is, amended to read as follows:
6-10A-24 PARKBOI E-PERMIT APPLICATION, AND REQUIREMENTS AND SUNSET DATE
A. A ParkBOI E-Permit is an on-street parking program that converts designated one (1) hour, time-limited parking areas to all day parking in the
downtown corridor,. Tthe geographical boundaries of which this parking program are kept on file in the City Clerk’s Office and available during
business hours for viewing by the public. All ParkBOI E-Permits shall be issued, maintained, and renewed by the City Clerk’s Office. The City
Council authorizes the Director to set and adjust the boundaries for the ParkBOI E-Permit program in the City by resolution, approved by City
Council.
B. Parking spaces available under the ParkBOI E-Permit program are limited and not guaranteed. The ParkBOI E-Permit additionally entitles
permittees to use the Elder Street lot and shuttle to the City’s downtown area City Center Plaza, located at 777 W. Main Street, Boise, for no
additional cost.
C. ParkBOI E-Permit’s program shall be awarded through a periodic application lottery system, administered by the City Clerk’s Office. In addition to
the parking permit application information set forth in Boise City Code 6-10B-07B of this chapter, every application for a ParkBOI E-Permit shall
contain proof that the applicant works within the boundaries of the downtown corridor.
D. A nonrefundable application fee shall accompany every application for a ParkBOI E-Permit. Permittees are thereafter charged a monthly fee. EPermit
fees shall be set in an amount to maximize target utilization based on location, capacity, and demand. The application and monthly fees are
in an amount established by the Boise City Council and listed on the most current City Clerk Fee Schedule.
E. The ParkBOI E-Permit number shall be the vehicle license plate number provided in the permit application and shall be non-transferable to any
other vehicle. Only motor vehicles with ParkBOI E-Permits may park in a designated one (1) hour, time limited parking area for a longer period
under this program.
F. The ParkBOI E-Permit program and all parking permits issued thereunder shall expire on February 1, 2019. All ParkBOI E-Permits shall be issued,
maintained, and renewed by the City Clerk’s Office.
Section 2. That this Ordinance shall be in effect immediately upon its passage, approval, and publication.
ADOPTED by the Council of Boise City, Idaho, on April 9, 2019.
APPROVED by the Mayor of the Boise City, Idaho, on April 9, 2019.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 2/503
APPROVED:
David H. Bieter, Mayor
ATTEST:
Lynda Lowry, Ex-Officio City Clerk
Disclaimer:
This is provided for informational purposes only. The formatting of this ordinance may vary from the official hard copy. In the case of any
discrepancy between this ordinance and the official hard copy, the official hard copy will prevail.
Ordinance NO. ORD-13-19
BY THE COUNCIL CLEGG, LUDWIG, MCLEAN, SANCHEZ, THOMSON AND WOODINGS
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING TITLE 1, CHAPTER 10, ARTICLE J, DEPARTMENT OF HUMAN RESOURCES, TO ADD SECTION 6, COMPREHENSIVE
LIABILITY PLAN, AND REMOVE TITLE 1, CHAPTER 13, COMPREHENSIVE LIABILITY PLAN, IN ITS ENTIRETY; AND PROVIDING AN EFFECTIVE
DATE.
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE MAYOR AND COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF BOISE CITY, IDAHO:
Section 1. That a new Boise City Code Title 1, Chapter 10, Article J, Section 6, shall be, and hereby is adopted and enacted to read as follows:
1-10J-6: COMPREHENSIVE LIABILITY PLAN
The Director of Human Resources or their designee shall oversee a comprehensive liability plan in compliance with Idaho Code. Additionally, with the
concurrence of the City Attorney, the Director shall settle claims and lawsuits including, but not limited to: tort claims, sewer no-fault claims, workers’
compensation, subrogation, excess insurance reimbursements, third party liens, or contribution or indemnity claims.
Section 2. That existing Boise City Code Title 1, Chapter 13, shall be, and hereby is repealed in its entirety.
Chapter 13
COMPREHENSIVE LIABILITY PLAN
1-13-1: PURPOSE OF CHAPTER:
The purpose of this chapter is to establish policies with respect to a comprehensive liability plan and to give specific and general authority to a Risk
Manager and a Safety Coordinator to act as authorized in all matters relating to risk management and safety. (1952 Code § 1-16-01)
1-13-2: RISK MANAGEMENT POLICY:
The City policy with respect to the management of all risks of accidental loss shall have as its objectives:
A. General:
1. The protection of the City against the financial consequences of accidental losses which are catastrophic in nature.
2. The minimization of the total long term cost to the City of all activities related to the identification, prevention and control of accidental losses and
their consequences.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 3/503
3. The preservation of City assets and public service capabilities from loss, destruction or depletion.
4. Creation of a system of internal procedures providing a constant reassessment of fluctuating exposure to loss, loss bearing capacity and
available financial resources, including insurance.
5. The establishment, to the extent possible, of an exposure free work and service environment in which City personnel, as well as members of the
public, can enjoy safety and security in the course of their daily pursuits.
6. Providing for periodic reevaluation of the City Risk Management Program.
7. Compliance with any Federal, State or local laws, rules and regulations affecting the City handling of risk.
B. Risk Retention:
1. With regard to risks of accidental loss, it shall be the City policy to self-insure all losses which occur with predictable frequency, and which will
not have a significant impact on the City fiscal position.
2. As a general guideline, the City will self-insure progressively upward to the extent that self-insurance is cost effective, does not endanger the
City fiscal stability, and the City risk management capabilities are more fully developed and demonstrated. Council approval will be obtained for
any increases in level of self-insurance. Exceptions to this guideline will be allowed:
a. Whenever certain necessary services can be obtained only by purchase of insurance.
b. When the City is obligated by contract or law to purchase insurance and no alternate method is acceptable.
c. When a higher level of risk retention proves both prudent and fiscally sound.
d. When deductibles or noninsurance do not result in long term economics. (1952 Code § 1-16-02)
1-13-3: RISK MANAGER AUTHORITY AND RESPONSIBILITY:
The Risk Manager shall be appointed by the Mayor. The Risk Manager shall have authority and responsibility for:
A. Information: Compilation of information leading to the identification and measurement of all risks of accidental loss.
B. Techniques: Selection of appropriate risk management techniques for resolving exposure problems, i.e.: 1) risk assumption; 2) risk reduction; 3) risk
retention; 4) risk transfer; or 5) other systems, as appropriate, including the purchase of insurance.
C. Information System: Developing and maintaining an information system in coordination with existing systems for timely and accurate recording and
reporting of losses, claims, insurance premiums and other risk related costs and information.
D. Allocations: Allocation of insurance premiums, uninsured losses and other risk costs to the budgetary units when necessary and appropriate.
E. Coordination: Coordination between the City and its insurance agents, brokers, underwriters and adjusters.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 4/503
F. Risk Aspects: Coordinating information and acting in an advisory capacity with regard to risk aspects of security, contracts and other legal documents
and legislation.
G. Training: Conduct training in risk management for appropriate City employees and fund training and travel costs for attending risk management, loss
control or other municipal insurance programs.
H. Supervise Costs: Supervise all costs in defending claims against the City. Should legal counsel outside the City Attorney's Office be retained by the
City, the City Attorney shall supervise all such outside counsel. (1952 Code § 1-16-03)
1-13-4: PURCHASE OF INSURANCE:
A. Procurement: The procurement of all insurance for the City will be coordinated by the Risk Manager through the Division of Purchasing.
B. When To Purchase: Insurance with limits equal to the maximum foreseeable loss shall be purchased when the potential loss exposure exceeds the
retention levels established by the Council, and when such insurance is available on a fiscally sound basis.
C. Source: Insurance shall be purchased from any source determined to be in the best interests of the City.
D. Qualifications: Insurance shall only be purchased from those insurers licensed by the State and, where practical, rated Best's A+11 or higher. (1952
Code § 1-16-04)
1-13-5: REEVALUATION OF RISK MANAGEMENT PROGRAM:
Periodically, with the approval of the Council, the Risk Manager shall contract with a risk management consulting firm who shall review and evaluate the
City Risk Management Program and make suggestions for improvement. (1952 Code § 1-16-05)
1-13-6: DIVISION OF SAFETY AND SAFETY COORDINATOR:
A. Created: There is hereby created a Division of Safety of the City. The Division of Safety shall be supervised and administered by the Safety
Coordinator. The Division of Safety shall be attached to the Finance Department, Risk Management Division. (1952 Code § 1-16-06)
B. Duties:
1. The Safety Coordinator shall develop and administer an Occupational Safety and Health Program for the City. The Safety Coordinator shall
promote and coordinate the safe use of property and equipment, as well as perform such other related duties as might be assigned by the
Mayor, Council or the Risk Manager.
2. In addition to the duties enumerated above, the Safety Coordinator shall:
a. Develop Citywide programs to promote safety awareness and training of employee and supervisors in safe work habits.
b. Administer the City Workers' Compensation Program.
c. Maintain comprehensive records of accident/injury and equipment damage.
d. Perform statistical analysis to determine trends, problem areas and overall safety performance.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 5/503
e. When necessary, conduct investigations of accident/injury to determine causes and enhance the establishment of preventive measures.
f. Develop Citywide policies and procedures relative to safety and loss prevention, as well as assist departments in developing policies and
procedures specific to their needs.
g. Conduct periodic inspections of City facilities and note corrective measures required to eliminate physical hazards. Also conduct follow up
to assure hazards have been eliminated.
h. Make periodic reports to the Mayor, Council and department heads.
i. Advise all officials, department heads, superintendents, supervisors and foremen on matters of safety pertaining to their supervision.
j. Use all means available to stimulate and to maintain the interest of the employees in the Safety Program.
k. Recommend the type of personal protective equipment purchased by the departments.
l. Coordinate with, and assist, the City Risk Manager, by any means available, to reduce or control losses from claims against the City. (1952 Code
§ 1-16-07)
1-13-7: DEPARTMENTAL SAFETY COMMITTEE:
Department heads shall have the prime responsibility for assuring a safe work environment and development of departmental safety program. Each
department head shall create departmental safety committees as appropriate. The Safety Coordinator shall be an ex officio member of all departmental
safety committees. Each departmental representative shall be of supervisor status and shall be appointed by the department head of the affected
department. The departmental safety committees shall:
A. Liaison: Maintain liaison with the Safety Coordinator as required to be fully informed of a Citywide safety issue.
B. Assistance: Assist the department heads in sponsoring meetings, initiating programs, planning activities, and using any other means to develop and
maintain employee awareness in safety.
C. Training: Promote, coordinate and may conduct safety training courses for employees.
D. Manual: Recommend and assist the department head in developing a departmental safety rules manual covering specific work procedures for that
department/division not covered in the general safety manual.
E. Monitor: Monitor proper application and enforcement of all Citywide and departmental safety policies.
F. Review Accidents: Review accidents within their department and make recommendations to the department head on work procedures, safety
equipment or training needs to correct safety hazards. (1952 Code § 1-16-08)
Section 3. That this Ordinance shall be in effect immediately upon its passage, approval, and publication.
ADOPTED by the Council of Boise City, Idaho, on May 7, 2019.
APPROVED by the Mayor of the Boise City, Idaho, on May 7, 2019.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 6/503
APPROVED:
David H. Bieter, Mayor
ATTEST:
Lynda Lowry, Ex-Officio City Clerk
Disclaimer:
This is provided for informational purposes only. The formatting of this ordinance may vary from the official hard copy. In the case of any
discrepancy between this ordinance and the official hard copy, the official hard copy will prevail.
Ordinance NO. ORD-14-19
BY THE COUNCIL CLEGG, LUDWIG, MCLEAN, SANCHEZ, THOMSON AND WOODINGS
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING TITLE 7, CHAPTER 7A, SECTION 6, (ALCOHOL; PUBLIC PARKS) BOISE CITY CODE TO CREATE AN EXCEPTION
ALLOWING ALCOHOL SALES, POSSESSION, AND CONSUMPTION WIITHIN THE EIGHTH STREET CORRIDOR WHEN AUTHORIZED BY A VALID
SPECIAL EVENTS PERMIT; AND PROVIDING AN EFFECTIVE DATE.
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE MAYOR AND COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF BOISE CITY, IDAHO:
Section 1. That Title 7, Chapter 7A, Section 6, Boise City Code (“Alcohol; Public Parks”), be, and the same are amended as follows.
A. Alcohol Generally: Alcoholic beverages other than beer and wine are prohibited in all Boise City parks and facilities unless the location is a licensed
premises or alcoholic beverages other than beer or wine are specifically allowed by this Code. The possession of more than seven and one-half (7.5)
gallons of beer and/or wine per person, group, or event shall require a permit from the department.
1. Exception: Alcoholic beverages are not prohibited within the Eighth Street corridor when the possession, sale, or consumption of alcoholic
beverages occurs in conjunction with a validly licensed special event.
Section 2. That this Ordinance shall be in effect immediately upon its passage, approval, and publication.
ADOPTED by the Council of Boise City, Idaho, on May 14, 2019.
APPROVED by the Mayor of the Boise City, Idaho, on May 14, 2019.
APPROVED:
David H. Bieter, Mayor
ATTEST:
Lynda Lowry, Ex-Officio City Clerk
Disclaimer:
This is provided for informational purposes only. The formatting of this ordinance may vary from the official hard copy. In the case of any
discrepancy between this ordinance and the official hard copy, the official hard copy will prevail.
Ordinance NO. ORD-15-19
BY THE COUNCIL CLEGG, LUDWIG, MCLEAN, SANCHEZ, THOMSON AND WOODINGS
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING TITLE 7, CHAPTER 7A, SECTION 01, (PUBLIC PARKS; DEFINITIONS) BOISE CITY CODE TO AMEND THE
DEFINITION OF SMOKING TO INCLUDE E-CIGARETTES ; AND PROVIDING AN EFFECTIVE DATE.
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE MAYOR AND COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF BOISE CITY, IDAHO:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 7/503
Section 1. That Title 07, Chapter 7A, Section 01, Boise City Code (Definition of Smoking), be, and the same is amended as follows.
SMOKING: inhaling, exhaling, burning, carrying, or possessing any combusting (heated, lit, or smoldering) tobacco or any other substance, whether
contained in a cigar, cigarette, or pipe, or any other object., Smoking also includes the use of an e-cigarette which creates vapor, in any manner of any
form, or the use of any oral smoking device for the purpose of circumventing the prohibition of smoking in this Chapter. Smoking does not include
possession of an unlit or unheated cigar, cigarette, or pipe. Smoking does not include use of an e-cigarette which creates only a vapor without any smoke.
Section 2. That this Ordinance shall be in effect immediately upon its passage, approval, and publication.
ADOPTED by the Council of Boise City, Idaho, on May 7, 2019.
APPROVED by the Mayor of the Boise City, Idaho, on May 7, 2019.
APPROVED:
David H. Bieter, Mayor
ATTEST:
Lynda Lowry, Ex-Officio City Clerk
Disclaimer:
This is provided for informational purposes only. The formatting of this ordinance may vary from the official hard copy. In the case of any
discrepancy between this ordinance and the official hard copy, the official hard copy will prevail.
Ordinance NO. ORD-16-19
BY THE COUNCIL CLEGG, LUDWIG, MCLEAN, SANCHEZ, THOMSON AND WOODINGS
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING TITLE 5, CHAPTER 11, SECTION 6, (SMOKE FREE AIR; DEFINITIONS) BOISE CITY CODE TO AMEND THE
DEFINITION OF SMOKING TO INCLUDE E-CIGARETTES ; AND PROVIDING AN EFFECTIVE DATE.
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE MAYOR AND COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF BOISE CITY, IDAHO:
Section 1. That Title 5, Chapter 11, Section 6, Boise City Code (“Definition of Smoking"), be, and the same is amended as follows.
SMOKING: inhaling, exhaling, burning, carrying, or possessing any combusting (heated, lit, or smoldering) tobacco or any other substance, whether
contained in a cigar, cigarette, or pipe, or any other object. Smoking also includes the use of an e-cigarette which creates vapor, in any manner of any
form, or the use of any oral smoking device for the purpose of circumventing the prohibition of smoking in this Chapter. Smoking does not include
possession of an unlit or unheated cigar, cigarette, or pipe. Smoking does not include use of an e-cigarette which creates only a vapor without any smoke.
Section 2. That this Ordinance shall be in effect immediately upon its passage, approval, and publication.
ADOPTED by the Council of Boise City, Idaho, on May 7, 2019.
APPROVED by the Mayor of the Boise City, Idaho, on May 7, 2019.
APPROVED:
David H. Bieter, Mayor
ATTEST:
Lynda Lowry, Ex-Officio City Clerk
Disclaimer:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 8/503
This is provided for informational purposes only. The formatting of this ordinance may vary from the official hard copy. In the case of any
discrepancy between this ordinance and the official hard copy, the official hard copy will prevail.
Ordinance NO. ORD-17-19
BY THE COUNCIL CLEGG, LUDWIG, MCLEAN, SANCHEZ, THOMSON AND WOODINGS
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING TITLE 2, CHAPTER 3, (PARKS AND RECREATION COMMISSION) BOISE CITY CODE TO INCLUDE THE DEFINITION
OF PARK; TO UPDATE BOARD MEMBERSHIP AND TERMS OF SERVICE; TO REPEAL AND REPLACE THE POWERS AND DUTIES OF THE
COMMISSION; AND TO DELETE THE TITLE TO PROPERTY PROVISION; AND PROVIDING AN EFFECTIVE DATE.
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE MAYOR AND COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF BOISE CITY, IDAHO:
Section 1. That Title 2, Chapter 3, Boise City Code (“Parks and Recreation Commission”), be, and the same are amended as follows.
Chapter 3
PARKS AND RECREATION COMMISSION
2-3-1: DEFINITIONS:
2-3-2: BOARD CREATED; MEMBERS:
2-3-3: APPOINTMENTS; TERM:
2-3-4: COMPENSATION:
2-3-5: POWERS AND DUTIES:
2-3-6: TITLE TO PROPERTY:
2-3-1: DEFINITIONS:
COMMISSION: The Boise City Parks and Recreation Commission.
COUNCIL: The Boise City Council.
DEPARTMENT: The Boise City Department of Parks and Recreation.
DIRECTOR: The Director of the Boise City Department of Parks and Recreation or his/her designee.
PARK: Any and all lands, buildings, facilities, reserves and open space, sports complexes, swimming pool grounds, golf courses, game fields, cemeteries,
community forestry, playgrounds, skate board parks, BMX facilities, zoological and/or botanical gardens, trails and other general or special use outdoor
places, including the Boise River Greenbelt, that are owned, operated or maintained by Boise City or specifically included in the inventory of park
properties at the office of the Director. (Ord. 46-18, 9-25-2018)
2-3-2: BOARD CREATED; MEMBERS:
There is hereby created a Boise City Parks and Recreation Commission, composed of a maximum of nine (9) members., oOne of whom shall member
may reside in the Boise City area of City impact. and aAt least one member of whom may be, at the time of appointment, under twenty-one (21) years of
age. and oOne of whom shall be a representative of the Boise School District. The remainder of the members shall consist of citizens of the City of Boise
at large. The Mayor shall appoint and the Council shall confirm commission members for the terms of office provided in this chapter. A majority of the
commission shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of any business of the commission. (Ord. 46-18, 9-25-2018)
2-3-3: APPOINTMENTS; TERM:
All appointments and terms of office of the Boise City Parks and Recreation Commission shall be for a term of three (3) years; provided that the student
member shall be appointed to a term not to exceed one year. Appointments to fill a vacancy, or to complete an unexpired term, shall be for the remainder
of the unexpired term only.
The officers of the commission shall consist of a President and a Vice President to be selected by the commission from among its members, to serve as
such officers for one year; provided, that the President of the commission shall be ineligible to succeed himself for consecutive terms of office. The
commission shall also designate a Secretary who need not be a member of the commission. (Ord. 46-18, 9-25-2018)
2-3-4: COMPENSATION:
All members of the commission and the officers thereof shall serve without salary or compensation, but their actual and necessary expenses shall be
allowed by the City. The City shall provide the necessary and suitable equipment and supplies to enable the commission to properly transact and attend to
its business. (Ord. 46-18, 9-25-2018)
2-3-5: POWERS AND DUTIES:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 9/503
A. It shall be the duty of the commission for the orderly and efficient administration of the provisions of title 7, chapters 6 and 7 of this Code, and this
chapter, as now in effect or as may hereinafter be amended, and any other ordinances hereinafter enacted or amended relating to public park grounds,
zoos, cemeteries, community forestry, park and recreation facilities and open space:
. To have control, superintendence and charge of all public park grounds, park and recreation facilities, open space, zoos, community forestry and
cemeteries in the City together with any land or lots, whether located within or without the City limits, hereinafter purchased, leased, devised or
bequeathed to the City for park and recreation purposes, and as such to direct the ornamenting, adorning, laying out and improving of the grounds of said
public park grounds, park and recreation facilities, open space, zoos, community forestry and cemeteries;
2. To study the economic and physical conditions and issues in connection with the maintenance, operation, management, control and use of all the public
park grounds, park and recreation facilities, open space, zoos, community forestry and cemeteries in the City;
3. To propose, adopt, promulgate and ratify rules and regulations:
a. Governing the control and regulation of all public park grounds, park and recreation facilities, open space, zoos, community forestry and cemeteries in the
City together with any land or lots hereinafter purchased, leased, devised or bequeathed to the City for park and recreation purposes;
b. Governing the planting, growing, care, regulation and control of trees and shrubbery in all public places under the control and management of the
commission subject, however, to the provisions of title 7, chapter 2, "Trees", of this Code, and the Community Forestry Strategic Management Plan as now
or as may be in the future adopted, ratified and approved by the Council and Mayor;
. Governing the use of all park and recreation facilities, including, but not limited to participation in or eligibility for all recreational or other programs and
team sports sponsored by the department or in which the department is the primary sponsoring entity, excepting therefrom rules, regulations or policies
governing the exclusion of persons from use of or participation in such facilities or programs. The commission shall recommend such proposed
exclusionary rules, regulations or policies to the Council for approval and ratification;
. Governing the internal policies of the department with respect to the overall mission of the department, including, but not limited to the placement and
naming of memorials, the designation of park names and licensing agreements less than one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00) in value with third
parties;
4. Subject to the approval of the Council and in conformity with the requirements of the Idaho Code, to propose and recommend rules and regulations
governing fees and charges for the use of all park and recreation facilities, including, but not limited to fees and charges for all recreational or other
programs and team sports sponsored by the department or in which the department is the primary sponsoring entity and the establishment of fees and
charges for burial permits and rights, opening and closing graves, and adopting all certificate, conveyance and other forms to be used in connection with
all burials in the cemeteries of the City;
5. To represent the public interest in making suggestions and recommendations to the City Council for the development, use, control and expansion of
needed and required park and recreation facilities and programs, including, but not limited to public park grounds, open space, zoos, community forestry
and cemeteries in the City and to make suggestions and recommendations to the Council for amendments to title 7, chapters 6 and 7 of this Code, and
this chapter, and title 7, chapter 2, "Trees", of this Code all as now in effect or as may hereinafter be amended, together with any other provisions of this
Code that may improve and correlate to the administration of programs affecting the parks, recreation, cemetery, community forestry and open space
programs of the City and its citizens;
6. To represent the public interest in making recommendations to the Council for the employment of the Director;
7. To review and recommend to the Council for approval development agreements, licensing agreements of a value of one thousand five hundred dollars
($1,500.00) or more and all other real estate transactions, easements or other transactions that require Council approval by Idaho Code or Boise City
ordinance;
8. To appoint members of subcommittees to provide community information to the commission concerning particular facilities or programs of the department.
B. All rules and regulations proposed, adopted, promulgated or ratified by the commission or approved and ratified by the Mayor and Council shall have
the force and effect of ordinance. All rules and regulations of the commission now in effect shall remain in full force and effect until amended, altered or
repealed. (Ord. 46-18, 9-25-2018)
The Commission shall have the following powers and duties:
A. To propose plans, recommendations and suggestions for the purpose of planning for future growth and development of Parks, whether located
within or outside City limits, and whether to be purchased, leased, devised, or bequeathed to the City for park and recreation purposes;
B. To study the economic and physical conditions and issues in connection with the maintenance, operation, regulation, control, and use of Parks, and
to make recommendations regarding the same to Mayor and Council;
C. To propose rules and regulations for the regulation, control and use of Parks, and the maintenance and operation necessary or convenient for the
proper orderly and efficient administration, operation, superintendence, and control of Parks;
D. To promote public interest and recommend the development, use, control, and expansion of needed, and required Parks;
E. To recommend rules and regulations for governing fees and charges for the use of Parks including, but not limited to fees and charges for all
recreational or other programs and team sports sponsoredby the Department or in which the Department is the primary sponsoring entity.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 10/503
2-3-6: TITLE TO PROPERTY:
The title to all property, real or personal, now owned or hereafter acquired by purchase, gift, devise, bequest or otherwise, and when not inconsistent with
the terms of its acquisition, shall vest in the City and in the name of the City title may be sued for, and defended by action at law, or otherwise. (Ord. 46-18,
9-25-2018)
Section 2. That this Ordinance shall be in effect immediately upon its passage, approval, and publication.
ADOPTED by the Council of Boise City, Idaho, on May 14, 2019.
APPROVED by the Mayor of the Boise City, Idaho, on May 14, 2019.
APPROVED:
David H. Bieter, Mayor
ATTEST:
Lynda Lowry, Ex-Officio City Clerk
Disclaimer:
This is provided for informational purposes only. The formatting of this ordinance may vary from the official hard copy. In the case of any
discrepancy between this ordinance and the official hard copy, the official hard copy will prevail.
Ordinance NO. ORD-19-19
BY THE COUNCIL CLEGG, LUDWIG, MCLEAN, SANCHEZ, THOMSON AND WOODINGS
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING TITLE 7, CHAPTER 5, SECTION 1, (OBSTRUCTING SIDEWALKS), BOISE CITY CODE TO STRIKE THE LANGUAGE
REGARDING THE CONTINUATION OF A VIOLATION FOR MORE THAN TWENTY-FOUR (24) HOURS AFTER NOTICE; AND PROVIDING AN
EFFECTIVE DATE.
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE MAYOR AND COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF BOISE CITY, IDAHO:
Section 1. That existing Boise City Code Title 7, Chapter 5, Section 1, shall be, and hereby is, amended to read as follows:
7-5-1: OBSTRUCTING SIDEWALKS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to obstruct, injure or impair any of the sidewalks, streets or alleys in the City. and to continue such obstruction for a
period of twenty-four (24) hours after notice from any police officer, or City Clerk licensing enforcement officers, to remove the same. This section shall not
prohibit the operation of a sidewalk cafe pursuant to a permit issued by the City Clerk.
Section 2. That this Ordinance shall be in effect immediately upon its passage, approval, and publication.
ADOPTED by the Council of Boise City, Idaho, on May 21, 2019.APPROVED by the Mayor of the Boise City, Idaho, on May 21, 2019.
APPROVED:
David H. Bieter, Mayor
ATTEST:
Lynda Lowry, Ex-Officio City Clerk
PREFACE
This City Code of Boise City contains ordinances up to and including ordinance 46-18, passed September 25, 2018. Ordinances of the City adopted after
said ordinance supersede the provisions of this City Code to the extent that they are in conflict or inconsistent therewith. Consult the City office in order to
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 11/503
ascertain whether any particular provision of the Code has been amended, superseded or repealed.
Sterling Codifiers
Coeur d'Alene, Idaho
Title 1
ADMINISTRATION
Chapter 1
BOISE CITY CODE
1-1-1: TITLE:
Upon adoption by the City Council, this Code is hereby declared to be and shall hereafter constitute the official City Code of Boise City. This Code of
ordinances shall be known and cited as the BOISE CITY CODE, and it is hereby published by authority of the City Council and shall be kept up to date as
provided in section 1-1-3 of this chapter. Any reference to the number of any section contained herein shall be understood to refer to the position of the
same number, its appropriate chapter and title heading, and to the general penalty clause relating thereto, as well as to the section itself, when reference is
made to this Code by title in any legal document. (2019 Code)
1-1-2: ACCEPTANCE:
This Code, as hereby presented in printed or online form, shall hereafter be received without further proof in all courts and in all administrative tribunals of
this State as the ordinances of the City of general and permanent effect, except the excluded and noncodified ordinances enumerated in section 1-2-1 of
this title. (2019 Code)
1-1-3: AMENDMENTS:
Any ordinance amending this Code shall set forth the title, chapter and section number of the section or sections to be amended, and this shall constitute a
sufficient compliance with any statutory requirement pertaining to the amendment or revision by ordinance of any part of this Code. All such amendments
or revisions by ordinance shall be immediately forwarded to the codifiers and the ordinance material shall be prepared for insertion in its proper place in
this Code. Each replacement page shall be properly identified and shall be inserted in this Code. (2019 Code)
1-1-4: ALTERATIONS:
It shall be deemed unlawful for any person to alter, change, replace or deface in any way any section or any page of this Code in such a manner that the
meaning of any phrase or order may be changed or omitted. Replacement pages may be inserted according to the official instructions when authorized by
the City Council. The City Clerk shall see that the replacement pages are properly inserted in official copies maintained in the Office of the City Clerk. Any
person having custody of official copy of this Code shall make every effort to maintain this Code in an up to date and efficient manner, and shall see to the
immediate insertion of new or replacement pages when delivered to or made available to him through the Office of the City Clerk. The Code books, while
in actual possession of officials and other interested persons, shall be and remain the property of the City and shall be returned to the Office of the City
Clerk when directed by order of the City. (2019 Code)
Chapter 2
SAVING CLAUSE
1-2-1: REPEAL OF GENERAL ORDINANCES:
All general ordinances of the City passed prior to the adoption of this Code are hereby repealed, except those included in this Code or are by necessary
implication herein reserved from repeal (subject to the saving clauses contained in the following sections), and excluding the following ordinances, which
are not hereby repealed: tax levy ordinances; appropriation ordinances; ordinances relating to boundaries and annexations; franchise ordinances and
other ordinances granting special rights to persons or corporations; contract ordinances and ordinances authorizing the execution of a contract or the
issuance of warrants; salary ordinances; ordinances establishing, naming or vacating streets, alleys or other public places; improvement ordinances; bond
ordinances; ordinances relating to elections; ordinances relating to the transfer or acceptance of real estate by or from the City; and all special and
noncodified ordinances. (2019 Code)
1-2-2: PUBLIC UTILITY ORDINANCES:
No ordinance relating to railroads or railroad crossings with streets and other public ways, or relating to the conduct, duties, service or rates of public
utilities, shall be replaced by virtue of the preceding section, except that this Code may contain provisions for those matters, in which case this Code shall
be considered as amending the ordinance or ordinances in respect to only those provisions. (2019 Code)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 12/503
1-2-3: COURT PROCEEDINGS:
A. No new ordinance shall be construed or held to repeal a former ordinance, whether the former ordinance is expressly repealed or not, as to any offense
committed against the former ordinance or as to any act done, any penalty, forfeiture or punishment so incurred, or any right accrued or claim arising
under the former ordinance, or in any way whatever to affect any such offense or act so committed or so done, or any penalty, forfeiture or punishment
so incurred or any right accrued or claim arising before the new ordinance takes effect, save only that proceedings thereafter shall conform to the
ordinance in force at the time of that proceeding, so far as practicable. If any penalty, forfeiture or punishment is mitigated by any provision of a new
ordinance, that provision may be, by the consent of the person or party affected, applied to any judgment announced after the new ordinance takes
effect.
B. This section shall extend to all repeals, either by express words or implication, whether the repeal is in the ordinance making any new provisions upon
the same subject or in any other ordinance.
C. Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed as abating any action now pending under or by virtue of any general ordinance of the City herein
repealed and the provisions of all general ordinances contained in this Code shall be deemed to be continuing provisions and not a new enactment of
the same provision; nor shall this chapter be deemed as discontinuing, abating, modifying or altering any penalty accrued or to accrue, or as affecting
the liability of any person, firm or corporation, or as waiving any right of the City under any ordinance or provision thereof in force at the time of the
adoption of this Code. (2019 Code)
1-2-4: SEVERABILITY CLAUSE:
If any section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this Code, or any part thereof, is held to be unconstitutional or invalid or
ineffective by any court of competent jurisdiction, that decision shall not affect the validity or effectiveness of the remaining portions of this Code, or any
part thereof. The City Council hereby declares that it would have passed each section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase
thereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections, subdivisions, paragraphs, sentences, clauses or phrases may be declared
unconstitutional, invalid or ineffective. (2019 Code)
Chapter 3
DEFINITIONS
1-3-1: CONSTRUCTION OF WORDS:
A. Liberal Construction: All general provisions, terms, phrases and expressions contained in this Code shall be liberally construed in order that the true
intent and meaning of the City Council may be fully carried out.
B. Interpretation: In the interpretation and application of any provision of this Code, it shall be held to be the minimum requirements adopted for the
promotion of the public health, safety and general welfare. Where any provision of a Code imposes greater restrictions upon the subject matter than the
general provision imposed by this Code, the provision imposing the greater restriction or regulation shall be deemed to be controlling.
C. Additional Interpretations:
1. Computation Of Time: Computation of time shall be as set forth in Idaho Rules of Civil Procedure 6(a).
2. Delegation Of Authority: Whenever a provision appears requiring the head of a department or some other City officer to do some act or perform
some duty, it is to be construed to authorize the head of the department or other officer to designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to perform
the required act or perform the duty unless the terms of the provision or section specify otherwise.
3. Gender: A word importing the masculine gender only shall extend and be applied to females and to firms, partnerships and corporations as well as to
males.
4. Joint Authority: All words giving a joint authority to three (3) or more persons or officers shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of
such persons or officers.
5. May/Shall: The word "may" is permissive; the word "shall" is mandatory.
6. Nontechnical And Technical Words: Words and phrases shall be construed according to the common and approved usage of the language, but
technical words and phrases and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be construed and understood
according to such meaning.
7. Number: A word importing the singular number only may extend and be applied to several persons and things as well as to one person and thing.
8. Officers Generally: Whenever any officer is referred by title, such as "Clerk", "Treasurer", etc., such reference shall be construed as if followed by the
words "of Boise City, Idaho".
9. Tense: Words used in the past or present tense include the future as well as the past and present. (2019 Code)
1-3-2: GENERAL DEFINITIONS:
Whenever the following words or terms are used in this Code, they shall have such meanings herein ascribed to them, unless the context makes such
meaning repugnant thereto:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 13/503
CITY CODE: The City Code of Boise City, Idaho, and amendments thereto.
CITY COUNCIL: Unless otherwise indicated, the City Council of Boise City, Idaho.
COUNTY: The County of Ada, State of Idaho.
FEE: A sum of money charged by the City for the carrying on of a business, profession or occupation, or other activity subject to City regulation,
authorization or limitation.
PERSON: Any public or private corporation, firm, partnership, association, organization, government or any other group acting as a unit, as well as a
natural person.
REASONABLE TIME: In all cases where any ordinance requires that an act be done in a reasonable time or that reasonable notice be given, such
reasonable time for such notice shall be deemed to mean such time as may be necessary for the expeditious performance of such duty or compliance with
such notice.
STATE: The State of Idaho.
WRITTEN, IN WRITING: Printing and any other mode of representing words and letters, but when the written signature of any person is required by law on
any official or public writing or bond, it shall be in the proper handwriting of such person, or in case such person is unable to write, by such person's proper
mark. (2019 Code)
1-3-3: CATCHLINES:
The catchlines of the several sections of this Code are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the content of the section and shall not be deemed or
taken to be titles of such sections, nor be deemed to govern, limit, modify or in any manner affect the scope, meaning or intent of the provisions of any
section hereof, nor unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted.
(2019 Code)
Chapter 4
GENERAL PENALTY
1-4-1: MISDEMEANOR PENALTY:
A. Violations Declared Misdemeanor: The violation of any ordinance of the City, or any section of this Code, is hereby declared to constitute a
misdemeanor and punishable as such, unless otherwise provided. (1952 Code § 1-03-01)
B. Penalty For Misdemeanor Violation: Except in cases where a different punishment is prescribed by ordinance, every public offense and every unlawful
act declared by ordinance to be a misdemeanor is punishable by a fine not exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or imprisonment in the County
Jail not exceeding six (6) months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. (1952 Code § 1-03-02; amd. 2019 Code)
1-4-2: INFRACTION PENALTY:
A. Fine Specified: Except in cases where a different punishment is prescribed by ordinance, every public offense and every unlawful act declared by
ordinance to be an infraction is punishable by a fine not exceeding one hundred dollars ($100.00), plus court costs and fees. (1952 Code § 1-03-03;
amd. 2019 Code)
B. Failure To Appear On Citation Or Summons: If the defendant fails to appear before the Clerk at or before the time stated in an infraction citation or
summons, the court shall enter default judgment against the defendant for the infraction as provided by law without giving further notice to the
defendant.
C. Failure To Appear After First Appearance: If a defendant fails to appear at the time fixed by a trial date notice or continuance notice served on the
defendant as provided by law, the court shall enter default judgment against the defendant for the infraction without giving further notice to the
defendant. (1952 Code § 1-03-03)
D. Notice Of Default Judgment: If a default judgment is entered against a defendant for an infraction pursuant to law, the Clerk shall mail a notice of
judgment to the defendant at the address stated in the citation advising the defendant that the defendant must pay the judgment by a date certain
which shall not be less than fourteen (14) days after the date of the notice. For a traffic infraction, notice shall state that failure to pay the judgment will
result in suspension of his driver's license, in accordance with Idaho Code section 49-1505. (1952 Code § 1-03-03; amd. 2019 Code)
1-4-3: FAILURE TO OBEY CITATION FOR MISDEMEANOR OR INFRACTION:
A. Unlawful: It shall be unlawful for any person to fail to appear in court at the time promised on a misdemeanor or infraction citation, or to fail to appear at
the time indicated on a misdemeanor or infraction citation served upon the defendant or to fail to appear at the time indicated on a misdemeanor or
infraction summons served upon the defendant, regardless of the disposition of the charge upon which such citation or summons was originally issued.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 14/503
B. Appearance By Counsel: The duty to appear in court at the time indicated in a misdemeanor or infraction citation or a summons may be complied with
by an appearance by counsel in the manner prescribed by rule of the Supreme Court.
C. Misdemeanor: Violation of the provisions of this section shall be a misdemeanor. (1952 Code § 1-03-04)
Chapter 5
OFFICIAL AND CORPORATE PROVISIONS
1-5-1: OFFICIAL NEWSPAPER:
The Idaho Statesman, a daily newspaper published at and within the City, is hereby designated and appointed as the official newspaper of the City. (1952
Code § 1-20-01; amd. 2019 Code)
Chapter 6
MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL
1-6-1: MAYOR:
A. Mission, Powers And Functions:
1. The City mission is to provide leadership, share the responsibility for advancing common community values, and, to the extent possible, provide
services which foster a high quality of life through wise use of community resources. The Mayor's Office mission, simply put, is to uphold and
implement the Citywide mission statement throughout the organization and throughout the community. In doing so, the office will continue to focus on
a wide variety of programs and initiatives which further the core principles of the City mission: to provide leadership; to advance community values;
and to maintain or enhance community quality of life.
2. The Mayor, in addition to the powers, duties and functions vested in him by statute as the Chief Executive Officer of the City, and those specifically
vested in him by the provisions of this Code, shall have authority to act, or designate the officer who shall act, in the enforcement of any provision of
this Code in all cases where this Code fails to specify the officer who shall be charged with the duty of enforcement. (1952 Code § 1-01-01)
B. Assistants To Mayor: The Mayor shall, with the consent of the Council, appoint up to three (3) assistants to the Mayor. (1952 Code § 1-01-02; amd.
2019 Code)
1-6-2: CITY COUNCIL; MEETINGS:
A. Parliamentary Rules: Except as may be inconsistent with the provisions of this section and, to the extent practicable, the parliamentary rules and law for
conducting Council meetings shall be as set forth in Robert's Rules of Order. (1952 Code § 1-02-01; amd. 2019 Code)
B. Quorum: A majority of the Council members elected shall constitute a quorum. A less number may adjourn from time to time and compel the attendance
of absent members. (1952 Code § 1-02-02)
C. Regular Meetings: The Council shall hold regular meetings every Tuesday of each month. Meetings will be held at City Hall at the hour of six o'clock
(6:00) P.M., except the fourth Tuesday, which meeting will be at twelve o'clock (12:00) noon, unless notice indicates otherwise in the manner provided
by statute. (1952 Code § 1-02-03)
D. Special Meetings: A special meeting of the Council may be called at any time by the Mayor or a majority of the members of the Council in the manner
provided by statute. (1952 Code § 1-02-04)
E. Order Of Business; Agenda:
1. Evening Meeting: Following the call to order at an evening meeting, the business of the City Council shall be considered in the following order,
whenever practicable:
a. Opening ceremonies (invocation, Pledge of Allegiance and roll call);
b. Reading and approval of minutes;
c. Special business;
d. Consent agenda;
e. Subdivisions;
f. Resolutions;
g. Ordinances;
h. Unfinished business;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 15/503
i. New business.
2. Daytime Meeting: Following the call to order at a daytime meeting, the business of the City Council shall be considered in the following order,
whenever practicable:
a. Opening ceremonies (invocation, Pledge of Allegiance and roll call);
b. Reading and approval of minutes;
c. Consent agenda;
d. Subdivisions;
e. Resolutions;
f. Ordinances;
g. Special business;
h. Unfinished business;
i. New business. (Ord. 18-13, 7-2-2013)
3. Agenda:
a. An agenda shall be prepared and posted for every meeting of the City Council, pursuant to Idaho Code section 74-204;
b. An agenda may be amended using the procedures listed in Idaho Code section 74-204. (Ord. 31-15, 7-28-2015)
F. Presiding Officer: The Mayor shall serve as the presiding officer for all meetings of the City Council. In the Mayor's absence, the duly elected Chair shall
serve as presiding officer. The presiding officer shall preserve order and decorum, may speak to points of order in preference to other members, and
shall decide all questions of order, subject to an appeal to the Council, on which appeal no member shall speak more than once without leave of the
Council. (1952 Code § 1-02-07; amd. 2019 Code)
G. Priority Of Business: All questions relating to priority of business shall be decided without debate. (1952 Code § 1-02-08)
H. Recognition By Presiding Officer: When two (2) or more members happen to request recognition at once, the presiding officer shall name who is to
speak first. (1952 Code § 1-02-09)
I. Privileges Of Members: No member shall speak more than twice on the same question without leave of the Council, nor more than once until every
member choosing to speak shall have spoken. (1952 Code § 1-02-10)
J. Motions: When a motion is under debate, no motion shall be received except to adjourn, to lay on the table, to postpone to a day certain, to refer or
amend, to postpone indefinitely, which several motions shall have precedence in the order in which they are stated. (1952 Code § 1-02-11)
K. Adjournment: A motion to adjourn shall always be in order, except when once put and voted down; the same shall not again be in order until some other
business shall have been taken up, and shall be always decided without debate. (1952 Code § 1-02-12)
L. Members Addressing The Chair: When any member is about to speak in debate or deliver any matter to the Council, he shall respectfully address the
presiding officer, and shall confine comments to the question in debate. (1952 Code § 1-02-13; amd. 2019 Code)
M. Members Must Vote; Exceptions: Every member who shall be present when a question is put shall vote for or against the same, unless the Council
shall excuse him; but no member shall be permitted to vote on a question when the yeas and nays are called for, unless present when his name is
called in its regular order. (1952 Code § 1-02-14)
N. Motion Must Be Recorded: No motion shall be considered unless the same shall be recorded. When a motion is recorded, it shall be stated by the
presiding officer before debate. It shall be reduced to writing, but the mover may withdraw it at any time before a decision or amendment is made to it.
(1952 Code § 1-02-15)
O. Reconsideration: When a question has been once decided, it shall be in order for any member who voted in the affirmative to move for a
reconsideration thereof, but no motion for a reconsideration of a vote shall be made after adjournment of the next regularly scheduled meeting following
the final reading of any ordinance or resolution to be reconsidered or any vote to be reconsidered. No motion for such reconsideration shall be made
more than once. (1952 Code § 1-02-16)
P. Suspension Of Rules: No rule of order shall be suspended except by an affirmative vote of two-thirds (2/3) of the members of the Council; provided,
however, that no formal motion to suspend a rule of order shall be required if the Council member requesting suspension of the rule of order receives
unanimous consent for the suspension of the rule of order. Standing rules (those rules adopted without previous notice and by a majority vote) may be
suspended by an affirmative vote of two-thirds (2/3) of the members of the Council. (1952 Code § 1-02-17)
Q. Classification And Reading Of Ordinances And Resolutions And Providing For Consent Agenda Procedures:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 16/503
1. Classification Of Ordinances And Resolutions: All actions of the Council involving the exercise of the City's legislative and police power functions, or
actions otherwise required by law to be in ordinance form, shall be designated as ordinances and appear in the form required by law. All other
actions of the Council of a ministerial nature relating to the administrative business of the City and requiring written findings or statements shall be
designated as resolutions. (1952 Code § 1-02-18)
2. Reading Of Ordinances And Resolutions:
a. Except as hereinafter provided, prior to final passage, all ordinances shall be read on three (3) different days, two (2) readings of which may be by
title only and one reading of which shall be in full, unless one-half (1/2) plus one of the members of the full Council vote to dispense with the rule.
(1952 Code § 1-02-18; amd. 2019 Code)
b. Prior to final passage, all resolutions shall be read on one day, the reading of which may be by title only.
3. Consent Agenda:
a. Definition; Consent Agenda: Those items on the consent agenda which are considered routine by the City Clerk, including, but not limited to, those
items hereinafter specified, shall be marked with an asterisk (*), and each item so marked shall be approved, accepted, etc., by motion of the
Council and roll call vote. Those items so approved under the heading "consent agenda" will appear in the Council minutes in their proper form as
if acted upon separately. Such items to be included in the "consent agenda" include:
(1) Grant deeds;
(2) Grants of easements;
(3) Reading of ordinances and resolutions;
(4) Auditors' reports as to cash count;
(5) Call for bids and bid results;
(6) Reports and minutes of administrative actions and proposals;
(7) Leases and agreements previously approved in principle;
(8) Claims against the City;
(9) Approval of warrants and checks;
(10) Approval of licenses and permits; and
(11) Subdivision final plats.
b. Removal Of Item From Consent Agenda: Upon the request of the Mayor, any Council member or any interested citizen, any item on the agenda
marked for consent consideration shall be removed therefrom and considered separately.
4. Procedure For Consent Agenda: A motion for approval or adoption of all "consent agenda" items shall pass on affirmative vote of a majority of those
Council members constituting a quorum. If, however, any item on the "consent agenda" includes the reading of any ordinance by title, in full or on an
emergency basis, the maker of the motion must so indicate, specifying each such item, and in the motion include a request to dispense with the rule
hereinbefore stated in subsection Q2a of this section. Such rule shall not be dispensed with except by affirmative vote on one-half (1/2) plus one of
the members of the full Council. (1952 Code § 1-02-18)
R. Passage Of Ordinances And Resolutions: The passage of every ordinance and resolution shall be by roll call of the Council with the yea or nay of each
member present being recorded, with the majority vote of the Council members constituting a quorum being required for passage. For purposes of
such passage, however, it shall be permissible for any Council member to move for the roll call, recording of votes, and passage of all or any number of
ordinances or resolutions appearing on the agenda for final passage. The maker of such a motion must specify by agenda number or classification,
which ordinances or resolutions appearing on the agenda are to be included for purposes of the motion. Upon the objection of the Mayor or any
Council member, any ordinance or resolution so included may be removed from the motion and considered separately. In the absence of such an
objection, all ordinances and resolutions included in the motion shall be subject to consideration for final passage, and upon such consideration, the
minutes shall reflect the yea or nay votes of each Council member on each ordinance or resolution so considered. (1952 Code § 1-02-19)
S. Questions: All questions shall be put in the order in which they are moved. (1952 Code § 1-02-20)
T. Lay On The Table: The motion to lay on the table shall be decided without debate. (1952 Code § 1-02-21)
U. Failure To Appear: Any person who shall fail to appear before the City Council pursuant to a subpoena, validly issued by the Mayor pursuant to Idaho
Code section 50-216, at the place and time recited in the subpoena to give testimony before the City Council, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, subject
to penalty as provided in section 1-4-1 of this title. (1952 Code § 1-02-22; amd. 2019 Code)
V. Administrative Staff To City Council: The City Council may appoint administrative staff in accordance with the City personnel procedures and within
budgeted appropriations. Administrative staff work at the pleasure of the City Council and are designated employees at-will. (1952 Code § 1-02-23)
1-6-3: SALARIES:
In accordance with Idaho Code title 50, compensation for the Mayor and City Council members shall be fixed by ordinance at least seventy five (75) days
prior to any general City election. Annual salaries are effective January 1 of the following year.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 17/503
A. Mayor: The annual salary of the Mayor shall be as follows:
1. The Mayor shall receive an annual salary of one hundred thirty six thousand seven hundred seventy dollars ($136,770.00), effective January 1,
2018.
2. The Mayor shall receive an annual salary of one hundred forty thousand eight hundred seventy three dollars ($140,873.00), effective January 1,
2019.
3. The Mayor shall receive an annual salary of one hundred forty five thousand ninety nine dollars ($145,099.00), effective January 1, 2020.
4. The Mayor shall receive an annual salary of one hundred forty nine thousand four hundred fifty two dollars ($149,452.00), effective January 1, 2021.
B. Council: The annual salary of each member of the City Council shall be as follows:
1. Each member of the City Council shall receive an annual salary of twenty four thousand nine hundred thirteen dollars ($24,913.00), effective January
1, 2018.
2. Each member of the City Council shall receive an annual salary of twenty five thousand six hundred sixty dollars ($25,660.00), effective January 1,
2019.
3. Each member of the City Council shall receive an annual salary of twenty six thousand four hundred thirty dollars ($26,430.00), effective January 1,
2020.
4. Each member of the City Council shall receive an annual salary of twenty seven thousand two hundred twenty three dollars ($27,223.00), effective
January 1, 2021.
C. Acting Mayor: Whenever any member of the City Council assumes the Office of Mayor during the Mayor's absence, that Council member shall receive
an additional fifty dollars ($50.00) per day while so acting.
D. Incidental Expenses: The Mayor and each member of City Council shall receive one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) per month to be used for incidental
expenses, including in-town travel, meetings and cellular phone use.
E. Benefits: The Mayor and City Council may receive benefits in accordance with Idaho Statute and City policy. (Ord. 12-17, 4-11-2017)
ARTICLE A. OFFICE OF ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
1-6A-1: OFFICE CREATED:
There is hereby created an Office of Economic Development. The Office of Economic Development shall be a division of the Office of the Mayor.
Employees of the Office of Economic Development shall be selected and hired by the Mayor. (1952 Code § 1-24-01)
Chapter 7
OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
1-7-1: APPLICABILITY:
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all Municipal employees, unless otherwise fixed by collective bargaining agreement. (Ord. 24-16, 8-9-2016)
1-7-2: APPOINTMENT OF OFFICERS:
A. Appointment: The Mayor, with the consent of the Council, shall appoint all department heads, the Ex Officio City Treasurer, the Ex Officio City Clerk,
and all employees covered by subsection 1-6-1B of this title of the Mayor's Office. All positions shall be collectively referred to as "appointive officers".
B. Confirmation: If the Council shall refuse to confirm any nomination, the Mayor shall then, within ten (10) days thereafter, nominate another person to fill
the office and he or she may continue to so nominate until his or her nominee is confirmed. If the Mayor fails to make another nomination for the same
office within ten (10) days after the rejection of a nominee, the Council shall appoint a suitable person to fill the office. The affirmative vote of one-half
(1/2) plus one of the full Council shall be required to confirm any nomination made by the Mayor.
C. Vacancy: Whenever a vacancy shall occur in an appointive office, the vacancy shall be filled by appointment in the same manner as the original
appointment.
D. Removal: Any appointive officer may be removed by the Mayor for any cause deemed sufficient, but such removal shall be by and with the affirmative
vote of one-half (1/2) plus one of the members of the full Council; provided, that the Council, by the unanimous vote of all of its members, may upon
their own initiative remove any appointive officer.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 18/503
E. Salaries: Initial salaries and any salary changes for all appointive officers shall be set by the Mayor, with the consent of the Council. (1952 Code § 1-06-
03)
1-7-3: ESTABLISHED DEPARTMENTS AND DIRECTOR DUTIES:
A. Established Departments: The following are established departments within the City:
Arts and History
Aviation
Finance and Administration
Fire
Human Resources
Information Technology
Legal
Library
Mayor
Parks and Recreation
Planning and Development Services
Police
Public Works
B. Director Duties: It shall be the Director of each department's duty to:
1. Be responsible for the effective administration of their respective departments and all activities assigned thereto;
2. Keep informed as to the latest practices in their particular field and inaugurate, with the approval of the Mayor and Council, such new practices as
appear to be of benefit to the City and to the public;
3. Establish and maintain records and reports in sufficient detail to furnish all information necessary for proper control of departmental activities and to
form a basis for reports required by the Mayor and Council;
4. Be responsible for the proper maintenance of all City property and equipment used in his department. (1952 Code § 1-06-04)
1-7-4: BONDS; AMOUNT:
The minimum penal sum of the bond for the respective officers and employees of the City shall be:
Ex Officio Treasurer $500,000.00
Ex Officio City Clerk 50,000.00
and fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) for every other officer or employee. The bond for officers or employees, other than the City Treasurer, may be a
blanket employees bond, but the penalty thereof shall be several. The penalty of all bonds shall be yearly. (1952 Code § 1-06-10)
Chapter 8
CODE OF ETHICS
1-8-1: POLICY:
It is hereby declared to be the policy of the City, and the Council hereby finds and declares such policy to be necessary in order to promote and provide
efficient and good government, where government is based on the consent of the governed, that the proper operation of democratic government requires
the public officials and employees be independent, impartial and responsible to the people, that government decision and policy be made in the best
interest of the people, the community and the government, that public office not be used for personal gain, and that the public have confidence in the
integrity of its government. (1952 Code § 1-21-01)
1-8-2: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, each of the terms herein defined shall have the meanings given in this section, unless a different meaning is clearly required by
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 19/503
the context. All words used in the present tense shall include the future; words used in the singular number shall include the plural number, and the plural
number the singular, unless the natural construction of the sentence indicates otherwise, and the word "shall" is mandatory, not directory:
BUSINESS: Any corporation, partnership, proprietorship, firm, enterprise, franchise, association, organization, self-employed individual and any legal
entity.
BUSINESS WITH WHICH HE OR SHE IS ASSOCIATED: Any business of which the person or a member of his or her household is a director, officer,
owner, employer or holder of more than one percent (1%) of the outstanding stock, and any business which is a client of the person.
CITY OFFICIAL: Any elected official, employee, any member of a board or commission appointed by the Mayor or City Council, or any agent of the City.
EMPLOYEE: An individual drawing a salary from the City, whether elected or not, and any noncompensated individual who performs personal services for
the City.
VALUABLE GIFT: Any gift with a value in excess of fifty dollars ($50.00), and any gift with a value of less than fifty dollars ($50.00) where the item is
durable and/or transferable and is offered within six (6) months of similar gifts. The purpose of this definition is to ensure that employees do not seek nor
receive multiple gifts that total more than fifty dollars ($50.00) over a relatively short period of time. Gifts that are durable and/or transferable do not include
food items, meals and the like. (1952 Code § 1-21-02)
1-8-3: STANDARD OF CONDUCT:
No City official shall knowingly:
A. Financial Gain: Use his or her official position or office to obtain financial gain for him or herself, any member of his or her household, or any business
with which he or she or a member of his or her household is associated.
B. Confidential Gain: Use or disclose confidential information gained in the course of or by reason of his or her official position or activities in any way that
could result in financial gain for him or herself or for any other person. (1952 Code § 1-21-03)
C. Valuable Gifts: Accept any valuable gift, whether in the form of service, loan, thing or promise from any person or business that is interested directly or
indirectly in any manner whatsoever in business dealings with the City; provided, however, any City official who is a candidate for public office may
accept campaign contributions and services in connection with such campaign. Gifts of any kind shall not be accepted where there exists a substantial
risk that the gift would undermine official impartiality. (1952 Code § 1-21-03; amd. 2019 Code)
D. Fiduciary Duty: Violate the fiduciary duty owed to the City under this standard of conduct. The "fiduciary duty" is defined as a duty to act for the benefit
of the citizens of the City, while subordinating one's personal interest to those of the City as a whole. When an employee expends any resources of the
City, this duty requires that the expenditure be reasonable, prudent and for the benefit of the City and not for personal gain. (1952 Code § 1-21-03)
1-8-4: DISCLOSURE OF CONFLICTS OF INTEREST:
A. Conflict Of Interest Defined: For purposes of this section, an actual "conflict of interest" is defined as a set of circumstances wherein a City official would
be required to take an action or make a decision that would affect his or her personal financial or pecuniary interests, or those of a member of his or her
household, or a business with which he or she is associated. An apparent conflict of interest is one that does not affect a City official's personal
financial or pecuniary interests, but nevertheless calls into question his or her objectivity and independence. Any City official who has either an actual
conflict of interest or an apparent conflict of interest, shall:
1. If a City official, other than an appointed or elected member of a commission, board or council, verbally discloses such interest to the Mayor (or if
such City official is the Mayor, then to the City Council), who may require the assignment of the matter creating the conflict to another City official of
the same department of the City who does not have a conflict of interest, or determine such conflict de minimus, as defined in subsection B of this
section. (1952 Code § 1-21-04)
2. If an appointed or elected member of a commission, board or council, discloses such interest on the records of said commission, board or council
and shall disqualify him or herself from participating in any decision or vote relating thereto, unless following such disclosure a majority of the
remaining members of such commission, board or council determined by official action at a public meeting of such commission, board or council that
such conflict of interest is de minimus, as defined in subsection B of this section.
B. De Minimis Conflict Defined: A pecuniary benefit is de minimis if it does not exceed the value of fifty dollars ($50.00) incidental to personal, professional
or business contacts and involving no substantial risk of undermining official impartiality, as defined in Idaho Code section 18-1359. An officer's interest
in a contract is deemed de minimis if it is a remote interest. "Remote interest" means that of a nonsalaried officer of a nonprofit organization; that of an
employee of a contracting party where the compensation consists entirely of fixed wages; that of a landlord or tenant of a contracting party; or that of a
holder of less than one percent (1%) of the shares of a corporation or cooperative which is a contracting party, all as defined in Idaho Code section 74-
502. There is no conflict of interest if the City official's personal interest is so remote that it would be unreasonable to question his or her ability to
impartially serve the City's best interests. (Ord. 31-15, 7-28-2015)
1-8-5: PROHIBITED INFLUENCE AND CONDUCT:
A. Valuable Gift: No City official shall solicit or receive any valuable gift, or anything of value, including favors, services or promises of future employment,
based on any understanding that such City official's vote, official action or judgment would be influenced thereby, or where it could reasonably be
inferred that the thing of value would influence the City official in the discharge of his or her duties, or as a reward for the discharge of his or her duties.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 20/503
B. Money: No person shall offer or pay to a City official, and no such City official shall solicit or receive, any money in any amount in addition to that
received as wages or salary by the City official in his or her official capacity, for advice or assistance given in the course of the City official's
employment or relating to the employment. (1952 Code § 1-21-05)
1-8-6: PROHIBITION OF FINANCIAL INTEREST:
A. Requirement: Neither the Mayor, members of the Council, City employees, nor agents of the City shall have any personal beneficial interest, either
directly or indirectly, in any expenditure, purchase, sale or contract made by the City, or in any firm, corporation or association furnishing or bidding on
such purchase, sale or contract, except as provided in subsection B of this section. (Ord. 31-13, 8-27-2013)
B. Criteria For Waiver: One-half (1/2) plus one of the full Council or the Ethics Commission, when appropriate pursuant to this Code, shall have the
authority to waive compliance with subsection A of this section when the instant situation meets all of the following criteria:
1. Either of the following conditions are met:
a. The interest is de minimis or remote, as defined by Idaho Code section 74-502, or section 1-8-4 of this chapter; or
b. The prospective contractee is an employee or agent who receives no salary or fee as compensation for the services provided to the City; and
2. No actual conflict of interest exists, as defined by section 1-8-4 of this chapter; and
3. The award/contract serves the best interest of the City; and
4. The award/contract does not constitute a violation of any laws of the State or this Code. (Ord. 31-15, 7-28-2015)
C. Surplus: City officials and employees may not purchase surplus property of the City.
D. Rebates Or Valuable Gifts: Every officer and employee of the City is expressly prohibited from seeking or accepting, directly or indirectly, any money
rebates or valuable gifts from any person, company, firm or corporation to which any purchase order or contract is or might be awarded.
E. Standard Of Conduct: Every officer, employee or agent of the City is expressly prohibited from knowingly:
1. Underestimating or exaggerating requirements to certain prospective bidders in order to influence bids;
2. Misrepresenting a competitor's prices, quality or service to obtain concessions;
3. Splitting invoices or orders, etc., in an effort to avoid the competitive bid requirements of Idaho Code and City ordinances. (Ord. 31-13, 8-27-2013)
1-8-7: EXCEPTION:
A City official shall not be deemed to have a financial interest in a matter if his or her interest is solely that of a general taxpayer or solely that of a recipient
of public services generally provided by the City on the same terms and conditions as if he or she were not an official. (1952 Code § 1-21-07)
1-8-8: APPOINTMENTS TO BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS; TERMS:
A. Appointments: Appointments to boards and commissions of the City shall be made with a view to minimizing potential conflicts of interest described in
this chapter, and no person shall be appointed to any such board or commission if his or her potential conflicts of interest are of such a degree that they
are likely to substantially interfere with the performance of his or her duties as an official. Appointments to such boards and commissions have
memberships which approximate the diverse interests of the residents of the City. (1952 Code § 1-21-08)
B. Terms Of Office: The terms of office for each board and/or commission shall be provided by ordinance. Reappointment for a successive term or terms
shall be subject to the approval of the Mayor and Council. Prior to the expiration of a term of office, the board or commission upon which a member
serves may submit a majority recommendation to the Mayor and Council for the reappointment of such member or the appointment of a new member
for Council consideration. (1952 Code § 1-21-09)
1-8-9: PENALTY:
Any person or business violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be
subject to penalty as provided in section 1-4-1 of this title. (Ord. 31-13, 8-27-2013; amd. 2019 Code)
Chapter 9
MUNICIPAL ELECTIONS
1-9-1: CONDUCT OF MUNICIPAL ELECTIONS:
All Municipal elections shall be conducted pursuant to Idaho Code title 34, chapter 14, except as modified by the specific provisions of Idaho Code title 50,
chapter 4. State Code shall control if any requirement or provision of this chapter conflicts with, or is preempted by, Idaho Code. (Ord. 52-13, 1-7-2014)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 21/503
1-9-2: QUALIFICATIONS FOR CITYWIDE OFFICE:
A. Qualified Elector: Every candidate for Citywide office shall be a qualified elector of the City.
B. Mayor: Every candidate for the Office of Mayor shall have the qualifications required by Idaho Code section 50-601.
C. City Council: Every candidate for a City Council seat shall have the qualifications required by Idaho Code section 50-702. (Ord. 52-13, 1-7-2014)
1-9-3: MAYOR:
A. Elected By Majority: The Mayor of the City shall be elected by a majority of the votes cast for any candidate running for the Office of Mayor.
B. Runoff Election: In the event no candidate receives a majority of the votes cast, there shall be a runoff election between the two (2) candidates receiving
the highest number of votes cast.
C. Conduct Of Runoff Election: If necessary, the runoff election shall be conducted pursuant to Idaho Code section 50-612. (Ord. 52-13, 1-7-2014)
1-9-4: CITY COUNCIL:
A. Membership: The City shall have a City Council composed of six (6) members.
B. Election By Designated Seats: The election of City Council members shall be by designated seats, pursuant to Idaho Code section 50-707, as
numbered by the City Clerk.
C. Term: Election to a City Council seat shall be for a term of four (4) years.
D. Number Of Seats During Biennial Election: During the biennial general Municipal elections, three (3) of the six (6) City Council seats shall be up for
election.
E. Filing For Designated Seat: Candidates for City Council seats shall file for a designated seat, in the manner prescribed by Idaho Code.
F. Elected By Plurality Of Votes: A candidate running for a designated City Council seat shall be elected by a plurality (the greatest number) of the votes
cast. (Ord. 52-13, 1-7-2014)
Chapter 10
CITY DEPARTMENTS
ARTICLE A. POLICE DEPARTMENT
1-10A-1: CREATED:
There is hereby created an administrative department of the City to be known as the Police Department. (2019 Code)
1-10A-2: CHIEF OF POLICE:
The Director of the Police Department shall be the Chief of Police, who shall superintend, direct and manage the department and all assigned and
employed departmental officers, assistants and employees. The Chief of Police shall be appointed by the Mayor and confirmed by the City Council. (Ord.
24-16, 8-9-2016; amd. 2019 Code)
1-10A-3: POWERS AND DUTIES:
The Chief of Police shall exercise all powers and duties necessary and incidental to those authorized by the Constitution, Federal law, State Code, this
Code and policies and procedures set forth by the Mayor and City Council. (2019 Code)
ARTICLE B. FIRE DEPARTMENT
1-10B-1: CREATED:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 22/503
There is hereby established and created an administrative department of the City to be known as the Fire Department. (1952 Code § 3-11-01)
1-10B-2: DIRECTOR OF DEPARTMENT:
The Director of the Fire Department shall be the Fire Chief, who shall superintend, direct and manage the department and all officers, assistants and
employees assigned to and employed for the department and its various divisions. The Fire Chief shall be appointed by the Mayor by and with the advice
and consent of the City Council. (1952 Code § 3-11-03)
1-10B-3: POWERS AND DUTIES:
The Fire Chief shall exercise all powers and duties necessary and incidental to those authorized by the Constitution, Federal law, State Code, this Code
and policies and procedures set forth by the Mayor and City Council. (1952 Code § 3-11-04; amd. 2019 Code)
1-10B-4: RECOGNITION OF LOCAL 149 OF INTERNATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF FIREFIGHTERS:
In the event laws of the State are amended in such a manner as to remove the obligation to bargain collectively with firefighters of the Fire Department, the
City will nevertheless continue to bargain with Local 149 of the International Association of Firefighters as to wages, rates of pay, working conditions and
all other terms and conditions of employment until such time as said association is no longer recognized by the City firefighters as their authorized
bargaining agent. The City's continuing bargaining obligation in such event shall be identical to that set forth in Idaho Code title 44, chapter 18, prior to
such amendment, except as modified by any provisions of an applicable collective labor agreement between the City and Local 149. (1952 Code § 3-11-
09)
ARTICLE C. LEGAL DEPARTMENT
1-10C-1: CREATED:
There is hereby created an administrative department of the City to be known as the Office of the City Attorney, which may also be known as the Legal
Department. (2019 Code)
1-10C-2: DIRECTOR OF LEGAL DEPARTMENT:
There is hereby created the Office of the City Attorney, who shall superintend, direct and manage the department and all officers, Deputy City Attorneys,
assistants and employees assigned to and employed for the department and its various divisions. The City Attorney shall be appointed by the Mayor by
and with the advice and consent of the City Council. (Ord. 6-15, 3-10-2015; amd. 2019 Code)
1-10C-3: POWERS AND DUTIES:
The City Attorney shall be the Chief Legal Advisor of the City and shall exercise all powers and duties necessary and incidental to those authorized by the
Constitution, Federal law, State Code, this Code and policies and procedures set forth by the Mayor and City Council. (1952 Code § 3-13-02; amd. 2019
Code)
ARTICLE D. DEPARTMENT OF AVIATION
1-10D-1: CREATED:
There is hereby created an administrative department of the City to be known as the Department of Aviation. (1952 Code § 3-02-01)
1-10D-2: DIRECTOR OF DEPARTMENT:
There is hereby created the Office of Director of Aviation, who shall manage, supervise, superintend and direct the Department of Aviation and all officers,
assistants and employees assigned to and employed for the department and its various divisions. The Director of Aviation is commonly referred to as the
Airport Director or Airport Administrator, and these terms shall be synonymous with the Director of Aviation. The Director shall be appointed by the Mayor
with the advice and consent of the City Council. (1952 Code § 3-02-02; amd. 2019 Code)
1-10D-3: POWERS AND DUTIES:
The Director of Aviation shall exercise all powers and duties necessary and incidental to those authorized by the Constitution, Federal law, State Code,
this Code and policies and procedures set forth by the Mayor and City Council. (1952 Code § 3-02-03; amd. 2019 Code)
ARTICLE E. DEPARTMENT OF PARKS AND RECREATION
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 23/503
1-10E-1: CREATION:
There is hereby created an administrative department within the City to be known as the Boise City Department of Parks and Recreation. (Ord. 42-18, 9-
25-2018)
1-10E-2: DIRECTOR:
There is hereby established the Office of Director, who shall superintend, direct and manage the department in accordance with the directions, orders,
rules and regulations adopted and promulgated by the Parks and Recreation Commission and, as may be required by ordinance, ratified, adopted and
approved by the City Council and Mayor. The said Director shall be appointed by the Mayor by and with the advice and consent of the Council. (Ord. 42-
18, 9-25-2018)
1-10E-3: POWERS; DUTIES:
The Director shall exercise all powers and duties necessary and incidental to those authorized by the Constitution, Federal law, State Code, this Code and
policies and procedures set forth by the Mayor and City Council. (2019 Code)
ARTICLE F. DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC WORKS
1-10F-1: CREATED:
There is hereby created an administrative department of the City to be known as the Department of Public Works. (Ord. 39-16, 10-25-2016)
1-10F-2: DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC WORKS:
There is hereby created the Office of Director of Public Works, who shall superintend, direct and manage the department and all officers, assistants and
employees assigned to and employed for the department and its various divisions. The Director shall be appointed by the Mayor with the consent of the
City Council. (Ord. 39-16, 10-25-2016)
1-10F-3: POWERS AND DUTIES:
The Director of Public Works, in addition to those necessarily or fairly implied in or incidental to or those essential to the powers, duties and functions
hereinafter expressly delegated and specified shall supervise, and be in charge of:
A. The planning, design, construction, management, maintenance and operation of the sewage collection and treatment system.
B. Planning, design, construction, management, maintenance and operation of the geothermal system.
C. Planning, design, construction, management, maintenance and operation of the Municipal irrigation system.
D. Planning, design, construction, management, maintenance and operation of the public streetlight system.
E. Planning, design, construction, maintenance and operation of the drainage and stormwater systems not the responsibility of other entities.
F. Planning and management of solid waste service, including, but not limited to, waste reduction programs and recycling.
G. Planning for, and protection of, groundwater quality.
H. Planning for, and protection of, air quality.
I. Providing technical engineering, inspection and project management support services to other City departments.
J. With concurrence of the Mayor and Council, establish fees necessary to carry out the duties of the department.
K. Billing and collection of City utility fees and charges.
L. Maintaining and repairing assigned City facilities.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 24/503
M. Providing internal security assistance, including operation and maintenance of the security system.
N. Appointment of a City Engineer who shall be a professional engineer licensed by the State.
O. Assume and perform such other duties, functions and services as may be required by ordinance or as assigned by the Council or Mayor. (Ord. 39-16,
10-25-2016)
ARTICLE G. DEPARTMENT OF PLANNING AND DEVELOPMENT SERVICES
1-10G-1: CREATED:
There is hereby created an administrative department of the City to be known as the Department of Planning and Development Services. (1952 Code § 3-
05-01)
1-10G-2: DIRECTOR OF DEPARTMENT:
There is hereby created the Office of the Director of Planning and Development Services, who shall superintend, direct and manage the department and
all officers, assistants and employees assigned to and employed for the department and its various divisions. The Director shall be appointed by the Mayor
by and with the advice and consent of the City Council. (1952 Code § 3-05-02; amd. 2019 Code)
1-10G-3: POWERS AND DUTIES:
The Director of Planning and Development shall exercise all powers and duties necessary and incidental to those authorized by the Constitution, Federal
law, State Code, this Code and policies and procedures set forth by the Mayor and City Council. (2019 Code)
ARTICLE H. DEPARTMENT OF FINANCE AND ADMINISTRATION
1-10H-1: CREATED:
There is hereby created an administrative department of the City to be known as the Department of Finance and Administration. (1952 Code § 3-06-01)
1-10H-2: DIRECTOR OF DEPARTMENT:
There is hereby created the Office of Director of Finance and Administration, who shall superintend, direct and manage the department and all officers,
assistants and employees assigned to and employed for the department and its various divisions. The Director shall be appointed by the Mayor by and
with the advice and consent of the Council. The Director shall serve as City Clerk ex officio and Treasurer ex officio. (1952 Code § 3-06-02; amd. 2019
Code)
1-10H-3: POWERS AND DUTIES:
The Director of Finance and Administration shall exercise all powers and duties necessary and incidental to those authorized by the Constitution, Federal
law, State Code, this Code and policies and procedures set forth by the Mayor and City Council. The Director shall provide financial oversight for the City
and shall oversee internal administrative offices. (1952 Code § 3-06-03; amd. 2019 Code)
ARTICLE I. DEPARTMENT OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
1-10I-1: CREATED:
There is hereby created an administrative department of the City to be known as the Department of Information Technology. (1952 Code § 3-07-01)
1-10I-2: DIRECTOR OF DEPARTMENT:
There is hereby created the Office of the Director of the Information Technology Department, who shall be known as the Chief Information Officer (CIO),
and who shall superintend, direct and manage the department and all officers, assistants and employees assigned to and employed for the department
and its various divisions. The CIO shall be appointed by the Mayor by and with the advice and consent of the City Council. (1952 Code § 3-07-02; amd.
2019 Code)
1-10I-3: POWERS AND DUTIES:
The CIO shall exercise all powers and duties necessary and incidental to those authorized by the Constitution, Federal law, State Code, this Code and
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 25/503
policies and procedures set forth by the Mayor and City Council. (1952 Code § 3-07-03; amd. 2019 Code)
ARTICLE J. DEPARTMENT OF HUMAN RESOURCES
1-10J-1: CREATED:
There is hereby created an administrative department of the City to be known as the Department of Human Resources. (Ord. 24-16, 8-9-2016)
1-10J-2: DIRECTOR OF DEPARTMENT:
There is hereby created the Office of the Director of Human Resources, who shall superintend, direct and manage the department and all officers,
assistants and employees assigned to and employed for the department and its various divisions. The Director shall be appointed by the Mayor by and
with the advice and consent of the Council. (Ord. 24-16, 8-9-2016; amd. 2019 Code)
1-10J-3: POWERS AND DUTIES:
The Director of Human Resources shall exercise all powers and duties necessary and incidental to those authorized by the Constitution, Federal law, State
Code, this Code and policies and procedures set forth by the Mayor and City Council. (Ord. 24-16, 8-9-2016; amd. 2019 Code)
1-10J-4: APPLICANTS FOR CITY EMPLOYMENT, CITY VOLUNTEERS; CRIMINAL HISTORY CHECKS:
A. Pursuant to Idaho Code section 67-3008, the City is authorized to perform and/or request criminal history checks of any applicant volunteer service or
employment, including current employee transfers and promotions within the City. If a criminal history check is needed through the Federal Bureau of
Investigation to screen an applicant or volunteer, the Department of Human Resources shall require each specified applicant or volunteer to be
fingerprinted and shall forward the fingerprints through the Idaho Department of Law Enforcement to the FBI Identification Division for a criminal history
check. Unless otherwise provided for by law, criminal history records shall not be disseminated to a private entity.
B. The Department of Human Resources shall develop guidelines for determining what positions for employment and volunteer service will require a
background check and fingerprinting. The guidelines will include those factors reasonably related to the requirements of that position which may result
in an applicant's disqualification for employment or volunteer service as a result of past criminal activities. (1952 Code § 3-10-02)
1-10J-5: FALSIFYING EXAMINATION; PUNISHMENT:
It shall be unlawful and punishable as a misdemeanor for any person, officer or employee, by him/herself, or by any other person, or in cooperation with
any other person, to defeat, deceive or obstruct any person in respect to his or her right to examination, or to corruptly or falsely mark, grade, estimate or
report upon the examination or proper standing of any person examined, or to furnish to any person examined or to be examined, employed or promoted,
any secret or special information for the purpose of either improving or injuring the prospects, chances or grade of any person examined or to be
examined. No applicant for any examination shall make any false representation as to his or her identity or permit any fraud for the purpose of improving
the prospects of examination; provided, the provisions of this section shall not apply to the holding or conducting of education courses or like training.
Violation of this provision shall be a general misdemeanor and, upon conviction, subject to penalty as provided in section 1-4-1 of this title. (Ord. 24-16, 8-
9-2016; amd. 2019 Code)
ARTICLE K. DEPARTMENT OF ARTS AND HISTORY
1-10K-1: CREATED:
There is hereby created an administrative department within the City to be known as the Department of Arts and History. (1952 Code § 3-12-01)
1-10K-2: DIRECTOR OF DEPARTMENT:
There is hereby established the Office of Director, who shall superintend, direct and manage the department and all officers, assistants and employees
assigned to and employed for the department and its various divisions. The Director shall be appointed by the Mayor and with the advice and consent of
the Council. (1952 Code § 3-12-02; amd. 2019 Code)
1-10K-3: POWERS AND DUTIES:
The Director of Arts and History shall exercise all powers and duties necessary and incidental to those authorized by the Constitution, Federal law, State
Code, this Code and policies and procedures set forth by the Mayor and City Council. (1952 Code § 3-12-03; amd. 2019 Code)
Chapter 11
INITIATIVE AND REFERENDUM
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 26/503
1-11-1: PROCEDURES:
The procedures for initiative and referendum are set forth in Idaho Code title 34. (Ord. 20-15, 6-2-2015, eff. 7-1-2015)
Chapter 12
FINANCIAL PROVISIONS
ARTICLE A. OFFICE OF INTERNAL AUDIT
1-12A-1: CREATED:
There is hereby created a financial administrative unit of the City to be known as Office of Internal Audit. The head of this unit shall be designated as the
Director of Internal Audit (Director). The Director and staff shall be independent of the other departments of the City and shall only be directly accountable
to the public and the City Council for work performed. (1952 Code § 1-09-01)
1-12A-2: APPOINTMENT AND REMOVAL:
A. Appointment Of Director: The Director shall be appointed by a majority vote of the full City Council after input from the Mayor.
B. Removal Of Director: The Director may not be removed from office except for misconduct, inefficiency, incompetence, inability or failure to perform the
duties of such office or negligence in the performance of such duties. In such cases that warrant removal from office, said removal shall be
accomplished only by a resolution adopted in public hearing by a vote of no less than five (5) members of the full City Council; nothing contained herein
shall prevent the Council from eliminating the Office of the Director by the normal ordinance process, which action shall not be considered a removal
for cause, but simply a change in policy by the City.
C. Auditors; Appeal Of Removal: Staff auditors shall be hired by the Director. An auditor may only be removed from office for misconduct, inefficiency,
incompetence, inability or failure to perform the duties of such office or negligence in the performance of such duties as determined by the Director. A
decision by the Director to remove an auditor may be appealed to the City Council within three (3) business days. A vote of no less than five (5)
members of the full City Council is required on appeal to remove an auditor. (Ord. 35-14, 9-16-2014)
1-12A-3: DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES:
A. Compliance: It shall be the duty and responsibility of the Director to review City financial transactions, policies and practices for compliance with the
Idaho Code, this Code and applicable City policies.
B. Annual Work Plan: The Director shall formulate and present to the Council and Mayor an annual work plan of tasks and projects for review and
adoption.
C. Job Description: The Director shall carry out the duties as defined by the job description.
D. Other Assigned Duties: The Director shall carry out any other duties as assigned by the City Council.
E. Findings, Reports: The Director shall communicate findings and reports to the appropriate departments for their input.
F. Fiduciary Responsibility: The Director and audit staff shall have a fiduciary responsibility to the citizens of the City and will, at all times, exercise their
duties with complete impartiality, fairness and objectivity.
G. Deception Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for the Director or any audit staff member to deceive the public or the City Council, in any manner, or to
obstruct or manipulate the audit process, or conspire with others to do the same.
H. Coercion: It shall be unlawful for the Director or any staff member to coerce, threaten, harass, intimidate, influence or obstruct in any manner another
person in the discharge of their responsibilities. (1952 Code § 1-09-03)
1-12A-4: INDEPENDENCE AND ACCOUNTABILITY:
A. Independence: The Director shall, at all times, be totally independent from any other department of the City. Any audits, investigations, findings,
recommendations and requests made by the Office of Internal Audit shall reflect the views of the Director alone.
B. Influencing: No person shall attempt to unduly influence or undermine the independence of the Director or staff in the performance of the duties and
responsibilities set forth in this article. (1952 Code § 1-09-04)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 27/503
1-12A-5: COOPERATION AND ASSISTANCE:
A. Employee Cooperation: All City employees shall be required as a condition of their employment to cooperate fully and truthfully with the Office of
Internal Audit operating within the course and scope of this article, by providing the Director or staff any information, evidence, interviews or other
material as requested.
B. Access: The Director and staff shall have complete access to any and all records maintained and retained by the City necessary to carry out the duties
and functions of the position. This access includes all electronic data or information maintained by the City and allowed by law.
C. Intimidation: It shall be unlawful for any person to directly or indirectly force, or by any threats to person or property, or in any manner wilfully intimidate,
influence, impede, deter, threaten, harass, obstruct or prevent another person from freely, fully and truthfully cooperating with the Office of the Director.
(1952 Code § 1-9-05)
D. Privileges, Confidentiality: Nothing contained herein is intended to waive any privileges or confidentiality that may exist for the protection of the City.
(1952 Code § 1-09-05; amd. 2019 Code)
1-12A-6: REPORTING TO COUNCIL AND PUBLIC:
A. Required: The Director shall report to the Council and Mayor all finding and reports upon the completion of all assignments.
B. Quarterly Summary To City Council: The Director shall provide a quarterly summary to the City Council of all activities conducted by the auditor or his
office.
C. Report Of Activities: The Director shall report any or all activities conducted by the auditor or his office upon the request of the City Council at any time.
D. Quarterly Report To Public: The Director shall report quarterly to the public all activities, as allowed by law, conducted by the auditor or his office. (1952
Code § 1-09-06)
ARTICLE B. PURCHASING
1-12B-1: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
The City takes seriously its authority to spend taxpayer funds to purchase public works construction, goods and services required for the orderly and
efficient operation of the City.
A. Adoption Of Idaho Code Purchasing Laws: In order to promote uniformity and consistency in the City procurement of public works construction, services
and goods, the City adheres to the purchasing by political subdivision laws in Idaho Code as established by the Idaho legislature.
B. Business Operations Manual: The procedures for the implementation of the purchasing laws shall be described in the Business Operations Manual of
the City, as it now exists or as it may from time to time be amended in the future. (1952 Code § 1-11-01)
1-12B-2: REPORTING OF ANTICOMPETITIVE PRACTICES:
When for any reason, collusion or other anticompetitive practices (any act by 1 or more parties seeking or endeavoring to limit or restrict competitive bid
policies) are suspected among any bidders, offerors or proposers, the procuring department shall transmit the relevant facts to the Purchasing Agent and
the City Attorney. (1952 Code § 1-11-02)
1-12B-3: REMEDIES:
A. Authority To Resolve Protested Solicitations And Awards:
1. Right To Protest: In the event a formal level contract is awarded to a bidder/proposer other than the lowest responsive bidder/highest ranking
proposer, any participating bidder/proposer may protest to the City Council through the Purchasing Agent. The protest shall be submitted in writing,
specifying the reason or reasons the proposed award is in error within seven (7) calendar days after transmittal of the notice of intent to award letter.
2. Authority To Resolve Protests: The Purchasing Agent, with concurrence of the department head, or a designee, shall have the authority, prior to the
commencement of an action in court concerning the controversy, to settle and resolve a protest of an aggrieved bidder/proposer, offeror or
contractor, actual or prospective, concerning the solicitation or award of a contract, unless the settlement entails the payment of City funds in excess
of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) or more, in which case it must be approved by the Mayor and City Council.
3. Decision: Unless a protest is withdrawn, the City Council shall either affirm its prior award, modify the award, reject all bids/proposals, or direct staff
to proceed as it directs.
4. Notice Of Decision: A copy of the decision under subsection A3 of this section shall be mailed by certified letter or otherwise furnished immediately
to the protestant and any other party intervening.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 28/503
5. Finality Of Decision: A decision under subsection A3 of this section shall be final and conclusive.
6. Stay Of Procurement During Protests: In the event of a timely protest under subsection A1 of this section, the City shall not proceed further with the
solicitation or with the award of the contract until the City Council considers the contentions raised or the protest is withdrawn.
B. Authority To Debar Or Suspend:
1. Authority: After reasonable notice to the person involved and reasonable opportunity for that person to be heard, the Purchasing Agent, after
consultation with the department head of the using agency and the City Attorney, shall have the authority to debar a person or firm for cause from
consideration for award of contracts. The debarment shall not be for a period of more than three (3) years. The same officer, after consultation with
the department head of the using agency, shall have the authority to suspend a person from consideration for award of contracts if there is probable
cause for debarment. The suspension shall be for a period not exceeding three (3) months.
2. Causes For Debarment Or Suspension: The causes for debarment or suspension include the following:
a. Conviction for commission of a criminal offense as an incident to obtaining or attempting to obtain a public or private contract or subcontract, or in
the performance of such contract or subcontract.
b. Conviction under City, State or Federal Statutes of embezzlement, theft, forgery, bribery, falsification or destruction of records, receiving stolen
property, or any other offense indicating a lack of business integrity or business honesty which currently, seriously and directly affects responsibility
as a City contractor.
c. Conviction under City, State or Federal antitrust statutes arising out of the submission of bids or proposals.
d. Violation of contract provisions, as set forth below, of a character which is regarded by the Purchasing Agent to be so serious as to justify
debarment action:
(1) Failure without good cause to perform in accordance with the specifications or within the time limit provided in the contract; or
(2) A recent record of failure to perform or of unsatisfactory performance in accordance with the terms of one or more contracts; provided, that
failure to perform or unsatisfactory performance caused by acts beyond the control of the contractor shall not be considered to be a basis for
debarment.
e. Any other cause the Purchasing Agent determines to be so serious and compelling as to affect responsibility as a City contractor, including
debarment by another governmental entity.
3. Decision: The Purchasing Agent shall issue a written decision to debar or suspend. The decision shall:
a. State the reasons for the action taken; and
b. Inform the debarred or suspended person involved of its rights to administrative review of the City Council.
4. Finality Of Decision: A copy of the decision under subsection B3 of this section shall be final and conclusive. The debarred or suspended person
may appeal to the City Council within fourteen (14) days of notification of the decision by filing a notice of appeal with the City Clerk.
C. Authority To Resolve Contract And Breach Of Contract Controversies:
1. Applicability: This subsection applies to controversies between the City and a contractor and which arise under, or by virtue of, a contract between
them. This includes, without limitation, controversies based upon breach of contract, mistake, misrepresentation or other cause for contract
modification or rescission.
2. Authority: The Purchasing Agent, with the concurrence of the department head or designee, is authorized, prior to commencement of an action in
court concerning the controversy, to settle and resolve a controversy described in subsection C1 of this section, unless the settlement entails the
payment of City funds of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) or more, in which case it must be approved by the Mayor and City Council.
3. Decision: If such a controversy is not resolved by mutual agreement, the Purchasing Agent shall promptly issue a decision in writing. The decision
shall:
a. State the reasons for the action taken; and
b. Inform the contractor of its right to administrative review by the City Council.
4. Notice Of Decision: A copy of the decision under subsection C3 of this section shall be mailed or otherwise furnished immediately to the contractor.
5. Finality Of Decision: The decision under subsection C3 of this section shall be final and conclusive. The contractor may submit a written appeal to
the City Council within seven (7) working days of notification of the decision by filing a notice of appeal with the City Clerk.
6. Failure To Render Timely Decision: If the Purchasing Agent does not issue the written decision required under subsection C3 of this section within
one hundred twenty (120) calendar days after written request for a final decision, or within such longer period as may be agreed upon by the parties,
then the contractor may proceed as if an adverse decision had been received.
D. Remedies Prior To An Award: If prior to award it is determined that a solicitation or proposed award of a contract is in violation of law, then the
solicitation or proposed award shall be:
1. Canceled; or
2. Revised to comply with the law.
E. Remedies After An Award: If after an award it is determined that a solicitation or award of a contract is in violation of law, then:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 29/503
1. If the person awarded the contract has not acted fraudulently nor in bad faith nor been party to the illegality:
a. The contract may be ratified and affirmed, provided it is determined by City Attorney and the Purchasing Agent that doing so is in the best interest
of the City; or
b. The contract may be terminated and the person awarded the contract shall be compensated for the actual expenses reasonably incurred under
the contract prior to termination.
2. If the person awarded the contract has acted fraudulently or in bad faith:
a. The contract may be declared null and void; or
b. The contract may be ratified and affirmed if it is determined by the Purchasing Agent such action is in the best interests of the City, without
prejudice to the City rights to such damages as may be appropriate. (1952 Code § 1-11-03)
ARTICLE C. CLAIMS; WARRANTS
1-12C-1: FILING CLAIMS:
Any party having claims or accounts against the City, except refund payments or accounts from funds or monies held in trust for performance guarantee
purposes only, shall file the same with the Clerk at least three (3) business days before the regular meeting of the Council; said claims or accounts shall be
in the form of a bill of particulars, stating the item in detail and for what and when the same accrued. When on account or claim, or any item thereof, has
once been disallowed, in whole or part, by the Council, the same shall not be again presented to the Council, and in no case shall such account be
presented to any Council other than the one that has passed on the same; and every claim or account when presented shall contain all items of accounts
and demands which the party claims against the City, up to the time of filing the same. (1952 Code § 1-12-01)
1-12C-2: PAYMENT OF CLAIMS BY WARRANT:
All claims and accounts allowed against the City shall be paid by a warrant upon the Treasurer, to be drawn by the Mayor and countersigned by the Clerk,
or on a check signed by the Mayor and Treasurer. (1952 Code § 1-12-02)
ARTICLE D. CITY TREASURY
1-12D-1: DAILY DEPOSITS:
Every officer of the City receiving money in his official capacity for, or on behalf of, the City, shall pay each day over to the Treasurer, or designated
depository, the amount received by him during the day, except where the public monies of a depositing unit at any one time are less than one thousand
dollars ($1,000.00) and in no event less often than once per week; and every officer so depositing money, or any person depositing money, with the
Treasurer to the credit of the City, shall be responsible for assuring that monies are allocated to the correct revenue account and that the documentation
accompanying the deposit is accurate. (1952 Code § 1-14-01)
ARTICLE E. SURETY BONDS
1-12E-1: GUARANTEE IN LIEU OF SURETY BONDS:
Whenever any chapter, section or provision of this Code, and as hereafter amended, or any rule, regulations or ordinance printed and contained in a book
in Code form now ratified, adopted and in force, and as hereafter amended, requires a surety bond as a condition: a) of acceptance of a plat; b) for the
approval of a grant for a permit or license; or c) for the permission to do any thing, act or work, the Council may, in lieu of a surety bond, require another
type of guarantee sufficient to secure the actual and faithful observance and performance of: a) all conditions and requirements therein imposed by said
plat, permit, license or contract, or thing, act or work approved; b) all ordinances of the City; and c) the duties required by ordinances, rules or regulations
now in force or as hereinafter enacted, ratified or adopted and otherwise do, perform and observe all provisions and conditions of any approval, permit,
license or contract. (1952 Code § 1-19-01)
1-12E-2: SECURITY OF THING, ACT OR WORK APPROVED:
The guarantee in lieu of a surety bond acceptable to secure the actual performance and observance of the plat, permit, license or contract, or thing, act or
work approved by the Council may be the following: (1952 Code § 1-19-02)
A. A general undertaking in a form similar to that required by Idaho Code section 12-613, and acknowledged by and before an officer authorized by law to
take acknowledgements in order for such undertaking to be recorded. (1952 Code § 1-19-02; amd. 2019 Code)
B. The assignment or pledge of savings passbooks, time certificates or certificates of deposit of a bank or savings and loan association authorized to do
business in the State.
C. The pledge, assignment or other act of rendering custody to the City in and to securities, bills or notes of the United States of America, or the bonds of
the State, Municipal corporations or local improvement districts. (1952 Code § 1-19-02)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 30/503
ARTICLE F. PERCENT FOR PUBLIC ART
1-12F-1: STATEMENT OF PURPOSE:
In order to beautify public areas, enhance the quality of life for City citizens, attract tourism, promote City services and the purposes of participating
departments through the use of public art, provide a mechanism to meaningfully involve citizens in the design of their environment, educate the public
about City departments and public art, and encourage businesses to locate within the City, thus expanding the City economic base, it is the policy of the
City to dedicate one percent (1%) of the total cost of all eligible capital improvement projects to fund art in public places in the City. Associated project
management, maintenance and education costs will be funded through the regular City budget process, not to exceed four tenths of a percent (0.4%) of
the total cost of all eligible capital improvement projects. (1952 Code § 1-25-01)
1-12F-2: ELIGIBLE CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT PROJECTS DEFINED:
A. Eligible Projects; Exclusions: Eligible capital improvement projects include all City projects or portions of projects, including construction, renovation or
remodeling expenses that are not specifically excluded. Costs excluded as ineligible for the program are:
1. Engineering, architect and other design and planning costs for capital projects, permits paid to another entity, building demolition costs, relocation
costs of tenants, environmental testing or "indirect" cost charges, such as interest during construction, advertising and legal fees;
2. Project costs for which art is not eligible by statute, law or regulation;
3. Major repair, renovation and maintenance projects that would not be capitalized under the City fixed asset policy definition;
4. Any projects or project cost components specifically excluded by the City Council.
B. Capital Improvement Projects By Other Entities: Eligible capital projects include capital improvement projects that are developed by other entities and
leased back to the City.
C. Development Cooperatively With Other Entities: Capital projects that are developed and implemented cooperatively with other public or private entities
are eligible projects. The City will encourage public art funding partnerships between the City and other public and private entities with which the City
cooperatively develops capital projects. The City shall provide funding for public art equivalent to one percent (1%) of the City funding of the eligible
project budget. The entity partners will be encouraged to provide one percent (1%) public arts funding for the portion of the eligible capital costs for
which they are responsible. If the entity partner chooses not to fund the public art associated with their portion of the project funding, the City Council
may choose to contribute the funding to achieve one percent (1%) of the total eligible project costs.
D. Ownership: All completed artworks commissioned or purchased through this program will be owned, insured and maintained by the City.
E. Other Sources: The "Percent for Public Art" Program does not preclude funding or the acquisition or commission of other public art for Municipal
property through other sources or mechanisms, including contributions, donations or grants. (1952 Code § 1-25-02)
1-12F-3: PROJECT MANAGEMENT, PLANNING, MAINTENANCE AND EDUCATION:
A. Project Management:
1. The Department of Arts and History (the "department") shall designate a person or persons to be responsible, in consultation with the respective City
departments, for the artist selection process, accessioning, deaccessioning, maintenance and conservation for all works of art in the Public Art
Program under the direction of the department, the Mayor and the City Council. The staff person may be a full time City employee or a temporary
contract employee.
2. Associated project management costs include, but are not limited to, the selection process, printing, postage, artist proposal fees, meetings, office
supplies, overhead, transportation and personnel.
B. Planning:
1. The department shall prepare an annual report and plan of all upcoming and in-progress art projects in cooperation with City department heads and
shall submit it to the City Council. The plan will be coordinated with the budget planning process. Capital project eligibility will be evaluated and
resolved in the budgeting and planning process.
2. All General Fund percent for art allocations shall be pooled and the department shall prioritize project opportunities based on criteria approved by
City Council and incorporated into the administrative guidelines. The City Council shall approve project opportunities prior to implementation.
3. All enterprise funded percent for art allocations will be pooled within the fund and in the department that generated them (Public Works or Airport)
and project opportunities will be prioritized by the relevant department and the Department of Arts and History based on the priorities agreed upon
between the two. The City Council will approve project opportunities prior to implementation.
4. The Percent for Public Art Program shall be consistent with the City Strategic Plan, Comprehensive Plan, goals and purposes, zoning and
subdivision ordinances, and allowed land uses.
C. Maintenance: All works commissioned and purchased as part of the Percent for Public Art Program shall be maintained in perpetuity, unless
deaccessioned from the collection. This includes regular care, such as, but not limited to, cleaning, resurfacing and replacement of parts, as well as
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 31/503
care in response to vandalism. The City will insure all works. The department is responsible for the maintenance of the public art collection. Other City
departments may assist in the maintenance for public art located in facilities under their direction, such as the Boise Airport and Parks and Recreation.
D. Education: Activities and collateral that support public awareness and understanding of the City public art collection include, but are not limited to,
walking tours, printed materials, lectures, website development and website maintenance. (1952 Code § 1-25-03)
1-12F-4: GENERAL REQUIREMENTS FOR ART:
A. Location: All works of public art will be located in a public place with public visibility and impact.
B. Professional Artist: A professional artist will be selected through a public selection process to consult, conceptualize and/or design and fabricate an art
component for the identified capital project.
C. Standards And Guidelines: The department shall adopt standards and guidelines for the development and selection of artists and projects. City
departments and relevant boards will be involved in the selection process. Boards and department heads will approve selection panel
recommendations of proposed artist or artwork before presentation to the City Council.
D. Existing Or Newly Commission Artwork: Works purchased through the Percent for Public Art Program may be existing artwork or newly commissioned
artwork.
E. Types: Works of art may be an integral part of a structure, attached to a structure or detached from a structure within or outside of it.
F. Professional Facilities: If deemed appropriate by the department and the germane City department, Percent for Public Art Funds for a capital
improvement project may be used to create professional facilities for the exhibition of public art and the associated costs of changing exhibitions,
facilities maintenance, professional curatorial, technical and preparator staff. If this option were utilized, the selection of a professional artist through a
public selection process as set forth in subsection B of this section would not be required. Instead, the department, in consultation with the germane
City department, would recommend an appropriate selection or bidding process for the facility design/fabrication, the method or choice of professional
arts management of the changing exhibitions, and artist selection process. The City Council shall approve this option through review of the annual
report/plan. (1952 Code § 1-25-04)
1-12F-5: SOURCE OF FUNDS:
A. Public Art Component Budget: During budget development or during interim budget processes related to individual capital projects, the public art budget
for each City capital improvement project shall be identified and transmitted to the City Council. Funds for the public art component will be appropriated
from the fund within which the capital improvement project is budgeted.
B. Calculation: The public art component budget for each capital improvement project shall be calculated by multiplying one percent (1%) times the
project's eligible costs. The budget for the public art component shall be calculated for the budgeted eligible capital improvement project costs at the
time of project approval by the City Council. The City Council may modify the public art component budget if during planning or implementation of the
project, the eligible capital project costs significantly vary from the budgeted costs at time of approval.
C. Consideration During Review, Approval Process: The public art component budget for each project shall be considered during the review and approval
process for capital projects. The public art component calculated in this section shall be included in the approved City capital improvement project
budget, unless the City Council chooses to modify the amount. Approval of the Capital Improvement Project budget or of the Capital Improvement
Program by the City Council shall, by policy, include and entail approval of the public art component associated with the capital improvement project or
Capital Improvement Program, unless specifically modified by the City Council. As capital projects may require more than one year to implement, all
unexpended project funds will be eligible to be rebudgeted each year, until project completion.
D. Associated Project Management, Maintenance And Other Costs:
1. For each eligible capital improvement project, an additional amount to fund projected project management, maintenance and other associated
implementation and operating costs ("associated costs") of the public art component, as defined in section 1-12F-3 of this article, shall be identified
during the City budget development or interim budget processes. The total project management and other costs for each project shall not exceed
four tenths of a percent (0.4%) of the total cost of the eligible capital improvement project.
2. The department shall prepare a budget request for submission for consideration by the City Council within the two (2) year budget process to
appropriately address the maintenance needs of the City public art collection. Ongoing maintenance costs for public art, beyond that provided by the
"associated costs" for new projects, shall be considered for funding within the two (2) year budget as a base municipal cost. The "associated costs"
approved for public art projects during a budget year shall not exceed the public arts project's budget for that budget period which is approved by
City Council within the City two (2) year operating and capital budget. The City Council may amend the associated project management,
maintenance and other costs for public arts projects through the City interim budget process.
a. The "associated costs" shall be used for project management to plan and implement the project, for annually required maintenance of City owned
art, and for general administration costs related to arts projects, including, but not limited to, costs related to the selection of art, siting,
maintenance, deaccessioning and community education as specified in section 1-12F-3 of this article.
b. The "associated costs" for all proposed public art component project budgets will be identified and reviewed within the City budget development
process and will compete for funding with other budget requests and priorities. (1952 Code § 1-25-05)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 32/503
Chapter 13
COMPREHENSIVE LIABILITY PLAN
1-13-1: PURPOSE OF CHAPTER:
The purpose of this chapter is to establish policies with respect to a comprehensive liability plan and to give specific and general authority to a Risk
Manager and a Safety Coordinator to act as authorized in all matters relating to risk management and safety. (1952 Code § 1-16-01)
1-13-2: RISK MANAGEMENT POLICY:
The City policy with respect to the management of all risks of accidental loss shall have as its objectives:
A. General:
1. The protection of the City against the financial consequences of accidental losses which are catastrophic in nature.
2. The minimization of the total long term cost to the City of all activities related to the identification, prevention and control of accidental losses and
their consequences.
3. The preservation of City assets and public service capabilities from loss, destruction or depletion.
4. Creation of a system of internal procedures providing a constant reassessment of fluctuating exposure to loss, loss bearing capacity and available
financial resources, including insurance.
5. The establishment, to the extent possible, of an exposure free work and service environment in which City personnel, as well as members of the
public, can enjoy safety and security in the course of their daily pursuits.
6. Providing for periodic reevaluation of the City Risk Management Program.
7. Compliance with any Federal, State or local laws, rules and regulations affecting the City handling of risk.
B. Risk Retention:
1. With regard to risks of accidental loss, it shall be the City policy to self-insure all losses which occur with predictable frequency, and which will not
have a significant impact on the City fiscal position.
2. As a general guideline, the City will self-insure progressively upward to the extent that self-insurance is cost effective, does not endanger the City
fiscal stability, and the City risk management capabilities are more fully developed and demonstrated. Council approval will be obtained for any
increases in level of self-insurance. Exceptions to this guideline will be allowed:
a. Whenever certain necessary services can be obtained only by purchase of insurance.
b. When the City is obligated by contract or law to purchase insurance and no alternate method is acceptable.
c. When a higher level of risk retention proves both prudent and fiscally sound.
d. When deductibles or noninsurance do not result in long term economics. (1952 Code § 1-16-02)
1-13-3: RISK MANAGER AUTHORITY AND RESPONSIBILITY:
The Risk Manager shall be appointed by the Mayor. The Risk Manager shall have authority and responsibility for:
A. Information: Compilation of information leading to the identification and measurement of all risks of accidental loss.
B. Techniques: Selection of appropriate risk management techniques for resolving exposure problems, i.e.: 1) risk assumption; 2) risk reduction; 3) risk
retention; 4) risk transfer; or 5) other systems, as appropriate, including the purchase of insurance.
C. Information System: Developing and maintaining an information system in coordination with existing systems for timely and accurate recording and
reporting of losses, claims, insurance premiums and other risk related costs and information.
D. Allocations: Allocation of insurance premiums, uninsured losses and other risk costs to the budgetary units when necessary and appropriate.
E. Coordination: Coordination between the City and its insurance agents, brokers, underwriters and adjusters.
F. Risk Aspects: Coordinating information and acting in an advisory capacity with regard to risk aspects of security, contracts and other legal documents
and legislation.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 33/503
G. Training: Conduct training in risk management for appropriate City employees and fund training and travel costs for attending risk management, loss
control or other municipal insurance programs.
H. Supervise Costs: Supervise all costs in defending claims against the City. Should legal counsel outside the City Attorney's Office be retained by the
City, the City Attorney shall supervise all such outside counsel. (1952 Code § 1-16-03)
1-13-4: PURCHASE OF INSURANCE:
A. Procurement: The procurement of all insurance for the City will be coordinated by the Risk Manager through the Division of Purchasing.
B. When To Purchase: Insurance with limits equal to the maximum foreseeable loss shall be purchased when the potential loss exposure exceeds the
retention levels established by the Council, and when such insurance is available on a fiscally sound basis.
C. Source: Insurance shall be purchased from any source determined to be in the best interests of the City.
D. Qualifications: Insurance shall only be purchased from those insurers licensed by the State and, where practical, rated Best's A+11 or higher. (1952
Code § 1-16-04)
1-13-5: REEVALUATION OF RISK MANAGEMENT PROGRAM:
Periodically, with the approval of the Council, the Risk Manager shall contract with a risk management consulting firm who shall review and evaluate the
City Risk Management Program and make suggestions for improvement. (1952 Code § 1-16-05)
1-13-6: DIVISION OF SAFETY AND SAFETY COORDINATOR:
A. Created: There is hereby created a Division of Safety of the City. The Division of Safety shall be supervised and administered by the Safety Coordinator.
The Division of Safety shall be attached to the Finance Department, Risk Management Division. (1952 Code § 1-16-06)
B. Duties:
1. The Safety Coordinator shall develop and administer an Occupational Safety and Health Program for the City. The Safety Coordinator shall promote
and coordinate the safe use of property and equipment, as well as perform such other related duties as might be assigned by the Mayor, Council or
the Risk Manager.
2. In addition to the duties enumerated above, the Safety Coordinator shall:
a. Develop Citywide programs to promote safety awareness and training of employee and supervisors in safe work habits.
b. Administer the City Workers' Compensation Program.
c. Maintain comprehensive records of accident/injury and equipment damage.
d. Perform statistical analysis to determine trends, problem areas and overall safety performance.
e. When necessary, conduct investigations of accident/injury to determine causes and enhance the establishment of preventive measures.
f. Develop Citywide policies and procedures relative to safety and loss prevention, as well as assist departments in developing policies and
procedures specific to their needs.
g. Conduct periodic inspections of City facilities and note corrective measures required to eliminate physical hazards. Also conduct follow up to
assure hazards have been eliminated.
h. Make periodic reports to the Mayor, Council and department heads.
i. Advise all officials, department heads, superintendents, supervisors and foremen on matters of safety pertaining to their supervision.
j. Use all means available to stimulate and to maintain the interest of the employees in the Safety Program.
k. Recommend the type of personal protective equipment purchased by the departments.
l. Coordinate with, and assist, the City Risk Manager, by any means available, to reduce or control losses from claims against the City. (1952 Code
§ 1-16-07)
1-13-7: DEPARTMENTAL SAFETY COMMITTEE:
Department heads shall have the prime responsibility for assuring a safe work environment and development of departmental safety program. Each
department head shall create departmental safety committees as appropriate. The Safety Coordinator shall be an ex officio member of all departmental
safety committees. Each departmental representative shall be of supervisor status and shall be appointed by the department head of the affected
department. The departmental safety committees shall:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 34/503
A. Liaison: Maintain liaison with the Safety Coordinator as required to be fully informed of a Citywide safety issue.
B. Assistance: Assist the department heads in sponsoring meetings, initiating programs, planning activities, and using any other means to develop and
maintain employee awareness in safety.
C. Training: Promote, coordinate and may conduct safety training courses for employees.
D. Manual: Recommend and assist the department head in developing a departmental safety rules manual covering specific work procedures for that
department/division not covered in the general safety manual.
E. Monitor: Monitor proper application and enforcement of all Citywide and departmental safety policies.
F. Review Accidents: Review accidents within their department and make recommendations to the department head on work procedures, safety
equipment or training needs to correct safety hazards. (1952 Code § 1-16-08)
Chapter 14
RECORDS MANAGEMENT POLICIES AND PROCEDURES
1-14-1: DEFINITION OF CITY RECORDS:
All papers, correspondence, memoranda, accounts, reports, maps, plans, photographs, sound and video recordings, files, microform, magnetic or paper
tape, punched card or other documents, regardless of physical form or characteristic, which have been or shall be created, received, filed or recorded by
any City office or department or its lawful successor, or officials thereof, in pursuance of law or ordinance or in the conduct, transaction or performance of
any business, duty or function of public business, whether or not confidential or restricted in use, are hereby declared to be records of the City, and shall
be created, maintained and disposed of in accordance with the provisions of this chapter or procedures authorized by it and in no other manner. Materials
acquired solely for reference, exhibit or display and stocks of publications shall not constitute records for purposes of this chapter. (1952 Code § 1-23-01)
1-14-2: CITY RECORDS DECLARED PUBLIC PROPERTY:
All City records, as defined in section 1-14-1 of this chapter, are hereby declared to be property of the City. No City official or employee has, by virtue of his
or her position, any personal or property right to such records even though he or she may have developed or compiled them. The unauthorized
destruction, removal from files or private use of such records is prohibited. (1952 Code § 1-23-02)
1-14-3: POLICY:
It is hereby declared to be the policy of the City to provide for efficient, economical and effective controls over the creation, distribution, organization,
maintenance, use and disposition of all City records through a comprehensive system of integrated procedures for the management of records from their
creation to their ultimate disposition.
A. Periodically, the City Clerk or designee shall review or examine filing systems in each department/division, make transfers of records, arrange for
disposition of outdated records and otherwise assist City officers in complying with the City records policy.
B. Two (2) copies of each final City report and study reproduced in Central Services is to be mailed to the Records Management Division for depositing at
the City Record Center. (1952 Code § 1-23-03)
1-14-4: RECORDS MANAGEMENT DIVISION ESTABLISHED:
There is hereby established a Records Management Division. The City Clerk is responsible for directing the division and coordinating records
management operations among the City departments. (1952 Code § 1-23-04)
1-14-5: CITY CLERK DESIGNEE:
A. Required: The City Clerk shall name a designee, who shall administer the Records Management Division and shall be responsible for Citywide files
management and the direction and control of the City Records Disposition Program. (1952 Code § 1-23-05)
B. Duties Of Designee: The City Clerk designee shall have the following duties, and others, as assigned by the City Clerk:
1. Plan, formulate and prescribe basic files management and records disposition policies, systems, standards and procedures.
2. Prepare records retention and disposition schedules in cooperation with department heads for all City departments; define and identify vital,
historical and/or permanent records; and establish retention periods for all records. Retention periods shall be no shorter than desired by the
originating office, but shall be as long as deemed necessary by the City Clerk and City Attorney.
3. Review schedules annually and update or amend as needed.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 35/503
4. Coordinate the Citywide files management and records disposition programs and report annually to the City Clerk on program effectiveness in each
City department.
5. Provide records management advice and assistance to all City departments, by preparation of a policies and procedures manual and by on site
consultation.
6. Develop, disseminate, coordinate files maintenance, records disposition procedures, and computer assisted retrieval programs, including, but not
limited to, those prescribed by this chapter, in order to meet the current and long term information needs of the City.
7. Train departmental records coordinators and other personnel in the fundamentals of records management and their duties in the Records
Management Program.
8. Implement at the proper time such actions as destruction, and transfers that are required by records schedules.
9. Establish and monitor compliance with standards for filing and storage equipment in all City departments.
10. Suggest departmental changes to enable management to realize the greatest efficiency and effectiveness in their records management programs.
11. Establish, in cooperation with other responsible City officials, a disaster plan for each City department and the archives to ensure maximum
availability of records for reestablishing operations quickly and with minimum disruption and expense.
12. Develop procedures to ensure the preservation of the historically valuable records of the City. (1952 Code § 1-23-06)
1-14-6: CITY DEPARTMENT HEADS RESPONSIBILITIES:
All City department heads are responsible for the implementation and operation of effective file operations, records transfers and dispositions, and other
activities in accordance with the provisions of this chapter within their areas of responsibility. They shall designate records coordinators within their
departments and provide the City Clerk designee the names of such designees. (1952 Code § 1-23-07)
1-14-7: RECORDS COORDINATORS RESPONSIBILITIES:
The Records Coordinator in each office and/or department is responsible for providing coordination between the City Clerk designee and personnel in his
or her office to ensure compliance with the provisions of this chapter. This responsibility shall include supervising the application of records schedules
within the office or department. (1952 Code § 1-23-08)
1-14-8: CITY OFFICES TO USE RECORDS SCHEDULES:
All City departments shall adopt records retention and disposition schedules and destroy, transfer or otherwise dispose of records in accordance with
policies set forth by the records schedules. (1952 Code § 1-23-09)
1-14-9: DEVELOPMENT OF RECORDS RETENTION AND DISPOSITION SCHEDULES:
A. Retention periods to be included in records schedules shall be submitted by the City Clerk designee to the City Attorney, who shall notify the City Clerk
designee within ten (10) working days of the approval or of any objection to a retention period. At the expiration of the ten (10) day period, if no
objection has been submitted, the records schedule shall be adopted by resolution and shall have full force as sufficient authorization for records
destruction or other action. If objection is made, the City Clerk designee shall determine a retention period satisfactory to the office or department
concerned, and the City Attorney.
B. When a records retention and disposition schedule is adopted by resolution, it shall thenceforth constitute full authority to transfer, microfilm, image,
prepare for destruction or take other actions, with respect to City records. The City Council hereby directs that such action be taken by the City Clerk
designee or under his or her supervision. The City Clerk designee shall notify in writing the department, State Historical Society and the City Council of
intended destruction, as required by law. (1952 Code § 1-23-10)
1-14-10: ONE TIME DESTRUCTION OF OBSOLETE RECORDS:
Prior to the implementation of the Records Management Program for a department, a one time destruction of obsolete records of that department may be
made by the department, under the supervision of the City Clerk designee. Prior to such destruction, the City Clerk designee shall submit lists of records to
be destroyed to the City Clerk and City Attorney, who shall give notice within ten (10) working days of any records they believe should not be destroyed,
and such records shall be retained for a period suggested by them. The City Clerk designee shall also submit notice as required by law to the State
Historical Society and the City Council. Obsolete records shall include those no longer created by the office or department and no longer are needed for
administrative, legal, fiscal or other research purposes. (1952 Code § 1-23-11)
1-14-11: ARCHIVES:
The archival operation shall utilize one or more buildings to store inactive records; to ensure the security of such records from deterioration, theft or
damage during the period of storage; and to permit fast, efficient retrieval of information from stored records. (1952 Code § 1-23-12)
1-14-12: PRESERVATION OF PERMANENT RECORDS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 36/503
The City Clerk designee shall develop procedures to ensure the permanent preservation of the historically valuable records of the City. The City Clerk
designee shall provide housing for such records in a Municipal facility and in such manner that the records, unless their use is restricted by law or
regulation, are open to the public for research purposes. In no circumstances shall the permanent records of the City be transferred to private individuals,
to private historical societies or museums, or to private or public colleges or universities. (1952 Code § 1-23-13)
1-14-13: NONCURRENT RECORDS NOT TO BE MAINTAINED IN OFFICE FILES:
Records no longer required to support current operations of the City shall be transferred to less costly off site storage, or be destroyed, when such action
is indicated by an approved records schedule. Such records shall not be maintained in active office files or equipment. (1952 Code § 1-23-14)
1-14-14: RECORDS USING PHOTOGRAPHIC AND DIGITAL MEDIA:
A. Authorized: The City may reproduce and retain documents in a photographic, digital or other nonpaper medium. The medium in which a document is
retained shall accurately reproduce the document in paper form during the period for which the document must be retained and shall preclude
unauthorized alteration of the document.
B. Film Quality Standards: If the medium chosen for retention is photographic, all film used must meet the quality standards of the American National
Standards Institute (ANSI).
C. Digital Resolution: If the medium chosen for retention is digital, the medium must provide for reproduction on paper at a resolution of at least two
hundred (200) dots per inch.
D. Original Public Records: A document retained by the City in any form or medium permitted under this section shall be deemed an original public record
for all purposes. A reproduction or copy of such a document, certified by the City Clerk, shall be deemed to be a transcript or certified copy of the
original and shall be admissible before any court or administrative hearing.
E. Disposition Of Original Paper Document: Once a paper document is retained in a nonpaper medium as authorized by this section, the original paper
document may be disposed of or returned to the sender, except in the case of permanent records, as defined in Idaho Code section 50-907. Paper
originals of permanent records shall be retained by the City in perpetuity, or may be transferred to the State Historical Society's permanent records
repository upon resolution of the City Council. (1952 Code § 1-23-15)
1-14-15: ACCESSIBILITY OF RECORDS ON MICROFILM OR DIGITAL MEDIA:
The public is hereby given identical access to records on microfilm or digital media to which they would be entitled under law if the records were in any
other medium. A reasonable fee is to be charged for reproduction of official or unofficial copies from records on microfilm or digital media. (1952 Code § 1-
23-16)
1-14-16: PUBLIC DISCLOSURE OF LICENSING RECORDS:
A. Release Of Records: Except as provided in subsection B of this section, the City Clerk or her/his designee is authorized to release or disclose to parties
other than those to whom the record pertains all information received by or retained by the City Clerk's Office, including names, addresses and criminal
records (other than NCIC reports and Ada County arrest/nonarrest records) of applicants, licensees, childcare operators, childcare workers, childcare
volunteers and juvenile childcare workers, a childcare facility's owners, officers and chief agents, if any, and persons residing in a childcare facility.
(1952 Code § 1-23-17)
B. Exceptions: The City Clerk or her/his designee shall not disclose or release the following:
1. Any personal information, including, but not limited to, parentage, race, religion, sex, height, weight, tax identification number, social security number,
financial worth or medical condition;
2. Reports and correspondence received from the State Department of Health and Welfare or a similar agency of another state relating to child
protection matters;
3. Complaints, reports and records concerning incidents which the City Clerk's Office verifies are unfounded or unsubstantiated, or do not fall within the
purview of duties assigned the City Clerk's Office by ordinance;
4. Investigatory records of a law enforcement agency, as required by Idaho Code section 74-124. (Ord. 31-15, 7-28-2015)
C. Requests For Information Requirements: The City Clerk or her/his designee may require that requests for information contained in the records of the
City Clerk's Office be made in writing, may require the name and address of the requesting party and may rely on requests submitted by facsimile
transmission. All such written requests shall be retained and are subject to disclosure under the State Public Records Act upon proper request. (1952
Code § 1-23-17)
1-14-17: INSPECTION, COPIES OF CITY DOCUMENTS; FEES:
Every officer having the custody of an instrument, paper or document which is required by Statute of this State or by ordinance of this City to be made,
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 37/503
kept and maintained, shall, upon the request and demand of a citizen, permit a citizen to inspect such instrument, paper or document, under the
supervision and such reasonable rules and regulations as shall be prescribed by that officer having custody of such instrument, paper or document.
Unless otherwise specified, department heads shall be the custodians of all records, reports and documents within their respective departments. At no
time shall such officer of the City ever authorize a citizen to remove such instrument, paper or document from his immediate presence. Requests for
copying or inspection of documents shall be processed in a manner consistent with provisions of the Idaho Code regarding public records. Except as
provided in subsection 1-14-16A of this chapter, no instrument, paper or document shall be inspected or copied by the public which is exempted from
disclosure by Idaho Code. Fees charged the public for copies of public records shall be promulgated pursuant to Idaho Code section 74-102. The City
Council shall adopt the fee schedule by resolution if it finds that it is consistent with Idaho Code section 74-102, or as that section may be amended. (Ord.
31-15, 7-28-2015)
Title 2
BOARDS, COMMISSIONS, COMMITTEES
Chapter 1
RULES, REGULATIONS AND REQUIREMENTS
2-1-1: SCOPE:
It is hereby determined by the City Council that a single, cohesive and consistent policy is required to order the relationship of all City boards and
commissions pursuant to this Code and State law. (1952 Code § 2-01-01)
2-1-2: APPOINTMENTS:
Unless otherwise provided, all appointments to boards or commissions which shall be permanent boards or commissions shall be made by the Mayor, with
the consent of the City Council. All members of boards or commissions may be removed from service on such boards and commissions in a like manner
as is provided for their appointment. (1952 Code § 2-01-05; amd. 2019 Code)
2-1-3: RESIDENCY REQUIREMENT:
Unless otherwise provided by this Code, members of every City board or commission must be, at the time of their appointment and throughout the tenure
of their membership, residents of the City, however, it is provided herein that one member of a board and commission may be a resident of Ada County
who resides within Boise City/Ada County area of impact, as that document may, from time to time, be amended, except as provided for by sections 2-5-3
and 2-15-1 of this title. (Ord. 7-14, 2-4-2014)
2-1-4: DUTIES SPECIFIED:
Unless specific activities or duties are enumerated elsewhere in this Code, all City boards and commissions shall operate in an advisory capacity only to
the Mayor and the City Council. Any activities, duties or responsibilities delegated by permanent boards and commissions shall be by ordinance and not
otherwise. (1952 Code § 2-01-02)
2-1-5: COMPENSATION:
Unless otherwise provided in this Code, all members of any City boards and commissions shall serve without compensation. However, actual and
necessary expenses may be allowed with the prior approval of the Mayor and City Council. (1952 Code § 2-01-03)
2-1-6: ORGANIZATION; REPORTS TO COUNCIL:
A. Unless otherwise provided in this Code, each City board or commission shall provide its own manner of organizing its manner of doing business,
including, but not limited to, the regularity of its meetings.
B. Each City board or commission shall provide minutes of its meetings to the City Council after each regular or special meeting of such board or
commission. Each City board or commission shall maintain such records as are required by law, provided for in the internal organization of the board or
commission or as the Mayor or City Council may from time to time require or request. (1952 Code § 2-01-04)
2-1-7: RESIGNATIONS OR VACANCIES:
Should any member of any City board or commission resign or should a vacancy on any City board or commission become available, a replacement board
or commission member shall be appointed in a manner consistent with this chapter to fill out the term of office for that originally provided for the member
resigning or vacating office on such board or commission. (1952 Code § 2-01-07)
Chapter 2
AIRPORT COMMISSION
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 38/503
2-2-1: CREATED:
There is hereby created an Airport Commission for the City, which commission shall be known and designated as the Boise Airport Commission. (Ord. 22-
13, 7-23-2013)
2-2-2: MEMBERSHIP; APPOINTMENT; TERMS; VACANCIES:
A. The membership of the Airport Commission shall be composed of up to eight (8) members appointed by the Mayor, with the consent of the Council.
One member shall be nominated by the Idaho National Guard without regard to residency; one member (in addition to the nominee of the Idaho
National Guard) may reside in the area of impact of the City; one member (in addition to the nominee of the Idaho National Guard) may reside outside
the area of impact of the City in an area affected by the operation of a regional airport; and one member may, at the time of appointment, be under
twenty one (21) years of age. Ex officio members consist of the Mayor, the member(s) of the Council assigned as liaison to the Airport Commission,
and the City Attorney or his/her designee.
B. The term of office for all Airport Commission members shall be for a three (3) year term. The youth member shall be appointed to a term of up to one
year and may be reappointed to up to four (4) successive terms. If a vacancy shall occur during an unexpired term, the Mayor, with the consent of the
Council, shall appoint a member to fill such unexpired term. (Ord. 22-13, 7-23-2013)
2-2-3: ORGANIZATION:
The commission shall organize and select one of its members as Chairperson, one of its members as Vice Chairperson to serve in the absence of the
Chairperson, and shall appoint a Secretary who need not be a member of the commission. The members of the commission and the Secretary shall serve
and act without compensation except that their actual and necessary expenses shall be allowed by the Council. The Secretary shall keep a record of all
meetings and proceedings of the commission and shall perform all services that may be required by the commission. (Ord. 22-13, 7-23-2013)
2-2-4: QUORUM:
Any four (4) members of the commission shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of the business. The City shall provide the necessary and suitable
equipment and supplies to enable the commission to properly transact and attend to business. (Ord. 22-13, 7-23-2013)
2-2-5: POWERS AND DUTIES:
It shall be the duty of the Airport Commission for the orderly and efficient administration and operation of the Boise Airport:
A. To study the economic and physical conditions and problems in connection with the maintenance, operation, regulation, control and use of the Boise
Airport;
B. To propose rules and regulations for the regulation, control and use of the Boise Airport, and the maintenance and operation of hangars, repair shops,
depots, taxi strips and all other facilities and utilities required, necessary or convenient for the proper orderly and efficient administration, operation,
superintendence and control of the Boise Airport;
C. To propose plans, recommendations and suggestions for the purpose of planning for further growth, development and regulation of the Boise Airport in
order to promote the public interest, convenience and welfare in the administration and operation of the Boise Airport, as well as to promote business
activities to serve as a catalyst for economic development throughout the City and region;
D. All rules and regulations proposed by the Airport Commission shall be submitted to the Mayor and Council for approval and ratification and, after such
approval and ratification, shall have the force and effect of ordinance. All rules and regulations of the Airport Commission now in effect shall have the
force and effect of ordinance and shall remain in full force and effect until amended, altered or repealed;
E. To advise the Mayor and Council in regard to rules and regulations for aircraft traffic regulation, airport facilities and runway improvements;
F. To advise the Mayor and Council regarding airport facilities and runway improvements; and
G. To formulate, propose and recommend such rules and regulations necessary or desirable to carry out the intent and purpose of this chapter. (Ord. 22-
13, 7-23-2013)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 17-19 - PARKS AND RECREATION COMMISSION. Go to new ordinance.
Chapter 3
PARKS AND RECREATION COMMISSION
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 39/503
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 17-19 - PARKS AND RECREATION COMMISSION. Go to new ordinance.
2-3-1: DEFINITIONS:
COMMISSION: The Boise City Parks and Recreation Commission.
COUNCIL: The Boise City Council.
DEPARTMENT: The Boise City Department of Parks and Recreation.
DIRECTOR: The Director of the Boise City Department of Parks and Recreation or his/her designee. (Ord. 46-18, 9-25-2018)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 17-19 - PARKS AND RECREATION COMMISSION. Go to new ordinance.
2-3-2: BOARD CREATED; MEMBERS:
There is hereby created a Boise City Parks and Recreation Commission, composed of a maximum of nine (9) members, one of whom shall reside in the
Boise City area of City impact and at least one of whom may be, at the time of appointment, under twenty one (21) years of age and one of whom shall be
a representative of the Boise School District. The Mayor shall appoint and the Council shall confirm commission members for the terms of office provided
in this chapter. A majority of the commission shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of any business of the commission. (Ord. 46-18, 9-25-2018)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 17-19 - PARKS AND RECREATION COMMISSION. Go to new ordinance.
2-3-3: APPOINTMENTS; TERM:
All appointments and terms of office of the Boise City Parks and Recreation Commission shall be for a term of three (3) years; provided that the student
member shall be appointed to a term not to exceed one year. Appointments to fill a vacancy, or to complete an unexpired term, shall be for the remainder
of the unexpired term only.
The officers of the commission shall consist of a President and a Vice President to be selected by the commission from among its members, to serve as
such officers for one year; provided, that the President of the commission shall be ineligible to succeed himself for consecutive terms of office. The
commission shall also designate a Secretary who need not be a member of the commission. (Ord. 46-18, 9-25-2018)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 17-19 - PARKS AND RECREATION COMMISSION. Go to new ordinance.
2-3-4: COMPENSATION:
All members of the commission and the officers thereof shall serve without salary or compensation, but their actual and necessary expenses shall be
allowed by the City. The City shall provide the necessary and suitable equipment and supplies to enable the commission to properly transact and attend to
its business. (Ord. 46-18, 9-25-2018)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 17-19 - PARKS AND RECREATION COMMISSION. Go to new ordinance.
2-3-5: POWERS AND DUTIES:
A. It shall be the duty of the commission for the orderly and efficient administration of the provisions of title 7, chapters 6 and 7 of this Code, and this
chapter, as now in effect or as may hereinafter be amended, and any other ordinances hereinafter enacted or amended relating to public park grounds,
zoos, cemeteries, community forestry, park and recreation facilities and open space:
1. To have control, superintendence and charge of all public park grounds, park and recreation facilities, open space, zoos, community forestry and
cemeteries in the City together with any land or lots, whether located within or without the City limits, hereinafter purchased, leased, devised or
bequeathed to the City for park and recreation purposes, and as such to direct the ornamenting, adorning, laying out and improving of the grounds of
said public park grounds, park and recreation facilities, open space, zoos, community forestry and cemeteries;
2. To study the economic and physical conditions and issues in connection with the maintenance, operation, management, control and use of all the
public park grounds, park and recreation facilities, open space, zoos, community forestry and cemeteries in the City;
3. To propose, adopt, promulgate and ratify rules and regulations:
a. Governing the control and regulation of all public park grounds, park and recreation facilities, open space, zoos, community forestry and
cemeteries in the City together with any land or lots hereinafter purchased, leased, devised or bequeathed to the City for park and recreation
purposes;
b. Governing the planting, growing, care, regulation and control of trees and shrubbery in all public places under the control and management of the
commission subject, however, to the provisions of title 7, chapter 2, "Trees", of this Code, and the Community Forestry Strategic Management Plan
as now or as may be in the future adopted, ratified and approved by the Council and Mayor;
c. Governing the use of all park and recreation facilities, including, but not limited to participation in or eligibility for all recreational or other programs
and team sports sponsored by the department or in which the department is the primary sponsoring entity, excepting therefrom rules, regulations
or policies governing the exclusion of persons from use of or participation in such facilities or programs. The commission shall recommend such
proposed exclusionary rules, regulations or policies to the Council for approval and ratification;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 40/503
d. Governing the internal policies of the department with respect to the overall mission of the department, including, but not limited to the placement
and naming of memorials, the designation of park names and licensing agreements less than one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00) in
value with third parties;
4. Subject to the approval of the Council and in conformity with the requirements of the Idaho Code, to propose and recommend rules and regulations
governing fees and charges for the use of all park and recreation facilities, including, but not limited to fees and charges for all recreational or other
programs and team sports sponsored by the department or in which the department is the primary sponsoring entity and the establishment of fees
and charges for burial permits and rights, opening and closing graves, and adopting all certificate, conveyance and other forms to be used in
connection with all burials in the cemeteries of the City;
5. To represent the public interest in making suggestions and recommendations to the City Council for the development, use, control and expansion of
needed and required park and recreation facilities and programs, including, but not limited to public park grounds, open space, zoos, community
forestry and cemeteries in the City and to make suggestions and recommendations to the Council for amendments to title 7, chapters 6 and 7 of this
Code, and this chapter, and title 7, chapter 2, "Trees", of this Code all as now in effect or as may hereinafter be amended, together with any other
provisions of this Code that may improve and correlate to the administration of programs affecting the parks, recreation, cemetery, community
forestry and open space programs of the City and its citizens;
6. To represent the public interest in making recommendations to the Council for the employment of the Director;
7. To review and recommend to the Council for approval development agreements, licensing agreements of a value of one thousand five hundred
dollars ($1,500.00) or more and all other real estate transactions, easements or other transactions that require Council approval by Idaho Code or
Boise City ordinance;
8. To appoint members of subcommittees to provide community information to the commission concerning particular facilities or programs of the
department.
B. All rules and regulations proposed, adopted, promulgated or ratified by the commission or approved and ratified by the Mayor and Council shall have
the force and effect of ordinance. All rules and regulations of the commission now in effect shall remain in full force and effect until amended, altered or
repealed. (Ord. 46-18, 9-25-2018)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 17-19 - PARKS AND RECREATION COMMISSION. Go to new ordinance.
2-3-6: TITLE TO PROPERTY:
The title to all property, real or personal, now owned or hereafter acquired by purchase, gift, devise, bequest or otherwise, and when not inconsistent with
the terms of its acquisition, shall vest in the City and in the name of the City title may be sued for, and defended by action at law, or otherwise. (Ord. 46-18,
9-25-2018)
Chapter 4
PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION1
2-4-1: CREATED:
There is hereby created a Planning and Zoning Commission for the City, which commission shall be known and designated as the Planning and Zoning
Commission. (1952 Code § 2-06-01)
2-4-2: CLERK OR SECRETARY:
The Planning and Zoning Commission shall have authority to designate a Clerk, who may be an officer or employee of the City, and who shall act as such
Clerk or Secretary to the commission, without extra compensation, and shall keep an accurate record of all proceedings of said commission, and shall file,
when ordered by the commission, with the Council, a report of all transactions of the Planning and Zoning Commission. (1952 Code § 2-06-02)
2-4-3: MEMBERSHIP; APPOINTMENT; TERMS; VACANCIES:
The Planning and Zoning Commission shall consist of the Mayor and one person who is, at the time of initial appointment, under eighteen (18) years of
age, as nonvoting ex officio members and, in addition thereto, not less than seven (7) nor more than eleven (11) additional voting members, to be
appointed by the Mayor and confirmed by the Council. Persons living within the area of City impact shall be entitled to representation on the Planning and
Zoning Commission. Such representation shall as nearly as possible reflect the proportion of population living within the area of impact. The term for each
appointment shall be four (4) years. No person shall serve more than two (2) full consecutive terms without specific concurrence by two-thirds (2/3) of the
City Council adopted by motion and recorded in the minutes. If a vacancy shall occur during any unexpired term, the Mayor, with the confirmation of the
Council, shall appoint a member for the balance of such unexpired term. (Ord. 4-15, 2-10-2015)
2-4-4: CHAIRPERSON:
The Planning and Zoning Commission shall meet and appoint one of its members as Chairperson of the commission, who shall hold office as such
Chairperson for such term as the commission shall so designate, and the commission may elect a Co-Chairperson, who shall act as Chairperson in the
absence of the Chairperson of the commission. (1952 Code § 2-06-04)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 41/503
2-4-5: COMPENSATION; QUORUM:
A. Compensation; Expenses: The members of the Planning and Zoning Commission shall serve and act without compensation, except that their actual
and necessary expenses shall be allowed by the Council and the City shall provide the necessary and suitable equipment and supplies to enable the
commission to properly transact and perform its business.
B. Quorum: A majority of the appointive members of the commission shall be necessary to constitute a quorum for the transaction of business. The
commission shall hold meetings each month for at least nine (9) months of the year, and at such other times as may be called by the Chairperson or by
the Mayor. (1952 Code § 2-06-05)
2-4-6: DUTIES:
It shall be the duty of the Planning and Zoning Commission to study and examine the economic, social and physical conditions and problems of the City,
particularly in regard to and in connection with regulations for the development of all public enterprises within the City, and to recommend and make
suggestions to the Mayor and Council in regard to public development, operation, management, regulation and control of all public utilities, buildings,
property and structures and to recommend and propose all measures and plans consistent with the future growth and development of the City in order to
secure for the City and its inhabitants proper sanitation and the establishment and promotion of proper service of all public utilities and facilities and to
promote such measures as may be advisable and beneficial for the promotion of the public health, interest, morals, safety, comfort and welfare of the
inhabitants of the City. (1952 Code § 2-06-06)
2-4-7: COOPERATION OF CITY DEPARTMENTS:
This chapter shall not be construed in any manner as infringing upon any authorization previously granted to any other commission or board of the City,
but all the departments and officials of the City shall cooperate with the Planning and Zoning Commission for the purpose of coordinating the efforts and
functions of all departments, commissions and boards of the City for the development of all public facilities of the City. (1952 Code § 2-06-06)
Chapter 5
DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEE ADVISORY COMMITTEE
2-5-1: CREATED:
There is hereby created a Development Impact Fee Advisory Committee for the City, which committee shall be known and designated as the Development
Impact Fee Advisory Committee. (1952 Code § 2-07-01)
2-5-2: CLERK OR SECRETARY:
The Development Impact Fee Advisory Committee shall have authority to designate a Clerk, who may be an officer or employee of the City, and who shall
act as such Clerk or Secretary to the committee, without extra compensation, and shall keep an accurate record of all proceedings of said committee, and
shall file, when ordered by the committee, with the Council, a report of all transactions of the Development Impact Fee Advisory Committee. (1952 Code
§ 2-07-02)
2-5-3: MEMBERSHIP; APPOINTMENT; TERMS; VACANCIES:
The Development Impact Fee Advisory Committee shall consist of up to nine (9) members appointed by the Mayor with the confirmation of the City
Council. At least two (2) members shall be active in the business of development, building or real estate and one member may be, at the time of
appointment, under the age of twenty one (21) years. Persons living within the area of City impact shall be entitled to representation on the Development
Impact Fee Advisory Committee. Such representation shall as nearly as possible reflect the proportion of population living within the area of City impact.
Upon appointment as herein provided, the members of the committee shall meet and draw lots for the term of office which shall be as near as possible for
an equal number of terms for two (2), four (4) and six (6) years, and thereafter, at the expiration of any term of office, appointment to such office shall be
for the period of four (4) years. Members appointed to the committee because of expansion beyond the five (5) original members shall serve three (3) year
terms. If a vacancy shall occur during any unexpired term, the Mayor, with the confirmation of the Council, shall appoint a member for the balance of such
unexpired term. The student member shall be appointed to a term of up to one year. (Ord. 16-13, 6-4-2013)
2-5-4: CHAIRPERSON:
The Development Impact Fee Advisory Committee shall meet and appoint one of its members as Chairperson of the committee, who shall hold office as
such Chairperson for such term as the committee shall so designate, and the committee may elect a Co-Chairperson who shall act as Chairperson in the
absence of the Chairperson of the committee. (1952 Code § 2-07-04)
2-5-5: COMPENSATION; QUORUM:
The members of the Development Impact Fee Advisory Committee shall serve and act without compensation, except that their actual and necessary
expenses shall be allowed by the Council and the City shall provide the necessary and suitable equipment and supplies to enable the committee to
properly transact and perform its business.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 42/503
Four (4) or more of the appointive members of the committee shall be necessary to constitute a quorum for the transaction of business. The committee
shall hold meetings each month as needed, and at such other times as may be called by the Chairman or by the Mayor. (Ord. 41-18, 9-25-2018)
2-5-6: DUTIES:
The Development Impact Fee Advisory Committee shall serve in an advisory capacity and is established to:
A. Assist the City in adopting land use assumptions;
B. Review the Capital Improvements Plan and proposed amendments, and file written comments;
C. Monitor and evaluate implementation of the Capital Improvements Plan;
D. File periodic reports, at least annually, with respect to the Capital Improvements Plan and report to the Mayor and Council any perceived inequities in
implementing the plan or imposing the development impact fees; and
E. Advise the Mayor and Council of the need to update or revise land use assumptions, Capital Improvements Plan and development impact fees. (1952
Code § 2-07-06)
2-5-7: INFORMATION AVAILABLE TO COMMITTEE:
The Mayor and Council shall make available to the Development Impact Fee Advisory Committee, upon request, all financial and accounting information,
professional reports in relation to other development and implementation of land use assumptions, the Capital Improvements Plan and periodic updates of
the Capital Improvements Plan. (1952 Code § 2-07-06)
2-5-8: COOPERATION OF DEPARTMENTS:
This chapter shall not be construed in any manner as infringing upon any authorization previously granted to any other commission or board of the City,
but all the departments and officials of the City shall cooperate with the Development Impact Fee Advisory Committee for the purpose of coordinating the
efforts and functions of all departments, commissions and boards of the City for the development of all public facilities of the City. (1952 Code § 2-07-06)
Chapter 6
PUBLIC WORKS COMMISSION
2-6-1: FINDINGS AND POLICY:
The Council hereby finds and declares that it is necessary and in the best public interest to maintain an advisory body known as the Public Works
Commission. The mission of the Public Works Commission shall be to ensure a safe, healthy, livable community, by advising the Public Works Department
staff, making recommendations to the Mayor and City Council and deciding appeals of Public Works Department actions. (1952 Code § 2-16-01)
2-6-2: MEMBERSHIP; APPOINTMENT; TERMS; VACANCIES:
A. The Public Works Commission shall consist of eight (8) members appointed by the Mayor and confirmed by the Council. Members should be chosen to
provide the commission with a broad and diverse makeup of knowledge, expertise or interest in environmental and engineering issues.
B. Seven (7) of the members shall be appointed to serve terms of four (4) years. An additional eighth student member, who at the time of their first
appointment must be a college undergraduate or graduate student, shall be appointed to a term of up to one year and may be reappointed for up to
three (3) additional one year terms. The Director of Public Works shall be an ex officio member and shall act as Secretary to the commission. If a
vacancy should occur during an unexpired term, such vacancy shall be filled in the same manner as the original appointment.
C. Members of the Public Works Commission must be, at the time of their appointment and throughout the tenure of their membership, residents of the
City; provided, that one member of the commission may be a resident of Ada County who resides within Boise City/Ada County area of impact.
D. The City residency requirement may be waived for an Ada County resident owning or operating a business located within the City, which receives City
sewer and/or trash services. (1952 Code § 2-16-02)
2-6-3: ORGANIZATION:
The commission shall annually select a Chairperson and a Vice Chairperson to conduct business in accordance with the commission's duly adopted
bylaws. The members of the commission and the Secretary shall serve and act without compensation, except that their actual and necessary expenses
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 43/503
shall be allowed by the Council. The Secretary shall keep a record of all meetings and proceedings of the commission and shall perform all services that
may be required by the commission. (1952 Code § 2-16-03)
2-6-4: QUORUM:
Any four (4) members of the commission shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business. The City shall provide the necessary and suitable
equipment and supplies to enable the commission to properly transact and attend to business. (1952 Code § 2-16-04)
2-6-5: DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES:
A. Advise On Policy Issues: The commission shall advise Mayor and Council on policy issues related to the Public Works Department operations that
include, but are not limited to, the management of the wastewater collection and treatment, geothermal and irrigation systems; transportation systems
as they may be developed; solid waste collection, recycling and hazardous waste programs; air and water quality programs; water resources
management; and facility, engineering and technical support for other City departments.
B. Specific Duties: Specific duties of the commission shall be to:
1. Advise and support Public Works staff in achieving their goals of commitment to excellence in providing efficient, effective and accessible public
services;
2. Exercise the commission's authority to hear appeals of Public Works staff actions and advise City Council on issues, including rates, ordinances and
policy matters;
3. Advise and support the department in its efforts to involve and inform citizens through public education;
4. Address future community needs through participation in long range planning and strategies;
5. Serve as a sounding board for major department communication projects or initiatives, providing advice and recommendations to ensure the
communication incorporates the views of the community, the City and, in particular, the Public Works Department. (1952 Code § 2-16-05)
Chapter 7
LIBRARY BOARD
2-7-1: MEMBERSHIP; APPOINTMENT; TERMS; VACANCIES; ORGANIZATION:
A. The Library Board shall consist of five (5) members as a Board of Library Trustees and one nonvoting, ex officio member who may, at the time of
appointment, be under twenty one (21) years of age. Terms of Trustees shall begin on July 1 of the calendar year and shall be for a term of five (5)
years and until his or her successor is appointed. Terms shall be set so one term shall expire during each calendar year. Appointees shall serve no
more than two (2) terms nor more than ten (10) consecutive years. The youth member shall be appointed to a term of up to one year and may be
reappointed to up to four (4) successive terms. All vacancies on the board shall be filled by appointment by the Mayor, and approved by the Council.
Appointments to complete an unexpired term shall be for the residue of the term only.
B. Said Board of Library Trustees shall elect from its members a President and a Vice President, who shall serve for a term of one year and until his or her
successor is elected, and shall adopt such rules for the transaction of business as may be necessary. (1952 Code § 2-04-01)
2-7-2: COMPENSATION:
All members of the Board of Library Trustees and the officers thereof shall serve without salary or any compensation whatsoever, except that members
may receive reimbursement for expenditures made while engaged in the business of the library. (1952 Code § 2-04-02)
2-7-3: MEETINGS; QUORUM:
The board shall meet for business purposes at least once a month, and at such other times as it may appoint, in a place to be provided for the purpose. A
majority of the board shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business. (1952 Code § 2-04-06)
2-7-4: POWERS AND DUTIES:
In addition to the powers elsewhere contained in this chapter and notwithstanding the provisions of Idaho Code title 50, the Board of Library Trustees of
each City library shall have the following powers and duties:
A. To establish bylaws for its own governance;
B. To establish policies and rules of use for the governance of the library or libraries under its control; to exclude from the use of the library any and all
persons who violate such rules;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 44/503
C. To establish, locate, maintain and have custody of libraries to serve the City, and to provide suitable rooms, structures, facilities, furniture, apparatus
and appliances necessary for library service;
D. With the approval of the City:
1. To acquire real property by purchase, gift, devise, lease or otherwise;
2. To own and hold real and personal property and to construct buildings for the use and purposes of the library;
3. To sell, exchange or otherwise dispose of real or personal property when no longer required by the library; and
4. To insure the real and personal property of the library;
E. To prepare and adopt a budget for review and approval by the City Council;
F. To control the expenditures of money budgeted for the library;
G. To accept or decline gifts of money or personal property, in accordance with library policy, and under such terms as may be a condition of the gift;
H. To hire, supervise and evaluate the Library Director;
I. To establish policies for the purchase and distribution of library materials;
J. To attend all meetings of the Board of Library Trustees;
K. To maintain legal records of all board business;
L. To exercise such other powers, not inconsistent with law, necessary for the orderly and efficient management of the library. (2019 Code)
2-7-5: LOCATION AND DESIGNATION OF LIBRARY:
The public library is now situated in the Boise Public Library building, located at 715 South Capitol Boulevard, Boise, Idaho, and shall be designated and
known as Boise Public Library. (1952 Code § 2-04-05)
2-7-6: LIBRARY MATERIALS DEFINED:
For the purposes of this chapter, the term "library materials" shall mean all those materials, including, but not limited to, books, periodicals, newspapers,
pamphlets, maps, documents, manuscripts, charts, pictures, engravings, audio cassettes, video cassettes, books on tape and computer software, whether
or not these materials may be checked out of the library. (1952 Code § 2-04-03)
2-7-7: REAL ESTATE TO VEST IN CITY:
The title of all property, real and personal, now owned or hereafter acquired by purchase, gift, devise, bequest or otherwise, for the purpose of the library
and reading rooms, when not inconsistent with the terms of its acquisition, shall vest in the City, and in the name of the City may be sued for and defended
by action at law or otherwise. (1952 Code § 2-04-07)
2-7-8: LIBRARY BORROWERS' CARDS:
A. Preparation; Information: The Board of Library Trustees shall prepare or cause to be prepared, a library borrower's card in the form and containing the
information it deems necessary to be issued to applicants for presentation by which to borrow any library materials or other property belonging to the
public library.
B. Issuance: Library borrowers' cards issued to:
1. Residents shall be nonexpiring as long as residency is maintained, but shall be verified annually for a current address.
2. Nonresidents shall be valid for one year from the month of issuance.
C. Corporate Cards: Corporations with an office located within the corporate limits of the City may apply for and receive a corporate borrower's card to be
used for work related borrowing. It shall be unlawful for any employee of the corporation to use the corporate card for personal use in order to avoid
paying a nonresident fee.
D. Changes: When any library card holder shall move from the address shown on the card issued to him or when the name of the card holder is changed
by marriage or otherwise, such person shall present his card for changing address and/or name thereon prior to, or at the time of, the next use of his
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 45/503
card.
E. Loaning Card: It shall be unlawful for a library card holder to give or loan his or her card to another person for the purpose of aiding such person to
obtain any library materials or other property belonging to the public library.
F. Unlawful Acquisition Of Library Property: It shall be unlawful for any person to acquire any library material or other property belonging to the public
library upon the presentation of a library card issued to another person. (1952 Code § 2-04-11)
2-7-9: BORROWERS OUTSIDE CITY; FEE:
A. Policy: No person residing outside the corporate limits of the City, regardless of post office or mailing address, shall be issued a library borrower's card,
or a renewal thereof, except upon the payment of an annual household nonresident license fee, such fee to be established by the Board of Library
Trustees at a rate no less than the average per household support paid by City residents; provided, if any person, or a spouse thereof, or a parent pays
ad valorem taxes on real and/or personal property situated within the City, such person or spouse thereof or a parent shall be deemed a resident library
borrower; provided, that nonresident senior citizens over the age of sixty two (62) may purchase an individual nonresident library card for a reduced
fee, such fee to be set by the Board of Library Trustees at a rate no less than twenty five percent (25%) of the full household nonresident license fee;
provided, that students who reside outside Ada County but attend City schools may purchase an individual nonresident card at the senior citizen rate;
and provided, that the Council reserves the right to waive, with or without application, the foregoing license fee for a library borrower's card imposed
upon persons residing outside the corporate limits of the City.
B. Exemptions: Persons who reside in a library district that have a contractual arrangement with the public library for the provision of library services shall
be exempt from the nonresident fee.
C. Household Members Entitled To Privileges: The library borrower's card(s) issued upon payment of the annual license fee shall entitle all members of the
household to library borrowing privileges. Such card(s) shall be issued in the name of, and be valid for, each individual household member. (1952 Code
§ 2-04-12)
2-7-10: FAILURE TO PAY FINE:
It shall be unlawful for any person to fail to remit fines established and assessed by the Board of Library Trustees of the public library for failure to return
library material when due or for incurring damage to library materials while in his or her possession. (1952 Code § 2-04-10)
2-7-11: MISUSE AND DEFACING LIBRARY RESOURCES AND PROPERTY:
No person shall wilfully or intentionally cut, tear, deface, break, injure, destroy or alter any item of the library materials collection or other property
belonging to the public library or any branch thereof. No person shall wilfully bypass the security of library network or any other computer network,
including the internet, while using electronic resources at the public library. Any person misusing the library network or attempting to bypass its security will
forfeit the right to use computers in the library, and will, in addition to other penalties prescribed by law, be liable for the financial costs of the library to
repair damage done to the library's electronic resources network. (1952 Code § 2-04-08)
2-7-12: PENALTY:
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be subject to penalty as
provided in section 1-4-1 of this Code. (1952 Code § 2-04-13; amd. 2019 Code)
Chapter 8
ARTS AND HISTORY COMMISSION
2-8-1: FINDINGS AND POLICY:
The City Council hereby finds that it is in the public interest to create an advisory body hereafter named and appointed to assist the Mayor and City
Council in carrying out the responsibilities of their offices to increase the appreciation of the arts, culture and history among the City citizens and to create
and maintain an atmosphere conducive to the fullest expression of all forms of art and history in order to provide artistic satisfaction to the performer and to
enrich the lives of all City citizens. (1952 Code § 2-17-01)
2-8-2: MEMBERSHIP; APPOINTMENT; TERMS; VACANCIES:
A. Membership; Appointment: There is hereby created the Arts and History Commission consisting of up to seven (7) members to be appointed by the
Mayor and confirmed by the City Council. One student member may be, at the time of appointment, under the age of twenty one (21) years. The
student member shall be appointed to a term of up to one year. The term of office for each of the remaining six (6) members shall be three (3) years.
B. Vacancies: Vacancies on the commission shall be appointed by the Mayor subject to approval by the City Council. The commission shall publicly
announce any vacancies, review candidates and recommend appointments to the Mayor, who shall thereafter have the right to appoint any candidate,
whether or not recommended by the commission. (Ord. 9-14, 3-4-2014)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 46/503
2-8-3: ORGANIZATION; COMPENSATION; QUORUM:
Within a reasonable time following appointment, the commission shall organize and select a Chairperson and Vice Chairperson. The members of the
commission shall serve and act without compensation, except that their actual and necessary expenses shall be allowed by the Council. A majority of
members of the commission shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business. (Ord. 16-13, 6-4-2013)
2-8-4: DEFINITIONS:
A. Boundaries Of The Arts: The boundaries of the arts are constantly changing, but for purposes of this chapter shall include, without limitation, all phases
of the visual, performing and literary arts.
B. History: For the purposes of this chapter, "history" shall include projects, programs or activities that relate to the identity, customs, skills, history or
heritage of a group of people that are transferred, communicated or passed along to succeeding generations. (1952 Code § 2-17-04)
2-8-5: DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES:
A. Objectives Specified: The commission shall advise and assist the Mayor and City Council to develop, coordinate and promote the visual, performing
and literary arts and heritage programs and policies for the enjoyment, education, cultural enrichment and benefit of the citizens of the City. In
furtherance of these duties, the commission shall have the following objectives:
1. To stimulate greater governmental and public awareness and appreciation of the importance of the arts and history.
2. To encourage the preservation and growth of the City artistic, cultural and historical resources, and foster the development of a receptive climate for
the arts, culture and history.
3. To provide general assistance to the City artistic, historical and cultural organizations with information and encouragement.
4. To encourage opportunities for City residents to participate in artistic, historical and cultural activities.
5. To promote the development of City artists, institutions and community organizations sponsoring arts and historical activities.
6. To assess the arts and cultural heritage needs of the people of the City and make such information available to the City Council and all interested
agencies and persons.
7. To encourage and coordinate the artistic, historical and cultural activities of other governmental agencies.
8. To seek and encourage financial support, including grants, loans and guarantees to City artists, arts institutions, historians and community
organizations sponsoring arts and history activities, subject to City Council approval.
9. To represent the public interest by developing and recommending policies that pertain to arts and history to the Director of the Department of Arts
and History and the City Council.
10. To represent the public interest by evaluating and making recommendations regarding the future growth of the Department of Arts and History.
11. To have superintendence and charge of all City owned public art assets.
12. To advise the City regarding the costs, benefits and other issues of acquiring cultural assets and implementing cultural programming.
13. To propose and adopt administrative rules and regulations as needed with regard to public art, heritage programs, other cultural assets or cultural
programming.
14. To appoint members of the community to subcommittees to provide support to the commission.
B. Rules And Regulations Of Commission: All rules and regulations proposed and adopted by the commission shall have the force and effect of ordinance.
All rules and regulations of the commission now in effect shall remain in full force and effect until amended, altered or repealed. (1952 Code § 2-17-05)
2-8-6: MEETINGS; POLICIES:
The commission shall hold regular public meetings, keep a written record of its proceedings and file an annual report with the City Council summarizing its
activities and setting forth recommendations. The commission shall establish policies for its internal operation. (1952 Code § 2-17-06)
2-8-7: RELATIONSHIP TO DEPARTMENT OF ARTS AND HISTORY:
The Department of Arts and History staff, employed by the City, shall provide administrative support to the commission in its advisory function to the
Mayor, City Council and to the City. (1952 Code § 2-17-07)
Chapter 9
HOUSING AND COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT CITIZENS ADVISORY COMMITTEE
2-9-1: CREATED:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 47/503
There is hereby created a Housing and Community Development Citizens Advisory Committee for the City, which shall be known and designated as the
Housing and Community Development Citizens Advisory Committee. (1952 Code § 2-21-01)
2-9-2: CLERK OR SECRETARY:
The Housing and Community Development Citizens Advisory Committee shall have the authority to designate a Clerk, who may be an officer or employee
of the City, and who shall act as such Clerk or Secretary to the committee, without extra compensation, and shall keep an accurate record of all
proceedings of said committee, and shall file, when ordered by the committee, with the City Council, a report of all transactions of the Housing and
Community Development Citizens Advisory Committee. (1952 Code § 2-21-02)
2-9-3: MEMBERSHIP; APPOINTMENT; TERMS; VACANCIES:
The Housing and Community Development Citizens Advisory Committee shall consist of not fewer than five (5) members appointed by the Mayor with the
confirmation of the City Council. Two (2) members shall be active in the business of development, banking or real estate and at least two (2) members
shall be active in private not for profit organizations or public agencies serving the community's economically disadvantaged citizens. At least fifty percent
(50%) of the committee members shall reside or be employed within the City limits. Upon appointment as herein provided, the members of the committee
shall meet and draw lots for the term of office which shall be as near as possible for an equal number of terms for two (2) and three (3) years, and
thereafter, at the expiration of any term of office, appointment to such office shall be for the period of three (3) years. If a vacancy shall occur during an
unexpired term, the Mayor, with the confirmation of the City Council, shall appoint a member for the balance of such unexpired term. (1952 Code § 2-21-
03)
2-9-4: CHAIRPERSON:
The Housing and Community Development Citizens Advisory Committee shall meet and appoint one of its members as Chairperson of the committee,
who shall hold office as Chairperson for such term as the committee shall so designate, and the committee may elect a Co-Chairperson who shall act as
Chairperson in the absence of the Chairperson of the committee. (1952 Code § 2-21-04)
2-9-5: COMPENSATION; QUORUM:
A. Compensation; Expenses: The members of the Housing and Community Development Citizens Advisory Committee shall serve and act without
compensation, except that their actual and necessary expenses shall be allowed by the Council and the City shall provide the necessary and suitable
equipment and supplies to enable the committee to properly transact and perform its business.
B. Quorum: A majority of the appointive members of the committee shall be necessary to constitute a quorum for the transaction of business. The
committee shall hold at least one meeting each year, and at such other times as may be called by the Chairperson or by the Mayor. (1952 Code § 2-21-
05)
2-9-6: DUTIES AND PURPOSE:
The Housing and Community Development Advisory Committee shall serve in an advisory capacity and is established to:
A. Assist the City in reviewing applications for CDBG and/or HOME Program funding;
B. Review the consolidated planning document, including the one year action plan, and proposed amendments, and provide comments;
C. Provide recommendations for programs and/or projects to receive CDBG and/or HOME Program funding;
D. File periodic reports, at least annually, with respect to the funding recommendations and report to the Mayor and Council any special conditions,
perceived inequities or concerns with regards to programs/projects recommended to receive CDBG and/or HOME Program funding. (1952 Code § 2-
21-06)
2-9-7: INFORMATION AVAILABLE TO COMMITTEE:
The Mayor and Council shall make available to the Housing and Community Development Citizens Advisory Committee, upon request, all financial and
accounting information, professional reports, annual monitoring results and such other information as may be necessary and appropriate for the committee
to review the progress of programs and/or projects previously awarded CDBG and/or HOME Program funding and to develop annual funding
recommendations. (1952 Code § 2-21-06)
2-9-8: COOPERATION OF DEPARTMENTS:
This chapter shall not be construed in any manner as infringing upon any authorization previously granted to any other commission or board of the City,
but all the departments and officials of the City shall cooperate with the Housing and Community Development Citizens Advisory Committee for the
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 48/503
purpose of coordinating the efforts and functions of all departments, commissions and boards of the City for the distribution of CDBG and/or funding to
public or private organizations serving the needs of the community's lower income citizens. (1952 Code § 2-21-06)
Chapter 10
OFFICE OF POLICE OVERSIGHT
2-10-1: CREATED:
There is hereby created an administrative unit of the City to be known as the office of police oversight. (Ord. 28-15, 7-7-2015)
2-10-2: APPOINTMENT AND REMOVAL OF DIRECTOR:
A. Appointment: The Director of the office of police oversight ("Director") shall be appointed by the Mayor and confirmed by the City Council.
B. Removal From Office: The Director may not be removed from office except for misconduct, inefficiency, incompetence, inability or failure to perform the
duties of such office, or negligence in the performance of such duties. In cases that warrant removal from office, the removal shall be accomplished
only by a resolution adopted in public hearing by either the majority of the full City Council upon recommendation of the Mayor, or by a vote of no less
than five (5) members of the full City Council. Nothing contained herein shall prevent the Council from eliminating the office of police oversight through
the normal ordinance process, which action shall not be considered a removal for cause but simply a change in policy by the City. (Ord. 28-15, 7-7-
2015)
2-10-3: SCOPE OF AUTHORITY:
The office of police oversight shall have the authority to exercise its duties and responsibilities, as outlined below, with regard to police activities and police
personnel, operating under authority of the City. (Ord. 28-15, 7-7-2015)
2-10-4: DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES:
A. Citizen Complaints: Any person may file with the office of police oversight a complaint or allegation of wrongdoing against a City police officer or police
employee. Upon receipt of such complaint or allegation, the office of police oversight shall:
1. Ensure that a timely, thorough, complete, objective and fair investigation into the complaint or allegation is conducted. This investigation may, at the
discretion of the Director, be conducted by either the office of police oversight, the Police Department or any other competent investigative agency.
2. Provide timely updates on the progress of the investigation to the complainant and the employee who is the subject of the investigation, unless the
specific facts of the investigation would prohibit such notification.
3. Based on the results of the investigation, reach an independent finding as to the facts. The Director shall assess the conduct of the City police officer
or police employee in light of the facts discovered through the investigation, the law, and the policies and training of the relevant department, and
shall make recommendations for personnel action to be taken.
4. Communicate these findings on a timely basis to the complainant, the employee who is the subject of the investigation, and the Chief of Police.
B. Review Of Internal Investigations Conducted By Police Department: The office of police oversight shall review internal investigations conducted by the
City police to determine if the investigations are complete, thorough, objective and fair.
C. Appeals Of Internal Investigation Findings: Any person may file with the office of police oversight an appeal of the findings of an internal investigation
conducted by the City police. Upon receipt of such an appeal, the office of police oversight shall:
1. Review the completed investigation.
2. Determine whether the investigation is complete, thorough, objective and fair.
3. Provide timely updates on the progress of the review to the complainant and the employee who was the subject of the original investigation, unless
the specific facts of the investigation would prohibit such notification.
4. Based on the review of the original investigation, reach an independent finding as to the facts. The Director shall assess the conduct of the City
police officer or police employee in light of the facts discovered through the investigation, the law and the policies and training, and shall make
recommendations for personnel action to be taken. The report and recommendations shall be given to the Chief of Police for the purpose of
discipline and/or commendation when warranted, and for use in the development of the affected police officer or police employee's formal personnel
evaluation.
5. Communicate these findings on a timely basis to the person filing the appeal, the employee who was the subject of the original investigation and the
Chief of Police.
D. Mediation: The office of police oversight shall develop an alternative dispute resolution process for resolving those citizen complaints that involve
conduct which may most appropriately be corrected or modified through less formal means.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 49/503
E. Policy Recommendations: The office of police oversight shall develop specific recommendations as to the policies, procedures, practices and training of
City police officers and police employees. The goal of the recommendations is improved professionalism, safety, effectiveness and accountability of
City police officers and police employees. The office of police oversight may make recommendations to the Chief of Police, the Mayor or the City
Council as appropriate.
F. Community Outreach: The office of police oversight shall develop and maintain a regular program of community outreach and communication for the
purpose of listening to and communicating with the citizens of the City.
G. Reporting: The Director shall file semiannual public reports with the City Clerk for transmittal to the City Council and Mayor, which shall:
1. Include a statistical analysis documenting the number of complaints received by category, their disposition and any actions taken;
2. Analyze trends and patterns;
3. Make recommendations, as appropriate.
The reports shall include all complaints received by the office of police oversight, police and internal affairs and shall include those matters audited
by the Director.
H. Critical Incidents:
1. In the event that an officer or employee of the Police Department is involved in a critical incident, defined in subsection H3 of this section, as a
principal, victim, witness or custodial officer, the office of police oversight shall be notified immediately and shall act as an observer to any criminal,
administrative or civil investigation conducted by or on behalf of such departments.
2. The office of police oversight may also conduct an independent administrative investigation into a critical incident. The Director shall assess the
conduct of the City police officer or police employee in light of the facts discovered through the investigation, the law, and the policies and training of
the relevant department, and shall further make recommendations for personnel action to be taken.
3. The report of investigation and recommendations shall be given to the Chief of Police for purpose of discipline and/or commendation when
warranted, and for use in the development of the affected police officer or police employee's formal personnel evaluation. "Critical incidents" include,
but are not limited to, situations involving the following:
a. Use of deadly force (excluding animals).
b. Use of force or any other police or law enforcement action that results in the death of one or more persons, or serious bodily injury requiring
hospital admission.
c. Vehicle pursuits, roadblocks or intercepts resulting in the death of one or more persons, or serious bodily injury requiring hospital admission.
d. Vehicular collisions resulting in the death of one or more persons, or serious bodily injury requiring hospital admission that occurred while a police
officer or police personnel was operating a City vehicle (either on duty or off duty) or a private vehicle while on duty. (Ord. 28-15, 7-7-2015)
2-10-5: CONFIDENTIALITY OF RECORDS AND INFORMATION:
The office of police oversight shall comply with all State and Federal laws requiring the confidentiality of law enforcement records, information and
confidential personnel records; and respect the privacy of all individuals involved. A police officer, police employee or citizen may waive his or her personal
privacy rights. (Ord. 28-15, 7-7-2015)
2-10-6: RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN OFFICE OF POLICE OVERSIGHT AND CITY POLICE AND OTHER DEPARTMENTS:
A. Standard Operating Procedures: The Chief of Police shall, jointly with the Director, develop standard operating procedures to govern the relationship
and flow of communication and work products between the office of police oversight and the Police Department.
B. Access To Information: The office of police oversight is to be given full, unrestricted and complete access to any and all information, files, evidence or
other material which the Director shall deem necessary in the performance of the duties specified and responsibilities set forth in this chapter.
C. Notification To Chief Of Police: The office of police oversight shall provide the Chief of Police with timely notification of complaints, investigations,
appeals and findings, and with such information and cooperation as is appropriate and necessary. (Ord. 28-15, 7-7-2015)
2-10-7: COOPERATION WITH OFFICE OF POLICE OVERSIGHT:
A. Required: All City employees and City police officers shall be required as a condition of their employment to cooperate fully and truthfully with the office
of police oversight operating within the course and scope of this chapter, by providing the office of police oversight with any and all information,
evidence, interviews or other material as requested.
B. Force Or Threaten Prohibited: No person shall directly or indirectly force, or by any threats to person or property, or in any manner wilfully intimidate,
influence, impede, deter, threaten, harass, obstruct or prevent, another person, including a child, from freely, fully and truthfully cooperating with the
office of police oversight. (Ord. 28-15, 7-7-2015)
2-10-8: INDEPENDENCE OF DIRECTOR OF OFFICE OF POLICE OVERSIGHT:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 50/503
A. Specified: The Director and any employee of the office of police oversight shall, at all times, be independent. Any investigations, findings,
recommendations and requests made by the office of police oversight shall reflect the views of the office of police oversight alone.
B. Influence Prohibited: No person shall attempt to unduly influence or undermine the independence of the Director or any employee of the office of police
oversight in the performance of the duties and responsibilities set forth in this chapter. (Ord. 28-15, 7-7-2015)
2-10-9: FALSE REPORTS:
The office of police oversight shall have the discretion to decline action on a complaint filed with the office of police oversight if the Director finds that there
is a reasonable belief that the alleged acts of misconduct in the complaint are false and that the person filing the complaint knew them to be false at the
time the complaint was filed. (Ord. 28-15, 7-7-2015)
Chapter 11
OPEN SPACE AND CLEAN WATER ADVISORY COMMITTEE
2-11-1: COMMITTEE CREATED:
As provided in the ballot language of the 2015 City levy, there is hereby established a Citizens' Advisory Committee designated and known as the Open
Space and Clean Water Advisory Committee, which shall operate only in an advisory capacity to the Mayor and Council, as specified in this chapter. (Ord.
3-16, 3-8-2016)
2-11-2: MEMBERSHIP; APPOINTMENT; ORGANIZATION:
A. Membership; Appointment: The Open Space and Clean Water Advisory Committee shall be composed of a minimum of seven (7) members, and a
maximum of nine (9), each to be appointed by the Mayor and confirmed by the City Council.
B. Scope Of Membership: Committee membership shall be at large, not by district, with attention given to geographically diverse representation of the City
and to ensuring the committee is comprised of members with expertise and experience in those areas relevant to the committee's purposes and goals,
potentially to include, but not limited to, fields of ecology, wildlife biology, botany, river geomorphology, and other sciences that are important to land
management and clean water; conservation experience; outdoor recreation management; real estate; environmental education; and investment
management.
C. Representation: Committee membership shall, insomuch as practicable, represent the diverse spectrum of users who enjoy the Boise Foothills, the
Boise River, and open space areas of the City.
D. Resident Of City: Every committee member, at the time of appointment and confirmation, and at all times of membership on the committee, shall be a
resident of the City.
E. Rotational Position: One position on the committee shall be a rotating position filled by a member of the Parks and Recreation Commission, who shall
be selected by nomination, second, and a majority vote of the members of the Parks and Recreation Commission present at its meeting.
F. Officers: At its first meeting, and thereafter every two (2) years, the committee, by nomination and majority vote, shall select a Chair and Vice Chair from
amongst its members. The Chair and Vice Chair shall serve a two (2) year term in those capacities.
G. Subcommittees: The committee Chair, or, with the approval of one-half (1/2) plus one of the committee in attendance at a meeting, the Vice Chair, shall
have authority to establish project based subcommittees and appoint members thereto.
H. Secretary; Records: The Secretary of the Parks and Recreation Commission, or such other person designated by the Director of the Parks and
Recreation Department, shall serve as Clerk and Secretary for the Open Space and Clean Water Advisory Committee. The Secretary shall keep a
record of all meetings and business of the committee, and shall ensure meeting agendas are timely posted and meeting minutes are publicly available.
I. Attendance Required: Committee members are expected to attend all committee meetings and actively participate in furthering the City's conservation
goals. (Ord. 22-16, 7-12-2016)
2-11-3: TERMS OF SERVICE:
A. Staggered Terms: Except as otherwise provided herein, people appointed and confirmed to the Open Space and Clean Water Advisory Committee shall
serve staggered three (3) year terms.
B. Initial Terms: To stagger terms of service, up to three (3) committee membership positions may be identified as "initial one year term" positions, up to
three (3) positions may be identified as "initial two (2) year term" positions, and up to three (3) positions may be identified as "initial three (3) year term"
positions. Upon expiration of these initial terms, all subsequent terms shall be three (3) years in length.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 51/503
C. Parks And Recreation Commission Member: The position on the Open Space and Clean Water Advisory Committee reserved for a member of the
Parks and Recreation Commission will not have the staggered three (3) year term prescribed for other positions on the committee. Instead, the person
selected by the Parks and Recreation Commission shall serve on the advisory committee for a term of two (2) years.
D. Vacancy: If a vacancy occurs with time remaining in an unexpired term, the Mayor may appoint a person to serve out the remainder of the unexpired
term, subject to confirmation by the City Council.
E. Reappointment, Reconfirmation: Upon the expiration of a member's term of service on the committee, reappointment by the Mayor and reconfirmation
by the City Council shall be required for that member to continue serving on the committee.
F. At Will; Removal: Committee members shall serve at the will and pleasure of the Mayor and City Council, and may be removed as provided in section 2-
1-2 of this title. (Ord. 22-16, 7-12-2016)
2-11-4: MEETINGS:
A. Required Meetings; Special Meetings: The committee shall, at a minimum, convene quarterly regular meetings throughout the calendar year. The
committee Chair, or a majority of committee members, may call special meetings, as needed.
B. Quorum: A majority of appointed and confirmed committee members shall constitute a quorum, and a quorum shall be required for the transaction of
business by the committee.
C. Conduct: Meetings of the committee shall be organized and directed in accordance with Robert's Rules of Order, as close as is practicable.
D. Agenda: An agenda shall be prepared and posted for every meeting of the committee, pursuant to Idaho's Open Meetings Law. An agenda may be
amended using the procedures provided in Idaho Code section 74-204. All other public process requirements applicable to a committee of this type
shall be followed. (Ord. 3-16, 3-8-2016)
2-11-5: COMPENSATION:
Members of the committee shall serve without salary or compensation, except that actual expenses shall be reimbursed, subject to the approval of the
Mayor and City Council. (Ord. 3-16, 3-8-2016)
2-11-6: DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES:
A. Advisory Capacity: The Open Space and Clean Water Advisory Committee shall serve in an advisory capacity to the Mayor and City Council in each of
the following ways:
1. Work in collaboration with City staff and within the framework of City management plans (such as the Interagency Foothills Management Plan, the
Open Space Reserve and Boise River Resource Management Plans, and the Ridge to Rivers Master Plan), and based upon direction from City
leadership, to recommend to the Mayor and Council:
a. The expenditure of funds from the 2015 levy;
b. The purchase or other acquisition of property, or the implementation of improvement projects, in areas such as the Boise Foothills and the Boise
River, to further the City's goals of protecting and conserving clean water and drinking water, safeguarding critical wildlife habitat, protecting critical
open space, preserving native plant species and enhancing trails and recreational opportunities; and
c. Potential partners for cost sharing opportunities, and with which the City can work to achieve its conservation goals.
2. Offer information and support on subjects and projects requiring specialized knowledge or experience.
3. Work with City staff to create an annual report detailing expenditures, projects and activities that support the City's conservation goals.
4. Promote, support and build awareness of the City's conservation goals.
5. Promote an environment of learning and continuous improvement to ensure the program makes use of the best available tools and practices for land
and water conservation.
B. Commitment Of Funds Prohibited: The Open Space and Clean Water Advisory Committee is not authorized to grant, donate or otherwise commit levy
funds for any purpose.
C. Code Of Ethics: Each member of the Open Space and Clean Water Advisory Committee shall comply with title 1, chapter 8, "Code Of Ethics", of this
Code, and shall avoid the existence or appearance of any existing, potential or perceived conflict of interest.
D. Ballot, Management Plans Applicability: All duties and responsibilities of the Open Space and Clean Water Advisory Committee and its members shall
be carried out within the framework established by the ballot language of the 2015 levy, in compliance with all relevant management plans adopted by
the City, and expressly subject to the direction and approval of the Mayor and City Council. (Ord. 3-16, 3-8-2016)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 52/503
Chapter 12
ETHICS COMMISSION
2-12-1: ETHICS COMMISSION:
A. Purpose: The purpose of the commission shall be to issue advisory opinions related to title 1, chapter 8, "Code Of Ethics", of this Code; and to hear
inquiries and issue findings regarding alleged violations of the previously cited provisions.
B. Creation And Appointment: There is hereby created an Ethics Commission to consist of five (5) members. One member of the Ethics Commission shall
be an employee of the City. This member shall not be an elected or appointed official, a member of the Mayor's Office, the City Attorney or his/her staff,
the internal auditor or his/her staff, a department head or any employee of Human Resources. Three (3) members of the commission shall constitute a
quorum. (1952 Code § 2-24-01)
C. Method Of Appointment:
1. The Mayor shall appoint two (2) members. The City Council shall appoint two (2) members.
2. The employee member of the commission shall be appointed by a majority of the four (4) members appointed by the Mayor and City Council. The
commission shall receive input from the Department of Human Resources prior to selection. (Ord. 6-18, 2-6-2018)
D. Terms Of Appointment:
1. Nonemployee members shall be appointed to terms of four (4) years; however, the first member appointed by the Mayor and the first member
appointed by the City Council shall initially serve two (2) year terms to achieve staggered ending dates. The City employee member shall serve a
term of two (2) years, which may be renewed by reselection by the commission.
2. If a member is appointed to fill an unexpired term, that member's term shall end at the same time as the term of the person being replaced.
E. Termination Or Removal:
1. The unexcused absence of any member of the commission from three (3) consecutive meetings, unless the commission has excused the absence
for good and sufficient reasons as determined by the commission, shall constitute termination from the commission.
2. The Mayor may remove a member appointed by him for inappropriate conduct before the expiration of the member's term. The City Council may
remove a member appointed by the City Council for inappropriate conduct before the expiration of the member's term. The commission may remove
the member appointed by the commission for inappropriate conduct before the expiration of the member's term. Before removing a member, the
Mayor or City Council, or commission, shall specify the cause for removal and shall give the member the opportunity to make a personal explanation.
F. Compensation: Members of the Ethics Commission shall serve without compensation in a volunteer capacity. The member who is an officer or
employee of the City shall not receive any additional compensation for serving on the Ethics Commission.
G. Consultation With City Attorney:
1. The Ethics Commission shall be provided with the services of the City Attorney or designee to assist it with legal questions, questions of procedure
and to act as parliamentarian at their meetings. The Ethics Commission may consult with the City Attorney or designee regarding legal issues and
may request advisory assistance in conducting hearings on inquiries during any stage of the process.
2. In the event that the City Attorney or a member of the City Attorney's Office is the subject of an inquiry, the Ethics Commission is hereby authorized
to retain conflict counsel. The Mayor and City Council shall assist the commission in retaining conflict counsel.
3. The commission shall have the ability to request assistance from Human Resources. When an inquiry involves a member of the Human Resources
staff, the commission shall not request or receive their assistance. (1952 Code § 2-24-01)
2-12-2: ADVISORY OPINIONS:
A. Current Employees: Any current officer, official, appointee or employee may submit a written request to the Ethics Commission for advisory opinions on
whether any conduct by that person would constitute a violation of the City Code of Ethics.
B. Persons Intending To Become Employees: The Ethics Commission may render advisory opinions to individuals who intend to become employees,
officers, or officials upon written request of the person. The commission may make further inquiry of the potential future relationship the requester may
have with the City to determine the appropriateness of proceeding on the request.
C. Publication Of Opinions: The Ethics Commission may publish its advisory opinions. It shall do so in compliance with the provisions of the Idaho Public
Records Act. The commission may publish guidelines based on advisory opinions.
D. Conduct In Accordance With Advisory Opinion: A person whose conduct is in accordance with an advisory opinion or a published advisory opinion of
the commission that has not been superseded by a subsequent advisory opinion shall not be found in violation of any of the provisions of the City Code
of Ethics.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 53/503
E. Noncompliance With Advisory Opinions: When the Ethics Commission has reason to believe that an advisory opinion has not been complied with, it
shall inform the person, the person's Supervisor, the department head, the City Attorney, Human Resources and the Mayor. The Supervisor,
department head, the City Attorney, Human Resources and the Mayor shall take all steps necessary to ensure compliance or address the matter as a
performance issue through the progressive discipline process. This provision does not provide authority for the commission to independently
investigate matters of compliance with advisory opinions.
F. De Minimis Opinion: The commission may issue advisory opinions declaring the intended conduct de minimis. The requesting party is entitled to rely on
the advisory opinion of the commission. Notwithstanding that determination, the Supervisor or department head of the affected employee can
supersede that determination as department policy. De minimis is defined as a trivial benefit not to exceed the value of fifty dollars ($50.00) incidental
to personal, professional or business contacts and involving no substantial risk of undermining official impartiality.
G. Authority Of Commission To Decide: The Ethics Commission shall have the sole authority to decide whether to consider, investigate or issue an
advisory opinion to any party seeking such opinion. The Ethics Commission shall render an advisory opinion pursuant to written rules adopted by the
commission. (1952 Code § 2-24-02)
2-12-3: INQUIRIES:
Any person may file an inquiry with the Ethics Commission asking whether a current officer, official or employee has failed to comply with the City Code of
Ethics. The City Clerk or designee shall accept inquiries on behalf of the Ethics Commission and shall immediately transmit such inquiry to the commission
or its designee. The City Clerk is responsible to schedule meetings and post notice of said meeting pursuant to Idaho open meeting requirements. Subject
to section 2-12-4 of this chapter, the Idaho Public Records Act, and the rules adopted by the commission pursuant to section 2-12-4 of this chapter, the
Ethics Commission shall follow all the appropriate law and procedures, to include the following:
A. Hearing: May conduct a hearing pursuant to the Idaho open meetings requirements on all inquires which have not been dismissed pursuant to
subsection 2-12-4F of this chapter or resolved in accordance with subsection 2-12-4G of this chapter. The affected officer, official or employee shall
have the right to a closed hearing if allowed by law.
B. Written Findings: Except as otherwise provided by law, written findings and recommendations, if any, on inquiries will become public record. The
commission findings should characterize the seriousness of the violation, if any.
C. Notice Of Findings And Recommendations: Except as otherwise provided by law, the commission shall inform the person who is the subject of the
inquiry and the person who submitted the inquiry of its findings and recommendations.
D. Supervisor, Department Head Notified: If the person who is the subject of the inquiry is an employee, nonelected officer or appointed official, notify the
person's Supervisor and department head of its findings and recommendations. (1952 Code § 2-24-03)
2-12-4: PROCEDURE FOR INQUIRIES:
The Ethics Commission shall adopt written rules for inquiries that create a process that is fair to both the person who submits the inquiry and the person
who is the subject of the inquiry. In addition to rules which the commission may, in its discretion adopt, the rules shall:
A. Time Line: Establish time lines for all aspects of its handling of inquiries. The time lines shall be sufficiently long to enable a person who is the subject of
an inquiry to have adequate time to understand the inquiry and prepare a response. The rules shall allow the commission to alter the time lines upon a
request of the subject of the inquiry for more time to prepare.
B. Filing: Require the inquiry to be filed with either the City Clerk or the 1-800 telephone reporting line with sufficient identifying information to enable the
Ethics Commission and staff to identify and contact the complaining party. The Ethics Commission will provide for a form which shall contain a
statement that states, to the best of the person's knowledge, information and belief formed after reasonable reflection, the information in the inquiry is
true. The rules shall require the inquiry to describe the facts that constitute the alleged violation of the Code of Ethics in sufficient detail so that the
commission and the person who is the subject of the inquiry can reasonably be expected to understand the nature of any offense that is being alleged.
C. Actions More Than One Year: Prohibit the commission from accepting inquiries about actions that took place more than one year prior to the date of
filing.
D. Notification: Require the commission to notify the person who is the subject of the inquiry that an inquiry has been filed. The rules shall require the
commission to provide notification in a timely manner. The rules shall require the notification to include a copy of the full inquiry; a copy of any portion of
the Code of Ethics that is alleged to have been violated; and the commission rules for dealing with inquiries.
E. Public Release Of Inquiry: Require the commission to provide the subject of the inquiry with a copy of the inquiry before it provides copies to any other
parties. The rules shall recognize that distribution to the public of an inquiry prior to screening by the commission or its designee could harm the
reputation of an innocent person and is contrary to the public interest; therefore, the rules shall prohibit the public release of the inquiry until the
screening process has been completed.
F. Review Time Period; Dismissal: Require the commission, a committee of the commission or a designee of the commission to review the inquiries within
the time period as adopted by the commission. The rules shall require the dismissal and the reason for dismissal to be in writing and available to the
public. The rules shall allow the inquiry to be dismissed if:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 54/503
1. The commission has no jurisdiction over the subject matter or the alleged violator;
2. The alleged violation, if true, would not constitute a violation of the Code of Ethics;
3. The alleged violation is a minor or de minimis violation;
4. The inquiry is, on its face, frivolous, groundless or brought for purposes of harassment;
5. The matter has become moot because the person who is the subject of the inquiry is no longer an officer, official or employee, unless the
commission determines that the public interest would be served by publishing an advisory opinion;
6. The person who is the subject of the inquiry had obtained a determination that the issue was de minimis or an advisory opinion under section 2-12-2
of this chapter permitting the conduct; or
7. The Supervisor or department head has already taken action as a result of finding a violation.
G. Finding Without Public Hearing: Allow the commission, at its discretion, to make a finding solely on the basis of written arguments without holding a
public hearing, if it determines that there is no significant discrepancy in the facts as presented by the person filing the inquiry and the person who is
the subject of the inquiry; and the commission determines that it does not need any additional information. However, the person alleged to have
violated the Code of Ethics retains the right to demand a hearing, which may be open to the public.
H. Open Meetings: Require the commission to have hearings on inquiries at meetings which may open to the public, when said inquiries have not been
dismissed or resolved pursuant to this section.
I. Representation: Allow any person who is the subject of an inquiry to designate a representative if he or she wishes to be represented by another, to
present evidence, and to cross examine witnesses. The rules shall allow the person who submitted the inquiry and the subject of the inquiry sufficient
time to examine and respond to any evidence not presented to them in advance of the hearing. While the intent of the process is to provide all parties
sufficient time to prepare for a hearing, in no circumstance shall the inquiry hearing be held more than sixty (60) days from receipt of the inquiry.
J. Open Deliberations: Require deliberations on inquiries to be conducted in an open public session unless the hearing is closed pursuant to law.
K. Dismissal Without Finding: Allow the commission to dismiss an inquiry without a finding for or against the subject of the inquiry if the person committed
the violation due to oversight and comes into voluntary compliance.
L. Failure To Appear: Allow the commission to dismiss an inquiry if the person who submitted it does not appear at the hearing and if, in the opinion of the
commission, it would be unfair to the subject of the inquiry not to have the opportunity to cross examine the person. The rules shall, however, require
the City Clerk to schedule the hearing at a time reasonably convenient to both the person who submitted the inquiry and the subject of the inquiry.
M. Compelling Attendance: Allow the commission to compel the attendance of any City officer, official or employee to testify at a hearing before the
commission.
N. Subpoenas: Allow the commission to request that City Council, with the assistance of the Mayor, issue subpoenas to individuals the commission
reasonably believes are necessary to fully appreciate the facts and circumstances related to an inquiry. The issuance and service of said subpoena
shall be in accordance with the process set forth in Idaho Code section 50-216.
O. Evidence: Require the commission to base its finding of a violation upon clear and convincing evidence.
P. Referral When Evidence Of Crime: Require the commission to stay the inquiry and refer the entire matter to the appropriate prosecuting attorney and/or
law enforcement agency when credible evidence of a crime under State law is discovered.
Q. Frivolous Inquiries: Require the commission to inform the person who submitted the inquiry and the subject of the inquiry in writing if it believes an
inquiry is frivolous, groundless or brought for purposes of harassment.
R. Prohibited Participation: Prohibit members who have not been present for the hearing from participating in the findings or recommendations.
S. Majority Required: Require that findings and recommendations be made only by a majority of the commission.
T. Considerations By Commission: Allow the commission to consider, when it makes findings and recommendations, the severity of the offense; the
presence or absence of any intention to conceal, deceive or mislead; whether the violation was deliberate, negligent or part of a pattern.
U. Advisory Opinion: Allow the commission to issue an advisory opinion in response to any inquiry, in lieu of making findings and recommendations, where
deemed appropriate by the commission. (1952 Code § 2-24-04)
2-12-5: SUBPOENAS:
The Ethics Commission shall have the authority to request that City Council, with the assistance of the Mayor, subpoena witnesses to come before them to
testify at a hearing or produce documentation. Any hearing conducted where one or more witnesses are compelled to attend pursuant to this provision
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 55/503
shall be presided over by the Mayor or President of the City Council. Neither the Mayor nor the President of the City Council shall participate in the
deliberations, findings or recommendation of the commission at such a meeting. The subpoena procedure shall be in accordance with Idaho Code section
50-216. Prior to requesting that a subpoena be issued by the City Council and the Mayor, every reasonable attempt should be made to secure the person
or documents voluntarily. (1952 Code § 2-24-05)
2-12-6: ANNUAL REPORT:
By February 15 of each year, the Ethics Commission shall submit an annual report to the Mayor and City Council summarizing its activities during the
previous calendar year. The report shall include any recommendations for modifying the Code of Ethics. (1952 Code § 2-24-06)
Chapter 13
ACCESSIBLE PARKING COMMITTEE
2-13-1: CREATED; APPOINTMENT; MEMBERSHIP; TERMS; VACANCIES:
There is hereby created an Accessible Parking Committee, which shall be designated the Accessible Parking Committee and which shall consist of at
least seven (7) members, as appointed by the Mayor and confirmed by the City Council, with each member being selected on behalf of an identifiable
population of persons with disabilities and with at least four (4) persons being a person with a disability. Each member shall be appointed for a term of four
(4) years. If a vacancy should occur during an unexpired term, such vacancy shall be filled in the same manner as an original appointment. (1952 Code
§ 2-25-01)
2-13-2: ORGANIZATION:
At their first meeting, the appointed committee members shall elect a Chairperson, Vice Chairperson and Secretary, who shall serve for terms of one year.
The Secretary shall keep a record of all meetings and proceedings of the committee and shall perform all services that may be reasonably required by the
committee. The committee shall hold regular public meetings, as necessary, and shall keep a written record of its proceedings. (1952 Code § 2-25-02)
2-13-3: COMPENSATION; QUORUM:
A. Compensation; Expenses: The members of the Accessible Parking Committee shall serve and act without compensation, except that their actual and
necessary expenses shall be allowed by the Council and the City shall provide the necessary and suitable equipment and supplies to enable the
committee to properly transact and perform its business.
B. Quorum: A majority of the appointive members of the committee shall be necessary to constitute a quorum for the transaction of business. The
committee shall hold at least one meeting each year, and at such other times as may be called by the Chairperson or by the Mayor. (1952 Code § 2-25-
03)
2-13-4: DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES:
The Accessible Parking Committee shall serve in an advisory capacity and is established to:
A. Provide information and recommendations to the Division of Parking Services relating to the need for additional accessible parking spaces pursuant to
section 6-10A-15 of this Code.
B. Provide recommendations regarding the relocation, repair or modification of existing accessible parking spaces.
C. Accept, analyze and make recommendations to the Division of Parking Services regarding requests for additional accessible parking spaces as
provided in section 6-10A-15 of this Code. (1952 Code § 2-25-04)
D. Provide advice and recommendations to the Planning and Development Services Department and other City departments on accessibility issues
relating to streetscapes and sidewalk fixtures, including, but not limited to, the placement of signs, planters, benches, bicycle racks, newsstands,
fences, and trash receptacles. (Ord. 31-17, 10-24-2017)
Chapter 14
NEIGHBORS IN NEED TRUST FUND ADVISORY BOARD
2-14-1: CREATED:
There is hereby created the Neighbors in Need Trust Fund Advisory Board to the Mayor and City Council in their role as Trustees of the Neighbors in Need
Trust Fund. (1952 Code § 2-26-01)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 56/503
2-14-2: CLERK OR SECRETARY:
The Neighbors in Need Trust Fund Advisory Board shall have authority to designate a Clerk, who may be an officer or employee of the City, and who shall
act as Clerk or Secretary to the board without additional compensation, and who shall keep an accurate record of all proceedings of said board, and shall
file with the City Council, when ordered by the board, a report of all transactions of the board. (1952 Code § 2-26-02)
2-14-3: MEMBERSHIP; APPOINTMENT; TERMS; VACANCIES:
The Neighbors in Need Trust Fund Advisory Board shall consist of the Housing and Community Development Citizens Advisory Committee and four (4)
additional members appointed by the Mayor with the confirmation of the City Council. The four (4) additional members shall be from the planning team or
the policy team for the City's ten (10) year plan to reduce and prevent chronic homelessness or shall have demonstrated a working knowledge of issues
related to the causes for, community impact of and potential solutions to homelessness. At least two (2) of the additional members shall reside or be
employed within the City limits. Appointment of the four (4) additional members shall be for a period of three (3) years. If a vacancy shall occur during an
unexpired term, the Mayor, with the confirmation of the City Council, shall appoint a member for the remainder of such unexpired term. (1952 Code § 2-26-
03)
2-14-4: ORGANIZATION:
The Neighbors in Need Trust Fund Advisory Board shall meet and appoint one of its members as Chair of the board, who shall hold office as Chair for
such term as the board shall so designate, and the board may elect a Vice Chair who shall act as Chair in times of absence of the appointed Chair of the
board. (1952 Code § 2-26-04)
2-14-5: COMPENSATION; QUORUM AND MEETINGS:
A. Compensation; Expenses: The members of the board shall serve and act without compensation, except that their actual and necessary expenses shall
be allowed by the Council and the City shall provide the necessary and suitable equipment and supplies to enable the board to properly transact and
perform its business.
B. Quorum; Meetings: A majority of the appointed members of the board shall be necessary to constitute a quorum for the transaction of business. The
board shall hold at least one meeting each year, and at such other times as may be called by the Chair or by the Mayor. (1952 Code § 2-26-05)
2-14-6: DUTIES:
The Neighbors in Need Trust Fund Advisory Board shall serve in an advisory capacity to the Mayor and City Council in their role as Trustees for the
Neighbors in Need Trust Fund and is established to:
A. Assist the City in reviewing applications for Neighbors in Need Trust Fund grants.
B. Provide recommendations to the Trustees regarding the expenditure of trust fund interest income for programs and projects to receive Neighbors in
Need Trust Fund grants at least annually.
C. Adopt, subject to input from the Housing and Community Development Division Manager and review and approval by the City Council, reasonable
guidelines and procedures proposed by the board to:
1. Further the Neighbors in Need Trust Fund mission;
2. Develop a process of selecting projects or programs for grants with preference given to projects and programs with demonstrated ability to leverage
funds.
D. Direct staff to:
1. Develop a fiscal reporting program;
2. Provide periodic reports pertaining to success of the programs and projects funded through the trust; and
3. Develop an annual report to be presented to the Mayor and the City Council.
E. Recommend grants consistent with the Trust Fund. Grants shall be for a public benefit, and for a particular purpose.
F. Treat all entities applying for grants on equal footing. Criteria for selection shall not favor one particular entity over another.
G. Seek donations to achieve the trust's purpose and deposit such donations in the Trust Fund account.
H. Comply with the language of resolution 20251 establishing the Trust Fund. (1952 Code § 2-26-06)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 57/503
2-14-7: CONFLICT OF INTEREST:
If any board member sits or is closely related to any entity applying for said funds, said board member shall disqualify himself or herself from taking any
action on the application and any application vying for the same funds. If the board or a board member has any unanswered question relating to
disqualification, the question should be submitted to the Ethics Committee. (1952 Code § 2-26-07)
2-14-8: INFORMATION AVAILABLE TO BOARD:
The Mayor and Council shall make available to the board, upon request, all financial and accounting information, professional reports, annual monitoring
results, and such other information as may be necessary and appropriate for the board to review the progress of the programs and projects previously
awarded Neighbors in Need Trust funding and to develop annual funding recommendation. (1952 Code § 2-26-07)
2-14-9: COOPERATION OF CITY DEPARTMENTS:
This chapter shall not be construed in any manner as infringing upon any authorization previously granted to any other commission or board of the City,
but all departments of the City shall cooperate with the board for the purpose of coordinating the efforts and functions of all departments, commissions and
boards of the City for the distribution of Neighbors in Need Trust funding, subject to Trustee approval, to public or private organizations serving the needs
of the chronically homeless. (1952 Code § 2-26-07)
Chapter 15
BOISE CITY/ADA COUNTY HOUSING AUTHORITY (BCACHA)
2-15-1: BOARD APPOINTMENTS:
The BCACHA Board of Commissioners consists of seven (7) Commissioners, who serve staggered five (5) year terms. The City fills appointments in odd
numbered years and the Ada County Commissioners fill appointments in even numbered years. Commissioners appointed by the City shall, at the time of
their appointment and throughout the tenure of their membership, be residents of the City. However, due to the broad jurisdiction for which BCACHA
provides services, at any given time, one of the Commissioners appointed by the City may reside in the Boise City/Ada County area of impact, Ada
County, or own a business in the City. (Ord. 7-14, 2-4-2014)
Title 3
LICENSES AND PERMITS
Chapter 1
BUSINESS LICENSE REQUIREMENTS
ARTICLE A. BUSINESS LICENSES GENERALLY
3-1A-1: LEGAL AUTHORITY:
Idaho Code sections 50-301 and 50-307 authorize the City to regulate occupations and businesses within the City. (Ord. 39-15, 8-25-2015)
3-1A-2: PURPOSE:
The City finds that public health, safety and welfare require that certain occupations and businesses within the City be regulated without restraining,
burdening or over regulating the businesses or occupations. The City issues a license pursuant to this article and the regulated business' pertinent
licensing in this title, to assure, as is reasonably practicable, that each person and business licensed in accordance with this title is in substantial
compliance with these minimum standards and procedures. The issuance of a license pursuant to this article, however, does not constitute a
representation of any affirmance to any person who transacts business with a person or business licensed pursuant to this article that said licensee is free
from risk. The City shall not be liable for nor shall a cause of action exist for any loss or damage based upon the failure of any person or business licensed
under this article to meet the standards contained herein. (Ord. 39-15, 8-25-2015)
3-1A-3: SCOPE:
This article sets forth policies, standards, requirements, and procedures applicable to all of the following persons, businesses, trades and occupations
licensed or regulated by the City:
Alarm installer and alarm installation service Title 3, chapter 12
Alcohol beverage catering Title 3, chapter 3
Topic Code Reference
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 58/503
Alcoholic beverage Title 3, chapter 3
Auction house, auction sale, and auctioneer Title 3, chapter 8
Child care facility Title 3, chapter 6
Child care worker Title 3, chapter 6
Commercial driver Title 3, chapter 13, article B
Commercial vehicle Title 3, chapter 13, article B
Eating and drinking Title 4, chapter 3
Going out of business sale Title 3, chapter 1, article B
Immobilization agent Title 3, chapter 15
Immobilization service Title 3, chapter 15
Massage establishment Title 3, chapter 10
Non-aerial fireworks and public fireworks display Title 5, chapter 12
Non-commercial kennel Title 5, chapter 1
Non-consent towing services Title 3, chapter 16
Pawnbroker Title 3, chapter 7
Precious metal dealers Title 3, chapter 9
Private patrol agent Title 3, chapter 12
Private security service Title 3, chapter 12
Sidewalk cafe permit Title 3, chapter 4
Solicitor Title 3, chapter 2
Special events Title 3, chapter 17
Stationless bicycle share programs Title 3, chapter 14
Taxicab business Title 3, chapter 13, article A
Taxicab driver Title 3, chapter 13, article A
Taxicab vehicle Title 3, chapter 13, article A
Temporary merchant Title 3, chapter 2
Tree pruning and tree removal Title 3, chapter 14
Valet, both regular and special event Title 3, chapter 11
Vendor Title 3, chapter 2
(Ord. 21-18, 6-26-2018)
3-1A-4: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and derivations shall have the meanings given herein. When not inconsistent with the
context, words used in the present tense include the future tense, words in the plural number include the singular number, and words in the singular
number include the plural number. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory. Words used throughout this chapter, but not defined
herein, shall have their plain, ordinary and common meaning. Words in any gender shall apply to the feminine, masculine and neuter genders.
APPLICANT: A person who applies for a license to engage in or operate a regulated business within the City.
CITY: The City of Boise City, Idaho.
CITY CLERK'S OFFICE: The Office of the City Clerk of the City or its designee.
CONVICTION: An individual is considered to have been convicted of a criminal offense for purposes of this title when:
A. A judgment of conviction, adjudication, or withheld judgment has been entered against the individual by any Federal, State, military, or local court;
B. There has been a finding of guilt against the individual by any Federal, State, military, or local court;
C. A plea of guilty or no contest by the individual has been accepted by any Federal, State, military, or local court; or
Topic Code Reference
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 59/503
D. The individual has entered into or participated in first offender, deferred adjudication, or other arrangement or program where judgment of conviction
has been withheld. This includes when the individual has entered into participation in a drug court, mental health court, domestic violence court, or
other specialty court.
DIRECTOR: The Director of the Department of Finance and Administration or the Director's designee, who must be an employee of the City.
DISQUALIFYING CRIME: A conviction for a crime that results in a denial, revocation, or suspension of a license to an applicant or licensee.
DRIVING BUSINESS: A business where the primary nature of the business requires the applicant or licensee, his employees or agents to drive a motor
vehicle in order to engage in or operate the business. The term "driving business" includes chapter 13, article B, "Commercial Transportation Vehicles";
chapter 16, "Nonconsent Towing Services"; chapter 13, article A, "Taxicabs"; and chapter 11, "Downtown Valet Parking", of this title.
GOOD CAUSE: A substantial reason that affords a legal excuse.
LICENSE: Written permission from the City to engage in or operate a business regulated by the City pursuant to this Code. The term "license" includes the
word "permit".
LICENSEE: A person holding a valid license issued by the City Clerk's Office pursuant to this article.
LICENSING OFFICE OR OFFICER: The City Clerk's Office or its designee, who must be an employee of the City.
PERSON: Any individual, partnership, association, corporation, or organization of any kind, or any governmental entity, including the State of Idaho and
every political subdivision thereof.
PERTINENT LICENSE CHAPTER: The chapters in this Code specifically addressing the additional requirements, disqualifications, and substantive rules
governing each regulated business listed in section 3-1A-3 of this article.
REGULATED BUSINESS: A business, trade, or occupation for which a license is required by this article.
REVOCATION: The permanent removal of a license.
SATISFACTORY DRIVING RECORD: A driving record that includes, but is not limited to, less than eight (8) points within twelve (12) months of applying
for or renewing a license, and no suspensions or revocations of a driver's license within three (3) years of applying for or renewing a license.
STATIONLESS BICYCLE SHARE OPERATOR: A person who owns, manages, or operates a Stationless Bicycle Share Program.
STATIONLESS BICYCLE SHARE PROGRAM: A for hire system of self-service bicycles, E-bikes, or motorized scooters that does not require either a rack
or sharing station, or other stationary object.
SUSPENSION: The temporary removal of a license.
TIER 1 BUSINESS: The following are tier 1 businesses:
A. Alcoholic beverage;
B. Alcohol beverage catering;
C. Auction house, auction sale, and auctioneer;
D. Eating and drinking;
E. Going out of business sale;
F. Non-aerial fireworks, and public fireworks display;
G. Non-commercial kennel;
H. Sidewalk cafe permit;
I. Special events; and
J. Tree pruning and tree removal.
TIER 2 BUSINESS: The following are tier 2 businesses:
A. Immobilization agent;
B. Immobilization service;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 60/503
C. Pawnbroker;
D. Precious metal dealers;
E. Non-consent towing services;
F. Temporary merchant;
G. Temporary merchant, seasonal; and
H. Vendor.
TIER 3 BUSINESS: The following are tier 3 businesses:
A. Alarm installer and alarm installation service;
B. Child care facility;
C. Child care worker;
D. Commercial driver;
E. Commercial vehicle;
F. Massage establishment;
G. Private patrol agent;
H. Private security service;
I. Solicitor;
J. Stationless bicycle share programs;
K. Taxicab business;
L. Taxicab vehicle;
M. Taxicab driver; and
N. Valet, both regular and special event. (Ord. 21-18, 6-26-2018)
3-1A-5: LICENSE REQUIRED:
No person shall, wholly or in part, engage in or operate a regulated business within the City without first obtaining and maintaining, in full force and effect,
all licenses required by the City in accordance with this Code. Every applicant or licensee must meet all of the qualifications and none of the
disqualifications set forth in this article and in the pertinent license chapter or article. In the event of a conflict between this article and the pertinent license
chapter or article, the stricter requirements shall govern. (Ord. 39-15, 8-25-2015)
3-1A-6: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE AND RENEWAL:
A. Manner, Form: Application for a license and application for renewal for a regulated business shall be made to the City Clerk's Office in such form and
manner as may be prescribed.
B. Included Information: The written application for a license and application for renewal thereof shall include, at a minimum, the following:
1. The name and address of the applicant or licensee; and if a partnership, the name and address of the general partner; and if a corporation or
association, the name and address of the agent for service of process; the name, physical and mailing address, e-mail address and phone number of
the operating manager; and such other information as may be required.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 61/503
2. The license desired, together with a description of the business, trade, occupation or profession.
3. Whether the applicant or licensee has had a similar license denied, suspended or revoked within the past five (5) years by the City, the State, or by
any other city, county or state.
4. Whether the applicant or licensee has been convicted of any disqualifying crime, the type of offense, the location of the offense and the date of
conviction.
5. The legal name of the proposed business, trade or occupation and any trade names, and the street address, if any, where the regulated business is
to be undertaken.
6. Any other relevant information required by the pertinent license chapter or article and any other relevant information required by the City Clerk's
Office.
7. A statement signed and sworn by the applicant or licensee, under penalty of perjury, that all information submitted is true and correct to the best of
his knowledge.
8. Proof that the applicant or licensee is eighteen (18) years or older, unless otherwise specified in the pertinent license chapter or article.
9. If the proposed applicant or licensee is a corporation, proof that the corporation is registered and in good standing in the State.
C. Investigation: Upon receipt of an application for a license or application for renewal thereof, the City Clerk's Office shall cause an investigation to be
made to the extent necessary to determine whether the applicant or licensee is qualified to be licensed in accordance with State law, this article and the
pertinent license chapter or article.
D. Background Check: Persons who apply for a license included within a tier 2 or tier 3 business, as defined and set forth in section 3-1A-4 of this article,
shall submit to a background check, which shall include fingerprinting. Pursuant to Idaho Code section 67-3008, the City Clerk shall forward fingerprints
through the Idaho State Police to the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) to conduct a national background investigation and criminal history check.
Unless otherwise provided by law, criminal history records and the results of the background investigation received from the FBI are confidential and
shall not be disseminated to any private person or entity. The criminal history and national background check may also include a check of the Idaho
Department of Transportation driving records, and other states and jurisdiction records and findings. Criminal history checks on those persons under
the age of eighteen (18) years of age shall include a check of the juvenile justice records of adjudications of the Magistrate Division of the District
Court, County Probation Services, the Department of Health and Welfare and other records as may be required by the pertinent licensing chapter or
article. The cost of taking and processing such fingerprints shall be borne by the applicant or licensee and is nonrefundable.
E. Change In Information: Every applicant or licensee must notify the City Clerk's Office in writing within ten (10) business days of any material change in
information contained in his application for a license or application for renewal thereof, including, but not limited to, change of name, address,
telephone number, employer, location of business office, registered agent, or addition or deletion of vehicles; provided, however, that if any of the
individuals identified in sections 3-1A-10-1 through 3-1A-10-4 of this article is convicted of a disqualifying crime, the applicant or licensee shall notify
the City Clerk's Office in writing within two (2) days of entry of such conviction.
F. Nonrefundable License Fee: Every application for a license required by this article or renewal thereof shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable license
fee in an amount established by the City Council and listed on the most current City Clerk license fee schedule. The required license fee, and all other
required costs and fees, shall be paid at the time of application for such license. (Ord. 39-15, 8-25-2015)
3-1A-7: DISPOSITION OF APPLICATION AND RENEWAL:
The City Clerk's Office shall take action to approve or deny an application for a license, or application for renewal thereof, within sixty (60) days of the
receipt of a completed application or completed application for renewal. (Ord. 39-15, 8-25-2015)
3-1A-8: TERM OF LICENSE:
A license issued by the City pursuant to this article is valid for one year from the date of issuance or renewal, unless stated otherwise in the pertinent
license chapter or article, or on the license, or unless sooner revoked, suspended or relinquished. (Ord. 39-15, 8-25-2015)
3-1A-9: FAILURE TO DISCLOSE INFORMATION; CHANGE OF INFORMATION:
An applicant or licensee who knowingly omits, misrepresents or fails to provide any required information, or who fails to sign the application for a license or
application for renewal, or who fails to disclose any material change in information, may be subject to denial, suspension or revocation of a license, or
prosecution under this article, or a combination of any of the above. (Ord. 39-15, 8-25-2015)
3-1A-10: DISQUALIFYING CRIMES OR CIRCUMSTANCES:
3-1A-10-1: TIER 1 BUSINESSES:
No applicant or licensee will be issued or renewed a license to engage in or operate a tier 1 business unless the applicant or licensee, or any of his
employees, meets all of the qualifications and none of the disqualifications set forth in the pertinent license chapter or this article. (Ord. 39-15, 8-25-2015)
3-1A-10-2: TIER 2 BUSINESSES:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 62/503
No applicant or licensee will be issued or renewed a license to engage in or operate a tier 2 business if, in addition to the disqualifiers listed in section 3-
1A-10-1 of this article, the applicant or licensee, or any of his employees:
A. Revocation Of License: Has, within the five (5) years immediately preceding the date of application, had any license of the same or similar kind revoked
by the City, the State or by any other city, county or state;
B. Warrant: Has an outstanding warrant for his arrest, detainment, extradition or deportment;
C. Felony Conviction: Has, within five (5) years prior to the date of making application for such license or application for renewal, been convicted of any
felony; provided, however, that any applicant, licensee or any of his affiliates or employees, who has not had a prior conviction within the past five (5)
years solely because he has been incarcerated shall be disqualified;
D. Specific Misdemeanors: Has, within the three (3) years immediately preceding the date of the application for such license or application for renewal,
been convicted of any misdemeanor criminal violation involving theft, larceny or other dishonest act, including, but not limited to, misdemeanor forgery
of and fraudulent use of a financial transaction card, misdemeanor forgery and counterfeiting, misdemeanor identity theft, misdemeanor insurance
fraud, misdemeanor public assistance fraud in the State or in any other city or jurisdiction; provided, however, that any applicant, licensee or any of his
affiliates or employees, who has not had a prior conviction within the past three (3) years solely because he has been incarcerated shall be disqualified;
or
E. Probation, Parole: At the time of application is currently serving any term of felony probation or parole. (Ord. 39-15, 8-25-2015)
3-1A-10-3: TIER 3 BUSINESSES:
No applicant or licensee will be issued or renewed a license to engage in or operate a tier 3 business if, in addition to the disqualifiers listed in sections 3-
1A-10-1 and 3-1A-10-2 of this article, the applicant or licensee, or his employees:
A. Sex Offender: Is required to register as a sex offender, pursuant to the Sexual Offender Registration Notification and Community Right-to-Know Act,
Idaho Code section 18-8301 et seq., or the Juvenile Sex Offender Registration Notification and Community Right-to-Know Act, Idaho Code section 18-
8401 et seq.;
B. Specific Misdemeanors: Has, within three (3) years prior to the date of making application for such license or application for renewal, been convicted of
any misdemeanor involving: the use of force against the person or property of another; the threat of force against the person of another; stalking,
telephone harassment, or violations of protection orders or no contact orders; theft or larceny; the use, possession or sale of illicit drugs or drug
paraphernalia; possession of a concealed weapon; or illicit sexual activity. Provided, however, that any applicant, licensee or any of his affiliates, or
employees who has not had a prior conviction within the past three (3) years solely because he has been incarcerated shall be disqualified;
C. Specific Sexual Offenses: Has a conviction, whether felony or misdemeanor, involving the sexual battery of any person, sexual exploitation or sexual
abuse of a minor or vulnerable adult, enticement of a minor, child pornography, kidnapping, lewd conduct with a minor, prostitution, rape or homicide; or
D. Domestic Violence: Is a respondent in a domestic violence protection order entered pursuant to Idaho Code title 39, chapter 63 after receiving notice of
and an opportunity for hearing; provided, entry of an ex parte order pursuant to Idaho Code section 39-6301 et seq., shall not apply herein. (Ord. 39-15,
8-25-2015)
3-1A-10-4: DRIVING BUSINESSES AND OTHER REQUIREMENTS:
A. Suspended Or Invalid License: In addition to those disqualifications included within a license's tier, no applicant or licensee will be issued or renewed a
license to engage in or operate a driving business while the applicant or licensee's driver's license is suspended or invalid.
B. Copy Of License And Driving Record: Each applicant or licensee must submit a copy of a valid State driver's license and a copy of that applicant's or
licensee's driving record showing that the applicant or licensee has a satisfactory driving record. The driving record shall be dated not more than ten
(10) days prior to the date the application is submitted.
C. Medical Certificate: Every two (2) years, each applicant or licensee for a driving business shall submit with the application a Department of
Transportation medical card stating that the applicant or licensee has sufficient hearing, vision and general health such that the applicant or licensee is
physically and mentally fit for the safe operation of a driving business. The medical card must be valid for at least eleven (11) months after the date the
applicant or licensee submits his application.
D. Proof Of Insurance: No applicant or licensee shall be issued a license to operate a driving business until the applicant or licensee has provided proof of
insurance as provided in the pertinent license chapter or article. (Ord. 39-15, 8-25-2015)
3-1A-11: REQUEST FOR EXEMPTION REVIEW:
A. Written Request: An applicant or licensee who is denied a license or whose license is not renewed may submit a written request for an exemption
review.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 63/503
B. Filing Time Limit: The request for an exemption review must be based upon good cause and filed with the City Clerk's Office at the time of application or
within seven (7) business days upon denial of such application.
C. Information Required: The written request for an exemption review must state the applicant's or licensee's name, address and phone number, the
remedy requested and must contain a concise written statement of the facts, circumstances and grounds for the requested exemption, and any
supplemental information establishing suitability for licensure. Any decision to grant an exemption shall not be considered as precedent or be given any
force or effect in any other proceedings. A request for an exemption review may be renewed annually.
D. Consideration: The City Clerk's Office shall consider the following factors or evidence in determining whether the applicant or licensee has shown good
cause for granting an exemption:
1. The severity or nature of the crime or disqualifying circumstance;
2. The period of time that has passed since the crime or disqualifying circumstance under review;
3. The number or pattern of crimes or disqualifying circumstance or other similar incidents;
4. The circumstances surrounding the crime or disqualifying circumstance that would help determine the risk of repetition;
5. The relationship of the crime or disqualifying circumstance to the license;
6. The applicant's or licensee's activities since the crime or disqualifying circumstance under review, such as employment, education, participation in
treatment, or any other factors which may be evidence of current rehabilitation;
7. The falsification or omission of information on the application form and other supplemental forms submitted; and
8. Any other information regarding rehabilitation or mitigating circumstances.
E. Applicant Bears Burden: The applicant or licensee shall bear the burden of establishing good cause for an exemption and his current suitability for a
licensure.
F. Restrictions, Stipulations: When such an exemption is granted, the license may be issued with restrictions and stipulations. If the licensee does not fully
comply with the restrictions, the license may be revoked or suspended. (Ord. 39-15, 8-25-2015)
3-1A-12: NOTICE OF INABILITY TO PROCEED:
If, at the time of initial application or renewal, an applicant or licensee has a pending criminal action for a disqualifying crime or an outstanding warrant for
his arrest, detainment, extradition or deportation, the City Clerk's Office shall issue a notice of inability to proceed. The applicant or licensee may submit
documentation that the matter has been resolved and that the applicant or licensee qualifies for the license within sixty (60) days of notification. If the
applicant or licensee fails to provide such notice, the application or renewal shall be deemed denied and the applicant must apply anew for the license.
(Ord. 39-15, 8-25-2015)
3-1A-13: TRANSFERABILITY:
A. Approval Required: A license to engage in or operate a regulated business shall not be transferred or leased without the written approval of the City
Clerk's Office or unless authorized by the pertinent license chapter or article.
B. Nonrefundable Application Fee: A nonrefundable application fee in an amount established by the City Council and listed on the most current City Clerk
license fee schedule shall accompany the application for each transfer requested. (Ord. 39-15, 8-25-2015)
3-1A-14: CONSENT TO COMPLIANCE INSPECTIONS:
Every licensee consents to reasonable compliance inspections during its regular hours of business by the City Clerk's Office, Chief of Police or their
respective designees to enter, free of charge, any place of business or to stop, in accordance with the law, any vehicle for which a license is required. The
compliance inspections are solely for the purpose of determining whether the activity is being carried on in compliance with Federal and State laws and
Municipal ordinances and to promote the public health, safety and welfare. (Ord. 39-15, 8-25-2015)
3-1A-15: NOTICE OF VIOLATION:
A. Issuance: Upon determining that a licensee is in violation of any Federal, State or local law, rule or regulation, but that the licensee does not pose an
immediate threat of harm to the public health, safety or welfare, the City Clerk's Office may issue a notice of violation.
B. Notice Requirements: Every notice of violation issued pursuant to this article shall:
1. Conform to the same notice and service requirements as a notice of denial, suspension or revocation;
2. Include all of the information listed in a notice of denial, suspension or revocation;
3. Identify the corrective action that shall be taken to address the basis for the notice of violation;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 64/503
4. State the date and time by which the required corrective action shall be completed;
5. State the date on which the license suspension or revocation will begin, and the length and terms of such a suspension, should the licensee fail to
complete the required corrective action by the date and time specified in the notice of violation; and
6. Explain the licensee's opportunity to request an informal review, an administrative review hearing by the Director and a review hearing by a Hearing
Officer to contest the proposed decision or action.
C. Failure To Correct; Suspension, Revocation: In the event a licensee, having received a notice of violation, fails to complete the corrective action stated
in the notice of violation, his affected license shall be suspended or revoked as stated in the notice of violation without any further notice or action. The
notice of suspension or revocation contained within the notice of violation shall suffice to provide notice of suspension or revocation.
D. Proof Of Completion: It shall be the duty of the licensee to provide proof of completion of the corrective action to the Licensing Officer. Failure to do so
shall result in license suspension or revocation as stated in the notice of violation.
E. Rescind: Upon receipt of satisfactory proof of completion of the correction action, the Licensing Officer shall provide the licensee with written notice
rescinding the possibility of the suspension or revocation as stated in the notice of violation. (Ord. 39-15, 8-25-2015)
3-1A-16: NOTICE OF DENIAL, REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION:
A. Registered, Certified Letter: If an application for a license is denied, suspended or revoked, a letter will be sent by registered or certified mail to the
applicant's or licensee's address on file in the City Clerk's Office.
B. Included Information: Every notice of denial, suspension or revocation shall include a statement or description explaining:
1. The proposed decision or action, and if for suspension or revocation, the effective date of the proposed decision or action, which date shall not be
less than ten (10) business days after the date of the notice unless the license is being suspended or revoked pursuant to section 3-1A-19 of this
article; and for suspension, the time period for the suspension, which shall be no longer than six (6) months;
2. The reasons why the license is being denied, suspended or revoked;
3. That the applicant or licensee has the opportunity to request an informal review, an administrative review hearing by the Director and a review
hearing by a Hearing Officer to contest the proposed decision or action;
4. If the applicant or licensee fails to request an informal review within ten (10) business days of the date of the notice, the licensee or applicant waives
his opportunity to contest the proposed decision or action, and the action shall become final on the notice's effective date. (Ord. 39-15, 8-25-2015)
3-1A-17: DENIAL, REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION OF LICENSE:
In addition to any other penalty provided by this article, the pertinent license chapter or article, or by law, any license issued in accordance with this article
may be denied, revoked or suspended for any of the following reasons:
A. Disqualifying Status; Driving Violations: Any one of the individuals identified in sections 3-1A-10-1 through 3-1A-10-4 of this article is convicted of a
disqualifying crime; or any individual identified in section 3-1A-10-4 of this article fails to maintain a satisfactory driving record, fails to submit the
required medical certificate, or fails to maintain and show proof of the requisite insurance coverages;
B. Failure To Comply: The licensee or applicant, or any of his partners, affiliates or employees fails to comply with any of the minimum standards,
requirements, policies, or procedures set forth in this article or the pertinent license chapter or article;
C. Fraud Or Misrepresentation: The licensee obtained his license by fraud or misrepresentation;
D. Failure To Take Corrective Action: The licensee fails to take corrective action within the time frame specified in a notice of violation;
E. Contrary Use: The license is being or has been exercised contrary to the terms or conditions of the license;
F. Failure To Pay Fee: The licensee or applicant fails to pay any applicable fee imposed pursuant to this article or the pertinent license chapter or article;
G. Operation Detrimental: The licensee is operating the regulated business in such a manner as to be detrimental to the public health, safety and welfare.
(Ord. 39-15, 8-25-2015)
3-1A-18: STAY OF SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION:
A. Effective Date: Absent an emergency as set forth in section 3-1A-19 of this article, the effective date of a proposed suspension or revocation shall be
not less than ten (10) business days after the date of the notice, unless otherwise mutually agreed to between the City Clerk's Office and the licensee.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 65/503
B. Denial: The decision of the City Clerk's Office to deny or not renew a license shall result in no stay and the decision shall become effective immediately.
(Ord. 39-15, 8-25-2015)
3-1A-19: EMERGENCY SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION:
A. Authority: Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, when, in the opinion of the City Clerk's Office, there is a clear and immediate threat to the
health, safety or welfare of the public, there shall be no stay of the suspension or revocation. The City Clerk's Office shall prepare a written notice of
suspension or revocation that includes a statement of the decision or action, an explanation of the reasons for the decision or action, the Code sections
relied upon for the decision or action and an explanation of the licensee's rights to request an administrative review hearing from the Director and a
review hearing by a Hearing Officer.
B. Administrative Review Hearing Request: The licensee shall have the right to request an administrative review hearing within ten (10) days of the
emergency suspension or revocation. (Ord. 39-15, 8-25-2015)
3-1A-20: WAITING PERIOD BEFORE BECOMING ELIGIBLE TO REAPPLY AFTER REVOCATION:
A licensee whose license was revoked may not reapply for a license until one year has elapsed from the date of notice of the revocation, the informal
review, the written decision in an administrative review or the written decision following a hearing before a Hearing Officer, whichever is latest; such waiting
period shall also apply to any applicant that is a partnership, association or corporation that includes a previously revoked licensee holding a ten percent
(10%) or more interest in the partnership, association or corporation. A licensee's failure to accept, acknowledge or receive notice shall not invalidate the
waiting period. (Ord. 39-15, 8-25-2015)
3-1A-21: REQUEST FOR INFORMAL REVIEW BY CITY CLERK'S OFFICE:
A. Time For Filing: Upon receipt of a notice of denial, suspension, revocation or violation, an applicant or licensee may request an informal review by the
City Clerk's Office within ten (10) business days after the date the decision is mailed or otherwise delivered to the applicant or licensee.
B. Information Required: A request for an informal review shall contain the following information:
1. The name of applicant or licensee;
2. If an existing licensee, the City applicant or license number; and
3. The reasons for which the review is requested set forth with specificity. (Ord. 39-15, 8-25-2015)
3-1A-22: INFORMAL REVIEW:
A. Duty Of City Clerk's Office: If the City Clerk's Office receives a request for an informal review, the City Clerk's Office shall:
1. Review the decision or action and any information submitted by a licensee or an applicant; and
2. Communicate with the licensee or applicant if additional documentation or clarification is required.
B. Untimely Filing: The City Clerk's Office will refuse to consider any request for informal review that is not received within ten (10) business days of the
date of the notice of denial, suspension, violation or revocation.
C. Licensee Failure To Respond: If the licensee fails to respond to communication requests, the decision or action shall become effective at twelve o'clock
(12:00) midnight on the effective date of the notice.
D. Burden Of Proof: The applicant or licensee has the burden of proof and must establish that the decision or action of the Licensing Officer was arbitrary
or capricious.
E. Review Informal: The review shall be conducted informally. The City Clerk's Office shall review the decision or action and the reasons therefor with the
applicant or licensee. The applicant or licensee, in person or through his attorney, may present any evidence showing reason why the decision or
action was arbitrary or capricious.
F. Decision Time Limit: The City Clerk's Office decision with respect to a request for informal review will be issued within seven (7) business days of the
receipt of the informal review request or upon receipt of additional documentation or clarification as requested.
G. Licensing Officer Not To Review: The informal review shall not be conducted by the Licensing Officer who issued the notice of violation, denial,
suspension or revocation. (Ord. 39-15, 8-25-2015)
3-1A-23: REQUEST FOR ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW BY DIRECTOR:
A. Request For Review: If the applicant or licensee fails to obtain the relief requested in the informal review, or if the licensee's license is suspended or
revoked pursuant to section 3-1A-19 of this article, the applicant or licensee may request an administrative review hearing by the Director.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 66/503
B. Time Limit For Filing: A request for an administrative review must occur within seven (7) business days of the mailing or hand delivery of the final
decision of the informal review to the applicant or licensee.
C. Information Required: A request for an administrative review shall contain the following information:
1. The name of applicant or licensee;
2. If an existing licensee, the City applicant or license number;
3. The reasons for which the review is requested set forth with specificity;
4. The applicant's or licensee's intent to be represented by legal counsel;
5. The remedy requested; and
6. The applicant's or licensee's availability for a hearing within the next seven (7) to fifteen (15) business days. (Ord. 39-15, 8-25-2015)
3-1A-24: ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW HEARING:
A. Duty Of Director: If the Director receives a request for an administrative review hearing, the Director shall:
1. Schedule a date for the hearing not more than fifteen (15) business days and not less than seven (7) business days after the Director receives the
request;
2. Notify the licensee or applicant of the date, time and location of the hearing; and
3. State in the notice that the applicant or licensee must appear at and participate in the hearing in order to contest the violation, denial, nonrenewal, or
the proposed suspension or revocation.
B. Untimely Filing: The Director will refuse to consider any request for review that is not received within seven (7) business days of the date of the mailing
or hand delivery of final resolution of the informal review.
C. Failure To Appear: If the licensee fails to appear at the hearing, the decision or action shall become effective at twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight the day
following the hearing.
D. Burden Of Proof: The applicant or licensee has the burden of proof and must establish that the decision or action of the City Clerk's Office was arbitrary
or capricious.
E. Informal Hearing: The hearings shall be conducted informally. The Director or his designee shall review the decision or action and the reasons therefor
with the applicant or licensee. The applicant or licensee, in person or through his attorney, may present any evidence showing reason why the decision
or action was arbitrary or capricious. The Director shall cause an audio or video recording to be made of the hearing.
F. Decision Of Default For Failure To Appear: If an applicant or licensee fails to appear at the administrative review hearing, the Director shall enter a
proposed decision of default upholding the denial, suspension or revocation. The proposed decision of default may be rescinded if, within seven (7)
business days of the date of mailing, the applicant or licensee submits a written explanation for not appearing, which the Director finds substantial and
reasonable.
G. Issuance Of Decision: The Director's written decision will be issued within seven (7) business days of the hearing. The Director's decision will include
the reasons for his decision.
H. Effective Date: The Director's decision shall become effective ten (10) business days after the date the decision is mailed or hand delivered to the
applicant or licensee. (Ord. 39-15, 8-25-2015)
3-1A-25: REVIEW OF DIRECTOR'S DECISION:
A. Filing Time Limit: A licensee or applicant may request a review of the Director's decision by a Hearing Officer within ten (10) business days of the
effective date of the Director's decision. (Ord. 39-15, 8-25-2015)
B. Information Required: A request for review of the Director's decision must be filed in writing and must include that information set forth in section 3-1A-
23 of this article. In addition, the request for review must be accompanied by a copy of the decision or action that is the subject of the review, and
identify all legal and factual basis of disagreement with the Director's decision. Requests for review must also include the applicant's or licensee's intent
to be represented by legal counsel and include payment of a fee as established by the City Council. (Ord. 39-15, 8-25-2015; amd. 2019 Code)
C. Burden Of Proof: The applicant or licensee has the burden of proof and must establish that the decision or action of the Licensing Officer was arbitrary
or capricious.
D. Decision Of Default For Failure To Appear: If an applicant or licensee fails to appear at the review hearing, the Hearing Officer shall enter a proposed
decision of default. The proposed decision of default may be rescinded if, within seven (7) business days of the date of mailing, the applicant or
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 67/503
licensee submits a written explanation for not appearing, which the Hearing Officer finds substantial and reasonable. (Ord. 39-15, 8-25-2015)
3-1A-26: AUTHORITY OF HEARING OFFICER:
A. Consideration By Hearing Officer: The Hearing Officer will consider only information that was available to the Director at the time the decision was
made. If a party shows with good cause that there is additional relevant information that was not presented to the Director, the Hearing Officer will
remand the request for administrative review to the Director for reconsideration. No Hearing Officer has the jurisdiction to invalidate any Federal or
State Statute, ordinance, rule or regulation, or court order. The Hearing Officer must defer to the Director's interpretation of statutes, ordinances, rules,
regulations or policy unless the Hearing Officer finds the Director's interpretation to be contrary to the plain meaning of the statute or ordinance or an
abuse of discretion.
B. Power To Regulate Proceedings: The Hearing Officer shall have and exercise the power to regulate the proceedings and to do all acts and to take all
measures necessary or proper for the efficient performance of the Hearing Officer's duties under this article. The Hearing Officer shall have all powers
of the City for the hearing of these matters, may issue subpoenas in the name of the City, may rule upon the admissibility of evidence, may put
witnesses under oath and may examine them and may call the parties to the action and examine them upon oath. (Ord. 39-15, 8-25-2015)
3-1A-27: WRITTEN REPORT:
A. Required: The Hearing Officer shall make findings of fact and conclusions of law as appropriate and issue a written report. The order must either affirm
the Director's action or reverse and remand the Director's action for further proceedings. The Hearing Officer does not have authority to modify the
Director's action. The Hearing Officer shall file the report with the Director, along with the recording of the proceedings, transcripts, if any, minutes,
evidence and original exhibits offered or received at the hearing. The Hearing Officer shall transmit a copy of the report to all persons entitled to notice.
The Hearing Officer shall cause an audio or video recording to be made of the hearing.
B. Time Limit: The Hearing Officer's report will be issued within fifteen (15) business days of the hearing, and shall become effective three (3) business
days after the date the decision is mailed or hand delivered to the applicant or licensee. Failure of the Hearing Officer to issue a report within fifteen
(15) business days shall not invalidate any suspension or revocation. (Ord. 39-15, 8-25-2015)
3-1A-28: UNLAWFUL ACTS:
It shall be unlawful for any applicant or licensee, or any of his respective employees, agents or affiliates to:
A. Fraud, False Statements: Engage in fraud, misrepresentation or to make a false statement in an application for a license or an application for renewal of
a license;
B. Failure To Obtain License Or Permit: Fail to obtain all required licenses and permits. Each day a person fails to obtain all required licenses shall
constitute a separate violation;
C. Failure To Report: Fail to report a licensee's failure to maintain all of the qualifications and none of the disqualifications as required by this article or the
pertinent licensing chapter or article;
D. Refusal Of Compliance Inspections: Refuse to allow the Chief of Police, City Clerk's Office or their designees to conduct compliance inspections; or
E. Violations: To violate any of the provisions of this article. (Ord. 39-15, 8-25-2015)
3-1A-29: RESPONSIBILITIES OF LICENSEES:
Every licensee is responsible for ensuring that his respective employees, agents and affiliates are familiar with the applicable policies, standards, laws and
ordinances applicable to the license issued to him by the City. (Ord. 39-15, 8-25-2015)
3-1A-30: PENALTY:
The violation of any of the provisions of section 3-1A-28 of this article is punishable as a general misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be
subject to penalty as provided in section 1-4-1 of this Code. In addition to a criminal penalty, the violation of any of the provisions of this article may result
in either the suspension or revocation of a license. (Ord. 39-15, 8-25-2015; amd. 2019 Code)
ARTICLE B. GOING OUT OF BUSINESS, CLOSING OUT SALES
3-1B-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and derivations shall have the meanings given herein. When not inconsistent with the
context, words used in the present tense include the future tense, words in the plural number include the singular number, and words in the singular
number include the plural number. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory. Words used throughout this chapter, but not defined
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 68/503
herein or in article A of this chapter, shall have their plain, ordinary and common meaning. Words in any gender shall apply to the feminine, masculine and
neuter genders.
APPLICANT: A person making application for a license or the renewal thereof.
COUNCIL: The Council of Boise City.
FIRE AND OTHER ALTERED GOODS SALE: A sale held out in such a manner as to reasonably cause the public to believe that the sale will offer goods
damaged or altered by fire, smoke, water or other like causes or means.
GOING OUT OF BUSINESS SALE: A sale held out in such a manner as to reasonably cause the public to believe that upon disposal of the stock of goods
on hand the business will cease and be discontinued, such sale including, but not limited to, the following kinds of sales: adjustors; adjustment; alteration;
administrators; assignees; bankruptcy; benefit of administrator or executor; benefit of creditors; benefit of trustees; building coming down; closing;
creditor's committee; creditors; end; executor; final days; force out; forced out of business; insolvency; insurance; last days; lease expires; liquidation; loss
of lease; mortgage; receivers; trustees; and quitting business.
GOODS: Any goods, wares, merchandise or other property capable of being the object of a sale regulated hereunder.
LICENSE OFFICER: The City Clerk.
PERSON: A person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or organization of any kind.
REMOVAL OF BUSINESS OR CLOSING OUT SALE: A sale held in such a manner as to reasonably cause the public to believe that the person
conducting the sale will cease and discontinue business at the place of sale upon disposal of the stock of goods on hand and will then move to and
resume business at a new location in the City, or will then continue business from other existing locations in the City; provided, however, that the sale
closing out of a line or type of goods not resulting in the cessation of the entire business shall not be deemed a removal of business or closing out sale.
(1952 Code § 5-01-01; amd. 2019 Code)
3-1B-2: APPLICABILITY OF REGULATIONS:
Except as to an application for a fire and other altered goods sale made within thirty (30) days from the date such goods were damaged by fire, smoke,
water or other like causes or means:
A. Persons Available To Apply: Any person who has not been the owner of a business advertised or described in the application for a license hereunder for
a period of at least six (6) months prior to the date of the proposed sale shall not be granted a license, except that on the death of a person doing
business in this City, his or her heirs, devisees or legatees shall have the right to apply for a license hereunder.
B. Sales Within One Year: Any person who has held a sale, as regulated hereunder, at the location stated in the application within one year last past from
the date of such application shall not be granted a license.
C. Branch Businesses: Where a person applying for a license hereunder operates more than one place of business, the license issued shall apply only to
the one store or branch specified in the application and no other store or branch shall advertise or represent it is cooperating with it, or in any way
participating in the licensed sale, nor shall the store or branch conducting the licensed sale advertise or represent that any other store or branch is
cooperating with it or participating in any way in the licensed sale.
D. Persons Not Affected: The provisions of this article shall not apply to or affect the following persons:
1. Persons acting pursuant to an order or process of a court of competent jurisdiction;
2. Persons acting in accordance with their powers and duties as public officials;
3. Duly licensed auctioneers selling at auction; or
4. Any publisher of a newspaper, magazine or other publication, who publishes in good faith, any advertisement, without knowledge of its false,
deceptive or misleading character, or without knowledge that the provisions of this article have not been complied with. (1952 Code § 5-01-03)
3-1B-3: LICENSE REQUIRED:
Except as to sales under judicial process and prior to obtaining a license to hold or conduct a sale pursuant to the provisions of this article, it shall be
unlawful for any person to sell or offer to sell any goods at a sale to be advertised or held out by any means constituting any one of the following kinds:
A. Fire, distress and other altered stock sale;
B. Going out of business sale; and
C. Removal of business or closing out sale. (1952 Code § 05-01-02)
3-1B-4: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
Application for a license to conduct a sale regulated by this article shall be made to the License Officer at least ten (10) days prior to such sale in such
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 69/503
form and manner as prescribed by the Council, but containing at least the following information:
A. Personal Information: The name and address of the person for which an application is made and the name and address of the owner or owners (if a
partnership or corporation, the names and addresses of partners, officers and managers) of the goods to be the object of the sale;
B. Length Of Time In Business: The length of time the person has been in business in the City and the length of time the person has been in business at
the address at which the sale is to be held;
C. Previous Sales: Whether, and when, any sales enumerated by this article have previously been held by said applicant, including the date and location
of said sales;
D. Manner Of Sale: A statement explaining the reason for the urgent and expeditious disposal of goods thereby and the manner in which the sale will be
conducted;
E. Dates: The dates of the period of time within which the sale is to be held;
F. Location: A description of the place where said sale is to be held;
G. Inventory: An inventory describing generally the goods to be offered for sale at said sale. Such inventory shall not include goods ordered in
contemplation of conducting a sale regulated hereunder, and any goods purchased within thirty (30) days before the filing of an application hereunder
shall be deemed to have been goods ordered in contemplation of a sale regulated by this article. (1952 Code § 5-01-04)
3-1B-5: LICENSE FEE, TERM AND BOND:
A. Application And Fee Submitted: An applicant for a license hereunder shall submit to the License Officer with his application a nonrefundable license fee
in an amount established by the City Council and listed on the most current City Clerk license fee schedule.
B. Term Of License: The license, if the application is approved by the Licensing Officer, shall authorize the sale described in the application for a period of
not more than sixty (60) consecutive days, Sundays and holidays excluded, following the date of issuance thereof.
C. Extension Of Term: Upon payment of an additional nonrefundable license fee in an amount established by the City Council and listed on the most
current City Clerk license fee schedule, the License Officer may renew or extend a license for one period of time only, such period to be in addition to
the period of time permitted in the original license, and such renewal shall not exceed thirty (30) consecutive days, Sundays and holidays excluded,
when the Licensing Officer finds:
1. That facts existing justify the license renewal;
2. The licensee filed an application for renewal;
3. The licensee has submitted with the application for renewal a revised inventory showing the items listed on the original inventory remaining unsold
and not listing any goods not included on the original application and inventory;
4. The license or renewal thereof shall authorize only the type of sale described in the application at the location named therein;
5. The license shall authorize only the sale of goods described in the inventory attached to the application.
D. Bond Amount: The applicant for a license hereunder shall tender with the application a bond in the sum of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) conditioned
upon the observance of this article and for the indemnification of any purchaser at such sale who suffers a loss by reason of misrepresentation. (1952
Code § 5-01-05)
3-1B-6: DUTIES OF LICENSEES:
A licensee hereunder shall have the duty to:
A. Additions Prohibited: Make no additions whatsoever during the period of the licensed sale to the stock of goods set forth in the inventory attached to the
application for license.
B. Deceptive Advertising; Conduct Of Sale: Refrain from employing any untrue, deceptive or misleading advertising, and conduct the licensed sale in
conformity with any advertising or holding out incident thereto.
C. Copy Of Inventory Available: Keep available at the place of sale a copy of the inventory submitted with the application and shall present such duplicate
to the License Officer, his representative or any police officer upon request.
D. Other Goods Separate From Filed Inventory: Keep any other goods separate and apart from the goods listed in the filed inventory as being objects of
sale and shall make such distinction to the public by placing tags on all the inventoried goods in and about the place of sale apprising the public of the
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 70/503
status of all such goods. Combining any additional or other goods with the goods inventoried shall cause the goods inventoried to lose its identity for
the purposes of the sale and any such license issued shall cease to apply to the sale of such goods. (1952 Code § 5-01-06)
3-1B-7: PENALTY:
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be subject to penalty as
provided in section 1-4-1 of this Code. (1952 Code § 5-01-07; amd. 2019 Code)
ARTICLE C. EXCESSIVE PRICE INCREASES DURING EMERGENCY
3-1C-1: EXCESSIVE PRICE INCREASES PROHIBITED:
Upon proclamation of public emergency involving or threatening the lives, property or welfare of the citizens, or for which a local disaster or emergency is
declared by the President of the United States, Governor of Idaho, or the Mayor and/or Council, and for a period of thirty (30) days from the date such
declaration is terminated, it shall be unlawful for any person, contractor, business or other entity to sell or offer to sell any consumer food items, repair or
reconstruction services, emergency or medical supplies or gasoline for an amount which exceeds ten percent (10%) of the highest price charged by such
person, contractor, business or other entity for said goods or services in the ten (10) days immediately prior to the proclamation of emergency. Violation of
this chapter is a misdemeanor, subject to penalty as provided in section 1-4-1 of this Code. (1952 Code § 5-37-01; amd. 2019 Code)
Chapter 2
VENDORS, SOLICITORS, TEMPORARY MERCHANTS
3-2-1: LEGAL AUTHORITY:
Idaho Code sections 50-301 and 50-307 authorize the City to adopt and enforce ordinances, rules and regulations governing standards and procedures
for licensing persons who engage in or operate a trade or business within the City. (2019 Code)
3-2-2: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
A. Purpose: The purpose of this chapter is to protect the health, safety and welfare of the City and its residents.
B. Intent: This chapter is not intended to prohibit or hamper speech which is protected by the First Amendment, but merely to regulate specific activities
which are commercial in nature. (1952 Code § 5-12-01)
3-2-3: SCOPE:
This chapter establishes the minimum standards and procedures for licensing and operating as a vendor, solicitor or temporary merchant. (2019 Code)
3-2-4: GENERAL LICENSING PROVISIONS APPLICABLE:
To the extent not inconsistent with this chapter, the licensing provisions set forth in chapter 1, article A of this title shall apply with full force and effect to all
provisions and sections of this chapter. (2019 Code)
3-2-5: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and derivations shall have the meanings given herein. When not inconsistent with the
context, words used in the present tense include the future tense, words in the plural number include the singular number, and words in the singular
number include the plural number. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory. Words used throughout this chapter, but not defined
herein or in chapter 1, article A of this title, shall have their plain, ordinary and common meaning. Words in any gender shall apply to the feminine,
masculine and neuter genders.
ADA COUNTY HIGHWAY DISTRICT (ACHD): The Ada County Highway District has jurisdiction over public streets and sidewalks in Ada County, Idaho.
DOWNTOWN BUSINESS IMPROVEMENT DISTRICT (DOWNTOWN BID): Area bounded by State Street, Fourth Street, Myrtle Street and Thirteenth
Street in Boise City, Idaho.
IDENTIFIED VENDING LOCATION (IVL): Marked location in the Downtown BID where a licensee may vend.
MIDBLOCK CROSSWALK AREA: The sidewalk area which falls between the two (2) lines fifteen feet (15') beyond each side of a marked midblock
crosswalk area (identified by the crosswalk lines delineated on the street pavement) and perpendicular to the curb.
MOBILE VENDING CART: A movable push cart that is operated by a vendor standing on the sidewalk.
MOBILE VENDING TRAILER: A mobile trailer operated by a vendor standing on or within the frame of the trailer on the public right-of-way between the
curb lines.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 71/503
MOBILE VENDING VEHICLE: A motorized vehicle operated by a vendor standing on or within the frame of the vehicle on the public right-of-way between
the curb lines.
PUBLIC SAFETY OFFICER: A City Licensing Officer, firefighter, police officer or meter monitor.
SIDEWALK: That portion of the public right-of-way which is between the curb lines or the lateral lines of a roadway and the adjacent property line intended
for the use of pedestrians in public places of Boise City.
SIDEWALK VENDING: The peddling, vending, selling, displaying or offering for sale any item of tangible personal property or other thing of value from a
mobile vending cart by a vendor to persons on the public rights-of-way, including sidewalks.
SOLICITOR: An individual who is taking or attempting to take, in person door-to-door, orders for sale of food, beverages, goods, merchandise or services
to be furnished or performed in the future, regardless of whether he/she is collecting advance payments on such sales. Such definition shall include any
person who, for himself, or for another person, hires, leases, uses or occupies any building, structure or motor vehicle within the City for the purpose of
exhibiting samples and taking orders for future delivery for door-to-door sales.
SPECIAL EVENT: The temporary use, with a valid permit, of public property, including streets, beaches, parks, community centers and waterways, for the
purpose of conducting certain short term events, such as art shows, music concerts, fund raising events, sidewalk sales, amusement attractions, circuses,
carnivals, rodeos, swap meets, sporting events and including, but not limited to, organized float trips, contests, street dances, tournaments, walkathons,
marathons, races, exhibitions or related activities.
STREET CORNER AREA: The sidewalk area at the intersection of two (2) streets, circumscribed by curbs, the property lines abutting the sidewalk area,
and the line including the point along the curb of the street either fifteen feet (15') from the outside line of a corner crosswalk, or where there is no marked
crosswalk, twenty five feet (25') from the curb line on the midpoint of the intersecting streets.
STREET VENDING: The peddling, vending, selling, displaying or offering for sale any item of tangible personal property or other thing of value from a
mobile vending trailer or vehicle situated on the public rights-of-way between the curb lines by a vendor to persons on the sidewalk.
TEMPORARY: Six (6) months or less.
TEMPORARY MERCHANT: Any person, whether owner or otherwise, whether a resident of the City or not, who engages in a temporary business of
selling and delivering goods, wares, merchandise and services within the City, and who, in furtherance of such purpose, hires, leases, uses or occupies
any building, structure or motor vehicle within the City for the exhibition and sale of food, beverages, goods, merchandise or services.
VENDOR: Any person, including an employee or agent of a group of individuals, partnership or corporation, who sells or offers to take orders or sell food,
beverages, goods or merchandise from a mobile vending cart, mobile vending vehicle or mobile vending trailer, or any other type of conveyance or from
his or her person. The word "vendor" shall include the words "hauler", "huckster" and "peddler". (1952 Code § 5-12-02; amd. 2019 Code)
3-2-6: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any vendor, solicitor or temporary merchant, as the same are defined in section 3-2-5 of this chapter, to engage in such business or
to employ another in such business within the corporate limits of the City without first obtaining a license from the City Clerk's Office in compliance with the
provisions of chapter 1, article A of this title, and this chapter. All vendors, solicitors or temporary merchants must meet all applicable City, State and
Federal law licensing requirements, including all Central District Health Department regulations and requirements, to be issued and to maintain a City
issued license. (1952 Code § 5-12-03; amd. 2019 Code)
3-2-7: EXCEPTIONS:
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to:
A. Court Ordered Sales: Any sales under court order;
B. Traveling Salespersons For Local Businesses: Traveling salespersons, commercial travelers or the like who exclusively or primarily sell to, or solicit
orders for, future delivery from local retailers, local businesses, local governments, local schools or local wholesale firms;
C. Farm, Garden Products: The sale of farm or garden products by the person producing the same;
D. Newspaper Subscriptions: The sale of a newspaper subscription in which the seller is a person engaged in both the delivery and sale of the newspaper;
E. School Students, Fundraising: The occasional sale of admission by local school students to a function of their school; or fundraising sales by local
service clubs or groups such as Elks, Kiwanis, Lions, Boy or Girl Scouts;
F. Political Funds, Membership: Any political group seeking funds or membership;
G. Garage, Yard Sales: Garage, yard or similar sales by individuals at their residence or place of business not exceeding two (2) separate sales in one
calendar year, not to exceed three (3) days each, which sales shall not include business inventory or items that have been purchased for the purpose
of resale at another garage sale;
H. Tax Exempt Organizations: Any organization exempt from taxation as provided by 26 USC 501 and meeting all the requirements for the exemptions
provided in that chapter;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 72/503
I. Special Events: Any activity conducted pursuant to a special events permit. (1952 Code § 5-12-04)
3-2-8: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
All vendor, solicitor and temporary merchant applications and renewals shall comply with the minimum license application requirements set forth in chapter
1, article A of this title, and be submitted to the City Clerk's Office. In addition to those requirements set forth in chapter 1, article A of this title, the following
information shall be supplied:
A. Persons Named: If the applicant is an association, company or corporation, then it shall state its name along with the names and descriptions of the
persons who will be soliciting in the City;
B. Description: A brief description of the nature of the business and the goods to be sold;
C. Employer Information: If employed, the name and address of the employer, together with credentials establishing the exact relationship between the
employer and the applicant;
D. Method Of Operation, Length, Vehicle: The proposed method of operation, length of time for which the right to do business is desired and if a motor
vehicle is to be used, a description of the same, together with license number or other means of identification;
E. Location; Delivery: The place where the goods or property proposed to be sold, or orders taken for the sale thereof, are manufactured or produced,
where such goods or products are located at the time said application is filed, and the proposed method of delivery; and
F. Food Products: When the applicant proposes to peddle any prepared food product for human consumption, a certification by the Central District Health
Department and an eating and drinking license, issued under title 4, chapter 3 of this Code, shall be required prior to issuance and throughout the
duration of a license. (1952 Code § 5-12-05; amd. 2019 Code)
3-2-9: ISSUANCE OF LICENSE:
A. Investigation: Upon receipt of an application for a license, the City Clerk's Office shall cause an investigation to be made to the extent necessary to
determine whether the applicant is qualified to hold a vendor, solicitor or temporary merchant license.
B. Qualifications: No applicant or licensee shall be issued a vendor, solicitor or temporary merchant license unless that person meets all of the
qualifications and has none of the disqualifications set forth in chapter 1, article A of this title, and this chapter.
C. Issuance: If the applicant meets all of the qualifications and has none of the disqualifications, the City Clerk shall issue, upon application and payment
therefor, a vendor, solicitor or temporary merchant license. (1952 Code § 5-12-06; amd. 2019 Code)
3-2-10: BOND REQUIRED:
Before any license as provided herein shall be issued for engaging in the business of vendor, solicitor or temporary merchant, as defined in section 3-2-5
of this chapter:
A. Individual: Every applicant plying his trade as an individual shall file with the City Clerk a bond in the amount of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00).
B. Associations, Corporations: Every business association, company or corporation which has employees or agents acting in the capacity of vendor,
solicitor or temporary merchant, shall file with the City Clerk a bond covering all such employees in the amount of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per
employee, up to a maximum bond amount of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00).
C. Form Of Bond: The bond may be in form of a surety bond issued by a company licensed to issue insurance in the State, a money order or cashier's
check payable to the City, or cash delivered to the City Clerk. The bond shall protect against any and all claims against the vendor, solicitor or
temporary merchant arising during the effective dates of the license issued under this chapter and filed with the City Clerk within sixty (60) days of the
expiration of any such license.
D. Notification To Customers Regarding Claims: Vendors, solicitors and temporary merchants shall notify each customer that they are bonded, and that
any claim may be presented to the City Clerk's Office located at 150 N. Capitol Blvd., Boise, Idaho, during regular business hours. Vendors, solicitors
and temporary merchants maintaining a stationary location through the term of the license may satisfy this requirement by a notice conspicuously
posted near the point of sale.
E. Return Of Bond: After expiration of a license, the City Clerk shall, upon application of the licensee, return the bond to the person designated in the
application sixty (60) days after receipt of application for return, unless the Clerk has been notified of the pendency of any claim or cause of action by
any person upon the bond. If the Clerk receives notice of a claim, the bond shall not be released except as directed by a court or the persons
submitting the claim.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 73/503
F. Waiver Of Bond: After being licensed for two (2) consecutive years without claims against the bond, the above bonding requirements will be waived.
(1952 Code § 5-12-08; amd. 2019 Code)
3-2-11: ISSUANCE AND EXHIBITION OF LICENSE:
A. Content Of Issued License: The City Clerk shall notify the applicant whether the license request is approved and shall issue a license. Such license
shall show the name, photograph of said licensee, the type of license issued, and the date of expiration.
B. Exhibition: The license issued to the licensee hereunder by the City Clerk shall be exhibited in a conspicuous place if the licensee is using a vehicle or a
building in his business, and otherwise must be displayed on the outside garment of the individual during hours of operation. (1952 Code § 5-12-09;
amd. 2019 Code)
3-2-12: GENERAL RESTRICTIONS:
Vendors, solicitors and temporary merchants are subject to the following restrictions:
A. Locations: No vendor, solicitor or temporary merchant shall have any exclusive right to any location in a public street or sidewalk, nor shall they be
permitted to operate in any congested area where his operations might impede or inconvenience the public. This license does not preclude the
issuance of a special events permit or other permits by the City Parks and Recreation Department in public parks, or the granting of permission to sell
or operate on private property by its owners.
B. Hours Of Operation: Vendors, solicitors and temporary merchants shall be allowed to engage in their licensed business only between nine o'clock (9:00)
A.M. and one hour after sunset, unless located in a commercially zoned area. In commercially zoned areas, vendors, solicitors and temporary
merchants shall be allowed to engage in their licensed business between the hours of six o'clock (6:00) A.M. on Sunday, Monday, Tuesday,
Wednesday and Thursday until three o'clock (3:00) A.M. on the following day. Vendors, solicitors and temporary merchants shall be allowed to engage
in their licensed business between the hours of six o'clock (6:00) A.M. on Friday and Saturday until five o'clock (5:00) A.M. the following day in
commercially zoned areas. All mobile vending carts, trailers or vehicles must be removed from public property during nonvending hours. If a special
event permit is sought, the City may make an exception to the usual hours of operation.
C. Enforcement Authority: Any law enforcement officer or City Licensing Officer shall be authorized to enforce this chapter.
D. Prohibited Locations: Unless positioned on a designated identified vending location, as defined in section 3-2-15 of this chapter, a mobile vending cart,
trailer or vehicle shall not be located:
1. Where clear pedestrian passage on the public sidewalk is less than five feet (5') wide;
2. Within a midblock crosswalk area;
3. On the portion of a public sidewalk crossed by a public or private driveway or within ten feet (10') of either side of the driveway;
4. Within any street corner area;
5. Within five feet (5') from a perpendicular line drawn to the curb from either side of a doorway;
6. In a manner in which the movement or visibility of vehicles using the street or other public right-of-way is obstructed.
E. Distance: Unless otherwise provided, mobile vending carts, trailers or vehicles shall not be placed within fifty feet (50') of another mobile vending cart,
trailer, vehicle or identified vending location.
F. Attachment Prohibited: Mobile vending carts, trailers or vehicles shall not be locked or chained to a parking meter, tree, streetlight or street furniture.
G. Unattendance: Mobile vending carts, trailers and vehicles shall not be left unattended on City streets or sidewalks for more than fifteen (15) consecutive
minutes.
H. Utility Service Prohibited: Utility service connections are not permitted. Electrical lines are not allowed overhead or lying in the pedestrian portion of the
sidewalk. City streetlight facilities shall not be used in any way to supply electrical service to a vendor site.
I. Garbage And Refuse: Vendors, solicitors and temporary merchants shall keep the area of operation free of debris. Vendors selling food or beverages
must provide trash receptacles and waste removal adjacent to or as a part of their operations. All spilled food, beverages, grease or other trash or
debris accumulating within twenty feet (20') of any mobile vending cart, trailer or vehicle shall be cleaned and collected by the vendor and deposited in
the vendor's trash receptacle. The vendor is prohibited from depositing waste, ice and any gray or wastewater into sidewalk waste receptacles,
privately owned dumpsters, City planters, gutters or the street drainage system.
J. Maintenance Of Mobile Vending Operations: Mobile vending carts, trailers or vehicles shall be maintained in such a manner that prevents the spilling or
splattering of grease, water, food or trash on any public right-of-way where the cart, trailer or vehicle is located. The cart, trailer or vehicle owner shall
be responsible for the cleaning and repair of any public right-of-way soiled, stained or damaged by the placement and operation of their mobile vending
operations. (1952 Code § 5-12-10; amd. 2019 Code)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 74/503
3-2-13: MOBILE VENDING CART, TRAILER AND VEHICLE STANDARDS:
A. Standards: Mobile vending carts, trailers and vehicles must be designed and built meeting normal industry standards and used in a safe manner.
B. Size; Design; Brakes: A mobile vending cart frame must not exceed five feet (5') wide by nine feet (9') long by seven feet (7') high, and must be able to
be pushed by one person. The mobile vending cart must have a minimum of two (2) functional, rubber tired wheels. The braking mechanism on the
mobile vending cart shall be affixed in such a manner that it is not readily removable in order to secure the cart when parked on the sidewalk. The use
of ropes and shocks as the sole braking mechanism is prohibited.
C. Generators: Generators on mobile vending carts, trailers and vehicles powered by gasoline are prohibited. Only generators powered by propane are
acceptable. No mobile vending cart shall carry more than two (2) 5-gallon containers of propane on a public right-of-way. Generators shall not be
placed on the ground.
D. BBQ Grills: Mobile vending carts, trailers and vehicles must have the BBQ grill enclosed and permanently built into the structure of the vendor cart,
trailer or vehicle.
E. Fire Extinguisher: A five (5) pound, "K" class, handheld fire extinguisher is required if a heating or cooking appliance is used.
F. Inspections: With the exception of merchandise or food items to be sold, mobile vending carts, trailers and vehicles presented for inspection shall be
exactly as they will appear when operating on a public right-of-way, including any food rack.
G. Support Equipment And Accessories: Support equipment and accessories, other than the generator and the propane tanks, must not extend more than
four feet (4') from the edge of the cart, trailer or vehicle in any direction and shall not be placed so as to impede pedestrian traffic. Umbrellas, canopies
or other covers used on mobile vending carts, trailers or vehicles must be securely fastened. The open diameter may not exceed nine feet (9'), with a
minimum vertical clearance of seven feet eight inches (7'8"), and must not extend more than four feet (4') from the edge of the cart, trailer or vehicle in
any direction.
H. Signage: Unsecured menu boards or sidewalk signs are prohibited.
I. Clean Appearance: Mobile vending carts, trailers and vehicles shall have a clean appearance at all times. (1952 Code § 5-12-11)
3-2-14: STREET VENDING RESTRICTIONS:
In addition to the restrictions and qualifications contained in this chapter, street vendors are additionally subject to the following restrictions:
A. Parking Restrictions: Vendor trailer or vehicles must at all times be parked in a legal manner. Vending operations shall be conducted only to pedestrians
on sidewalks. No service to the public shall be made from the street side of the vehicles.
B. "Open For Business" Sign: To differentiate between vending trailers or vehicles that are merely legally parked on the street from those that are actively
engaged in vending operations, any street vending cart, trailer or vehicle must place an "open for business" sign on the cart, trailer or vehicle in a
conspicuous manner when the vending operations are open for business. This sign must be taken down when vending operations have ceased. (1952
Code § 5-12-12; amd. 2019 Code)
3-2-15: DOWNTOWN BUSINESS IMPROVEMENT DISTRICT (BID) RESTRICTIONS:
In addition to the restrictions contained in this chapter, all vendors, solicitors and temporary merchants must comply with the following restrictions in order
to vend in the Downtown Business Improvement District (Downtown BID), unless exempted by a special events permit:
A. Street Vending Prohibited: Street vending is prohibited in the Downtown BID.
B. Sidewalk Vending: Mobile vending carts and trailers are prohibited from selling within the specific area of Main and Idaho Streets between Fourth and
Eleventh Street, and Sixth Street between Idaho and Grove Streets, unless selling from a designated vending location that is designated with the
symbol "IVL" (identified vending location). IVLs may be determined and marked, moved, removed or restricted by hours and days of operation by
administrative order of the City Clerk, as set forth in subsection C of this section. A map indicating all Downtown BID IVLs can be obtained at the City
Clerk's Office located at 150 N. Capitol Blvd., Boise, Idaho, 83702.
C. Determining Identified Vending Locations (IVLs): The City Clerk's Office, together with the Ada County Highway District (ACHD) and Capital City
Development Corporation (CCDC) will identify locations that are compatible with the public interest in the use of the sidewalk areas as public rights-ofway.
The City Clerk's Office shall determine and mark each IVL, and may move, remove or restrict by hours and days of operation. For each IVL
location, the City Clerk's Office shall consider, among other factors: the width of sidewalk, the proximity and location of intersections, crosswalks,
driveways, doorways, police or fire stations, hospitals, schools, parks, fire escapes, trees, bus stops and shelters, truck loading zones, taxi stands,
hotel zones, existing street fixtures, such as signposts, lampposts, parking meters, fire hydrants, benches, phone booths, and the known pedestrian
congestion of a particular area to determine if the IVL will provide for adequate public safety and pedestrian flow twenty four (24) hours a day.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 75/503
D. IVL Regulations:
1. IVLs are available on a first come, first serve basis.
2. Only one vending cart may occupy an IVL at one time.
3. A mobile vending cart occupying an IVL that is unable to conduct business shall be removed after fifteen (15) minutes.
4. Beginning at six o'clock (6:00) A.M., the first properly licensed mobile vendor that positions his or her cart over the IVL may maintain that position
until three o'clock (3:00) A.M. the following morning or five o'clock (5:00) A.M. on Saturday and Sunday, except as provided herein.
5. Any IVL which is designated as a "restricted IVL" by administrative order of the City Clerk, shall be prohibited from use by all vendors, solicitors and
temporary merchants between the hours of nine o'clock (9:00) P.M. on Friday and Saturday evenings until five o'clock (5:00) A.M. the following
morning.
E. Display Of License, Permit: No person shall use a mobile vending cart while engaged in sidewalk vending within the Downtown BID without displaying
thereon, in a conspicuous manner, all applicable licenses and permits. (1952 Code § 5-12-13; amd. 2019 Code)
3-2-16: UNLAWFUL CONDUCT:
In addition to those acts set forth in section 3-1A-28 of this title, it shall be unlawful for any person to:
A. Failure To Comply: Fail to comply with any of the requirements and restrictions set forth in this chapter;
B. Misrepresentation: Misrepresent the purpose of, or affiliation of those engaged in, the solicitation;
C. Continue Efforts: Continue efforts to solicit from an individual once that individual informs the solicitor that he does not wish to give anything to or to buy
anything from that solicitor;
D. Represent Endorsement: Represent the issuance of any license under this chapter as an endorsement or recommendation of the solicitation;
E. Posted Premises: Enter upon any premises when the same is posted with a sign stating "No Peddlers Allowed" or "No Solicitation Allowed" or other
words to such effect; or
F. Fraud, Misrepresentations: Commit fraud, make misrepresentations or false statements in the course of carrying on the business. (1952 Code § 5-12-
14; amd. 2019 Code)
3-2-17: CANCELLATION OF SALE:
The buyer shall have the right to cancel the door-to-door sale within three (3) business days. A business day is any calendar day, except Sunday, or the
following holidays: New Year's Day, Washington's Birthday, Memorial Day, Independence Day, Labor Day, Columbus Day, Veterans Day, Thanksgiving
Day and Christmas Day. (1952 Code § 5-12-15)
3-2-18: REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION; NOTICE AND HEARING:
Except as otherwise provided herein, the procedures for denial, suspension, revocation and appeal of a license shall be as set forth in chapter 1, article A
of this title. (2019 Code)
3-2-19: PENALTY:
Any person, business, firm, company or corporation who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon
conviction, shall be subject to penalty as provided in section 1-4-1 of this Code. Each day a violation is continued shall be a separate offense. (1952 Code
§ 5-12-20; amd. 2019 Code)
Chapter 3
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
3-3-1: LEGAL AUTHORITY:
Idaho Code sections 50-301 and 50-307 authorize the City to regulate occupations and businesses within the City. (2019 Code)
3-3-2: PURPOSE:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 76/503
The City finds that public health, safety and welfare require that certain occupations and businesses within the City be regulated without restraining,
burdening or over regulating the businesses or occupations. The buying and selling of alcohol is an industry that requires astute ownership in order to
maintain compliance with all of the laws and regulations designed to protect society. The licensing process is one step in assisting in compliance with
those laws. However, the issuance of a license pursuant to this chapter does not constitute a representation or an affirmance to any person who transacts
business with a person that said licensee is free from risk. The City shall not be liable for, nor shall a cause of action exist for, any loss or damage based
upon the failure of any person licensed under this chapter to meet the standards contained herein. (2019 Code)
3-3-3: SCOPE:
This chapter establishes minimum standards and procedures for licensing and operating a business which serves, sells, distributes or is otherwise
involved in the supply of alcoholic beverages within the City. (2019 Code)
3-3-4: GENERAL LICENSING PROVISIONS APPLICABLE:
To the extent not inconsistent with this chapter, the provisions set forth in chapter 1, article A of this title, shall apply with full force and effect to all
provisions and sections of this chapter, and chapter 1, article A of this title is hereby incorporated herein by reference and applies to those rights and
responsibilities not further defined herein. (2019 Code)
3-3-5: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and derivations shall have the meanings given herein. When not inconsistent with the
context, words used in the present tense include the future tense, words in the plural number include the singular number, and words in the singular
number include the plural number. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory. Words used throughout this chapter, but not defined
herein or in chapter 1, article A of this title, shall have their plain, ordinary and common meaning. Words in any gender shall apply to the feminine,
masculine and neuter genders.
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE: Any beverage containing alcohol which is a product of distillation of any fermented liquor, or synthetic ethyl alcohol, including
beer, wine, spirits, or any liquid containing alcohol, beer, wine or spirits.
BEER: Any beverage obtained by alcoholic fermentation of an infusion or decoction of barley, malt or other ingredients in drinkable water.
BEER GARDEN: A geographically designated or enclosed area surrounded by fencing, with posted signage restricting consumption, approved by the City
Council upon recommendation of the Police Chief and Fire Chief, where persons twenty one (21) years of age or older may consume or possess alcoholic
beverages in compliance with the provisions of this chapter and State law.
BOTTLED BEER: Beer sold or disposed of while securely, tightly and adequately sealed in a glass, metal or other container of a capacity not to exceed
two (2) gallons.
CATERING PERMIT: A permit issued by the City Council to serve and sell alcoholic beverages, which is valid for no more than two (2) consecutive days
for parties, or five (5) consecutive days, with an option to request one extension for festivals or conventions. Said permits however, may be designated for
less time and requests for extension may be denied at the sole and absolute discretion of the City Council.
CITY COUNCIL: The City Council of Boise City, Idaho.
CONVENTION: A formal meeting of members, representatives or delegates, including a political party, fraternal society, profession or industry.
EVENT: A convention or a party.
EVENT VENUE: The physical location where an event occurs.
FESTIVAL: A period or program of festive activities, cultural events or entertainment lasting three (3) or more consecutive days.
FIRE CHIEF: The Fire Chief of Boise City, Idaho, or designee.
FIRE DEPARTMENT: The Boise City Fire Department.
LIQUOR: All kinds of liquor sold by and in a State liquor store of the State of Idaho.
OFF PREMISES BEER OR WINE LICENSE: A license authorizing a person to sell beer or wine at retail for consumption off of the licensed premises.
ON PREMISES BEER OR WINE LICENSE: A license to sell beer or wine by the individual glass or opened bottle at retail for consumption on the premises
only.
PARTY: A social gathering especially for pleasure or amusement and includes, but is not limited to, such social events as weddings, birthdays and special
holiday celebrations to include, but not be limited to, New Year's celebrations, Super Bowl Sunday, St. Patrick's Day, the Fourth of July and Labor Day.
PLACE OF BUSINESS: The location where business is carried on by the owners or agents of owners and under the control of those owners or agents.
POLICE CHIEF: The Chief of Police for Boise City, Idaho, or designated agent.
POLICE DEPARTMENT: The Boise City Police Department.
PREMISES: The business building in or grounds on which the service and sale of any alcoholic beverage is authorized under this chapter and pursuant to
Idaho Statute.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 77/503
RETAILER: Any person engaged in the sale or distribution of alcoholic beverages, with the exception of keg beer sold by Idaho State licensed
wholesalers.
SPIRITS: Any beverage which contain alcohol obtained by distillation mixed with drinkable water or other substances in solution, including, among other
things, brandy, rum, whiskey, vodka and gin.
STATE: The State of Idaho.
WINE: Any alcoholic beverage obtained by the fermentation of the natural sugar content of fruits (grapes, apples, etc.) or other agricultural products
containing sugar (honey, milk, etc.) containing not more than fourteen percent (14%) alcohol by volume. (Ord. 29-15, 7-7-2015; amd. 2019 Code)
3-3-6: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any person or licensee to sell, keep for sale or dispense any alcoholic beverage without first obtaining the appropriate license or
permit required by law. Further, it shall be unlawful for licensees to give away or otherwise dispose of any liquor in the original containers or otherwise than
by retail sale by the drink. (1952 Code § 5-05-02)
3-3-7: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
Prior to the issuance of a license, as herein provided, the applicant shall file with the City Clerk an application as set forth in section 3-1A-6 of this title, and
include such information and statements relative to the applicant and the premises (in existence or to be constructed in accordance with plans and
specifications approved by City) where the alcoholic beverages are to be sold. In addition to the qualifications required by other provisions of this chapter,
the application must show:
A. Owner Consent: A certified copy of a document showing that the owner consents to the sale of alcoholic beverages on the premises, if the premises to
be licensed is not owned by the applicant.
B. State License: A license issued by the State Police, Alcohol Beverage Control, for the premises and for the time for which the application is made.
C. County License: A license issued by the Board of County Commissioners for the premises and for the time for which the application is made.
D. Display Of License: That upon issuance of a license to the applicant for the particular premises, the license shall at all times be prominently displayed in
the place of business of the licensee. (1952 Code § 5-05-03; amd. 2019 Code)
3-3-8: QUALIFICATIONS:
A. Prohibited Persons: No person shall sell or dispense alcoholic beverages at retail until licensed in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, and no
retailer's license shall be issued to any applicant, or such license transferred to any person, including the executor, administrator or trustee in
bankruptcy of the estate of the holder of a retail license, when that person:
1. Is under the age of nineteen (19) years;
2. Is not the bona fide owner of such business;
3. Is not a citizen of the United States, or has not been a bona fide resident of the State for at least thirty (30) days next preceding the date of
application for a license; provided, that if the applicant is:
a. A partnership, all members thereof shall be citizens of the United States and have been residents of the State for at least thirty (30) days
preceding the date of application for a license; or
b. A corporation or association, it must be organized under the laws of the State or qualified under the laws of the State to do business in the State
and the principal officers and the members of the Governing Board must be citizens of the United States and residents of the State for at least
thirty (30) days next preceding the date of application for such license;
4. As the licensee or any of its employees, officers or members of the Governing Board or Body, has been convicted or paid any fine, or has received a
deferred sentence or withheld judgment, or has suffered the forfeiture of a bond for failure to appear, or has completed any sentence of confinement:
a. That within three (3) years immediately preceding the date of filing the application, the applicant has not been convicted of the violation of any law
of the State, any other state, or of the United States, regulating, governing or prohibiting the sale, manufacture, transportation or possession of
alcoholic beverages or intoxicating liquors, or, within said time, suffered the forfeiture of a bond for failure to appear in answer to charges of any
such violation;
b. That within five (5) years immediately preceding the date of filing the application, the applicant has not been convicted of any felony or paid any
fine or completed any sentence of confinement therefor within said time;
c. That within three (3) years next preceding the date of filing said application, the applicant has not had any license provided for herein, or any
license or permit issued to the applicant pursuant to the law of this State, or any other state, or of the United States, to sell, manufacture, transport
or possess alcoholic beverages or intoxicating liquors, revoked;
5. Has engaged in the operation, or interests therein, or any of its employees, officers or members of its Governing Board or Body has been so
engaged in the operation, or interests therein, of any place for the purpose of prostitution or who have been convicted of any crime or misdemeanor
opposed to decency or morality;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 78/503
6. Has had a license revoked by this City, the State, or any city or county of this State; was a member of a partnership or association whose license has
been revoked by this City, the State, or any city or county of this State; was an employee, officer or member of the Governing Board, or one of the
principal stockholders of a corporation licensed to sell alcoholic beverages at retail and whose license has been revoked by this City, the State or any
city or county of this State.
B. Partners, Members: The affirmative showing required with respect to qualifications of an applicant shall also be required to be made with the respect to
each partner of a partnership applicant and to each incumbent officer, director or member of the Governing Board or Body of a corporation or
association applicant, and to each person then employed by an applicant whose duties include the serving or dispensing of alcoholic beverages. (1952
Code § 5-05-05; amd. 2019 Code)
3-3-9: RETAILER'S LICENSE:
All licenses for the retail sale of alcoholic beverages within the City shall terminate at twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight on December 31 of the year in which
such license is issued, unless application for renewal has been made. If application for renewal has been made, the current license shall remain in force
until the City Clerk has acted on the application for renewal and has given notice of the action taken. (1952 Code § 5-05-08; amd. 2019 Code)
3-3-10: TRANSFER OF LICENSE:
A. Application, Approval Required: A license may be transferred, but the transferee, including any executor, administrator or trustee in bankruptcy of the
estate of the retailer, shall not be authorized to retail alcoholic beverages thereunder until the transferee shall have filed under oath an application
therefor containing the same information required in an application for a license, and if the transferee possesses the qualifications and none of the
disqualifications of a retailer as provided in this title, the Council shall approve such transfer and the Clerk shall amend the license to reflect the
transfer.
B. License Transfer Fee: Each such beer or wine license shall be accompanied with a transfer fee of ten percent (10%) of the annual license fee.
C. Location Transfer; Fee: Application to transfer a beer or wine license from one authorized location to another shall be made to the Council on forms
prescribed and furnished by the Clerk. Each application for transfer of location shall be accompanied by a transfer fee of ten percent (10%) of the
annual license fee. (1952 Code § 5-05-10)
3-3-11: SCHOOLS; CHURCHES; EXCEPTIONS:
No alcoholic beverage license shall be issued to any person to sell beer for consumption on the premises where any part of the room, or other place, for
such sale or consumption is:
A. School Activities: Within a radius of three hundred feet (300') of any part of building within which any public school activities are conducted; nor (1952
Code § 5-05-12)
B. Churches: Within a radius of one hundred fifty feet (150') of any room within which the regular religious or Sunday school services of a duly organized
and established religious sect are or were so conducted prior to issuance of such license; provided, that this subsection shall not apply to a room or
other place for such sale and consumption for which such a retailer's license had been issued prior to the conduct of such services and except for any
period of three (3) months have continuously been in effect. (1952 Code § 5-05-12; amd. 2019 Code)
3-3-12: CONSUMPTION ON AND OFF PREMISES:
Retailers holding valid licenses for the retail sale of liquor may sell wine for consumption on or off the licensed premises. Retailers holding a valid onpremises
wine license may sell wine for consumption on the premises only. Retailers who do not possess a valid license for the retail sale of liquor or
retailers who do not have a valid on-premises wine license shall not permit consumption of wine on the licensed premises and may sell the wine only in its
original unbroken container. Wine sold for consumption, on or off the licensed premises, may be sold only during hours and on the days beer can be sold.
(1952 Code § 5-05-13)
3-3-13: LIQUOR CATERING PERMIT:
A. Legal Authority: Idaho Code sections 23-934A through 23-934C authorize the City to issue catering permits.
B. Purpose: This section provides the procedures and guidelines to obtain an alcoholic beverage catering permit pursuant to Idaho Code title 23.
C. Catering Permit Required: No person shall serve and sell any alcoholic beverage by the drink at an event, without first obtaining a catering permit
issued by the City Clerk's Office.
D. Application For Permit:
1. Application for a catering permit shall be made to the City Clerk's Office in such form and manner as may be prescribed.
2. The written application for a catering permit shall include, at a minimum, the following:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 79/503
a. The name and address of the applicant; and if a partnership, the name and address of the general partner; and if a corporation or association, the
name and address of the agent for service of process; and such other information as may be required.
b. The number and a photocopy of the applicant's State retail liquor license, State retail beer or wine license, or permit issued pursuant to Idaho
Code section 23-1007A.
c. The dates and hours requested during which the permit will be effective, which shall not exceed:
(1) Two (2) consecutive days for a party; or
(2) Five (5) consecutive days for festivals and conventions, with an option to request one extension on the same terms and conditions as the
original permit. Extension on a festival or convention catering permit may be issued or denied at the sole and absolute of the City Clerk's Office.
d. The name of the organization, group or person sponsoring the party, festival or convention; and if applying pursuant to a planned special event
permit, the name and number of the planned special event permit.
e. If not the applicant, then the name, phone number, physical and mailing address, and e-mail address of the applicant's designee who will present
at the premises for the duration of the event.
f. The address at which the catering permit is to be used; and if a public building or private building open to the public, the rooms in which the
alcoholic beverages are to be served.
g. A detailed description or diagram of the location where the alcoholic beverages are to be served and sold, including a detailed scale drawing of the
area.
h. The number of people anticipated to attend the event, including all hosts, employees, sponsors, agents, consumers and security personnel.
3. Upon receipt of an application for a permit, the City Clerk's Office shall cause the application to be forwarded to the Police Chief and Fire Chief. In
addition, the City Clerk's Office shall cause an investigation to be made to the extent necessary to determine whether the applicant is qualified to
receive a catering permit.
4. Every application for a catering permit shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable permit fee in an amount established by the State and listed on the
most current City Clerk license fee schedule. An applicant shall pay a fee for each day the catering permit is to be in effect.
5. The application must be made to the City Clerk's Office no less than five (5) business days prior to the event. In the event an applicant submits an
application within five (5) business days of the event, the applicant may request an expedited review. The request for expedited review must be in
writing and must explain the reasons for requesting the expedited review. Upon good cause shown, in the City Clerk's sole discretion, the City Clerk
may waive the application filing deadline. If the City Clerk fails to find good cause for an expedited review, the City Clerk shall provide such a
decision to the applicant in writing. The application deadline may also be waived if an applicant is applying to use the catering permit at a
preapproved event venue and the number of persons attending the event is less than two hundred (200). In either waiver situation, the application
shall be submitted no later than twelve o'clock (12:00) noon the day before the event.
E. Disqualifying Circumstances: No person shall be issued a catering permit if the person:
1. Does not possess a valid retail liquor license, State retail beer or wine license, or permit issued pursuant to Idaho Code section 23-1007A; or
2. Has been convicted of, or received a withheld judgment for, any disqualifying crime pursuant to chapter 1, article A of this title.
3. Is required to obtain a planned special event permit as provided by this Code and has not obtained approval of said permit; or
4. Has requested a catering permit for more than the allowed maximum number of days permitted pursuant to this chapter; or
5. The Police Chief or Fire Chief recommends denial of the catering permit.
F. Police And Fire Application Review:
1. Upon receipt of an application from the City Clerk's Office, the Police and Fire Chiefs, or their designees, may recommend approval of the
application, approval of the application with conditions, or denial of the application, for any of the following reasons:
a. To carry out the policies of the City, including to protect the health, safety and welfare of the public, or to prevent an unlawful disturbance or
nuisance, the Police Chief may recommend the catering permit be issued with conditions. The Police Chief may consider such factors as the
anticipated number of participants, the location of the venue, pedestrian and vehicular traffic, the occurrence of other events in the area at the
same time, ingress or egress of customers to the business and surrounding businesses, the presence of minors, and any other relevant factors.
The conditions the Police Chief may impose include, but are not limited to, posting signs, hiring additional security personnel at the applicant's
expense, hiring trained alcohol servers, reducing the number of dates or times of the event, or maintenance of the event venue in a specified
manner, including restricted area and access points.
b. The Fire Chief shall review the application to confirm that the proposed size, configuration, location and number of people attending the event is
consistent with the Fire Code, and to determine if the event will impede the access of emergency vehicles or emergency personnel to the area.
The Fire Chief may recommend that the event venue be maintained in a specified manner as a condition of the catering permit to ensure
compliance with the Fire Code and access of emergency vehicles and personnel.
G. Event Venue: A proposed event venue shall meet all of the following conditions:
1. The event venue abuts or is contiguous to or has sufficient sanitation services;
2. The boundaries of the event venue are identified by the placement of one or more continuous physical barriers with a minimum height of three feet
(3');
3. Any conditions required by the Police Chief or Fire Chief that establish and limit access of the public to and from the area where alcoholic beverages
are served and sold;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 80/503
4. The proposed placement or description of any required signs is satisfactory to the Police Chief;
5. None of the event venue's furnishings, tables, chairs or barriers encroach on any sidewalk, and are not closer than eight feet (8') from a roadway,
alley or edge of the payment used for motor vehicle traffic, not including private parking areas; and
6. The event venue obtains and maintains in good standing all required State, County and City licenses, and is in compliance with all applicable
Federal, State and local statutes, rules and regulations.
H. Issuance Or Denial Of Catering Permit: The City Clerk's Office shall issue a catering permit if all of the following are met:
1. The applicant is not disqualified for any reason set forth in subsection E of this section;
2. The Police Chief and Fire Chief recommend issuance of a catering permit either with or without conditions, and, if with conditions, the applicant
accepts any such conditions; and
3. The event venue meets all of the requirements of subsection G of this section.
I. Pre-Approved Event Venue:
1. An event venue that routinely hosts catering permit events may be pre-approved as an event venue ("pre-approved event venue"), provided the
event venue meets all of the following conditions:
a. The event venue hosts at least twenty (20) events each year at which a catering permit is required;
b. The event venue obtains and maintains in good standing all required State, County and City licenses, and is in compliance with all applicable
Federal, State and local statutes, rules and regulations; and
c. The event venue shall not, within one hundred twenty (120) days of its request to be on the pre-approved event venue list, have any violations of
its State, County and City licenses, or any criminal violations regarding the serving of alcoholic beverages.
2. Despite meeting the above qualifications, the City Clerk's Office may deny pre-approval status to an event venue if the City deems that inclusion on
the pre-approval list is contrary to public safety or inconsistent with the purpose for which catering permits should be used.
3. A venue must re-submit its request to be a pre-approved event venue each January, or at the time of the first catering permit application to use that
venue for the year.
4. The City Clerk, Police Department or Fire Department may remove a venue from the pre-approved event venue list at any time for any violation of
this Code, or any civil or criminal violation. Both inclusion on the pre-approved event venue list and removal from the list is within the discretion of the
City Clerk's Office, and no right of appeal exists for failure to be included on the list, or removal from the list.
J. Multi-Day Planned Special Event: If, pursuant to chapter 17 of this title, a planned special event is scheduled for more than three (3) days, two (2) or
more separate applicants may apply for and receive two (2) or more separate catering permits, which may run consecutively to each other and last the
duration of the planned special event; provided, however, that no individual applicant may receive two (2) catering permits that run consecutively or
receive a catering permit that exceeds three (3) consecutive days.
K. Catering Permit Event:
1. At the event for which the catering permit was obtained, the applicant or applicant's designee listed on the application shall be personally present at
the event venue for the duration of the permit.
2. The catering permit shall be displayed in a conspicuous location at the event venue for the duration of the event.
L. Grounds For Revocation: The City Clerk, Police Chief or Fire Chief may revoke a catering permit for the following reasons:
1. When, subsequent to issuance of the catering permit, the Clerk's Office finds that the permittee failed to meet the qualifications and none of the
disqualifications of this section;
2. The permittee obtained his permit by fraud or misrepresentation;
3. The permittee fails to comply with any of the minimum standards, requirements, policies or procedures set forth in this title;
4. The catering permit is being exercised contrary to the conditions of the catering permit; or
5. The permittee is operating the catering permit in such a manner as to be detrimental to the public health, safety or welfare.
M. Revocation Due To Exigent Circumstances:
1. Where there exists a clear danger to the health, safety or welfare of the public resulting from the use of the catering permit, or where the permittee or
his agents fail to perform in conformance with the conditions and terms set forth on the catering permit, the City Clerk, Police Chief or Fire Chief may
revoke the catering permit by immediately demanding and seizing the permit.
2. Upon receipt of the revoked permit, or where the permit cannot be seized due to the unavailability of the permittee or his designee, or where the
permittee or his designee refuses to surrender the permit, the Chief of Police may direct the seizure and removal of all alcoholic beverages. The
Chief of Police shall keep the alcoholic beverages as evidence and, upon conviction of the person for violation of the provisions of this chapter or any
other local, County or State law, forfeit the alcoholic beverages, including all packages and bottles, to the State.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 81/503
N. Procedure Upon Denial, Revocation; Appeal: Except as otherwise provided in this title, the procedures for denial, revocation and appeal shall be as set
forth in chapter 1, article A of this title.
O. Violations:
1. A person who fails to display or surrender a catering permit as provided in this section shall be guilty of an infraction for a first time offense. A second
or subsequent offense shall be a misdemeanor.
2. A person holding a catering permit, or any person employed or acting on the behalf of a person holding a catering permit, who permits, allows or fails
to correct conduct in violation of the conditions or terms of a catering permit is guilty of an infraction for a first time offense. A second or subsequent
offense shall be a misdemeanor.
3. It shall be a misdemeanor for any person to obtain multiple catering permits for the sole purpose of circumventing State or local laws and
regulations. (Ord. 29-15, 7-7-2015; amd. 2019 Code)
3-3-14: PENALTY:
A. Penalty For Misdemeanor Violation: Every misdemeanor is punishable as provided in section 1-4-1 of this Code.
B. Penalty For Infraction Violation: Every infraction is punishable as provided in section 1-4-2 of this Code. (Ord. 29-15, 7-7-2015; amd. 2019 Code)
ARTICLE A. UNLIMITED SALES FOR ONE PRICE PROHIBITED
3-3A-1: PROHIBITION:
On premises where alcoholic beverages are sold by the drink, a licensee or a licensee's agent or employee may not sell, offer to sell or deliver an
unlimited number of alcoholic beverages to a person or group of persons for a fixed or single price. (1952 Code § 5-08-01)
3-3A-2: EXCEPTIONS:
A. Special Events: The above prohibition applies only when one price is charged for an unlimited number of alcoholic beverages and does not apply to the
purchase of a ticket for a special event where food will also be served, such as a wine tasting, wine or beer dinner, fund raiser, etc.
B. Catering Permits: The prohibition of this section shall not apply to licensees selling or serving alcoholic beverages pursuant to a catering permit issued
by the City Clerk. (1952 Code § 5-08-01)
3-3A-3: PENALTY:
Any person violating this provision shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, subject to penalty as provided in section 1-4-1
of this Code. (1952 Code § 5-08-01; amd. 2019 Code)
ARTICLE B. SERVER TRAINING
3-3B-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and derivations shall have the meanings given herein. When not inconsistent with the
context, words used in the present tense include the future tense, words in the plural number include the singular number, and words in the singular
number include the plural number. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory. Words used throughout this chapter, but not defined
herein or in chapter 1, article A of this title, shall have their plain, ordinary and common meaning. Words in any gender shall apply to the feminine,
masculine and neuter genders.
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE: Any beverage containing alcohol which is a product of distillation of any fermented liquor or synthetic ethyl alcohol, including
beer, wine, spirits or any liquid containing beer, wine or spirits.
APPROVED SERVER TRAINING: A program approved by the Chief of Police as indicated in section 3-3B-2 of this article, which is designed to educate
servers of alcohol on laws and rules regarding the sale and service of alcoholic beverages, the effects of alcohol on the human body, methods of
identifying intoxicated persons and refusing to sell or serve alcohol to those persons, and methods for checking and identifying legal identification.
CHIEF OF POLICE: The Chief of the Boise City Police Department or designee.
LICENSEE: The person to whom a valid license to retail liquor by the drink or beer and wine by the drink is issued by the Idaho State Police. A club
licensee is a "club" as defined in Idaho Code section 23-902(1) and possessing a club license as defined in Idaho Code section 23-903 on January 1,
2009.
SERVER OF ALCOHOL: Any person serving or selling any alcoholic beverages, including spirits, wine or beer for consumption on a licensed premises as
a requirement of his or her employment, and any person managing those employees. Servers of alcohol include waiters, waitresses, bartenders and
managers of waiters, waitresses and bartenders. (1952 Code § 5-07-01; amd. 2019 Code)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 82/503
3-3B-2: APPROVED SERVER TRAINING:
A. All approved server training programs must include an examination component, that shall include but not be limited to, the following topics:
1. Monitoring a patron's behavior;
2. Recognizing intoxicated patrons;
3. Checking patrons' photo identifications for relevant information;
4. Recognizing false and altered photo identification;
5. Providing alternatives to alcoholic beverages;
6. Problem solving when interacting with intoxicated and belligerent patrons; and
7. Understanding and applying Idaho laws and rules pertaining to alcoholic beverages.
B. The approved server training programs are set forth on the current list maintained by the Boise Police Department and available through either the
Boise Police Department or the City Clerk's Office. The Boise Police Department may change the list of approved server training programs from time to
time as it deems appropriate. (Ord. 39-18, 9-25-2018)
3-3B-3: SERVER TRAINING REQUIREMENTS:
A. Completion Of Program Required: Unless already certified, a "server of alcohol", as defined in section 3-3B-1 of this article, must complete an approved
server training program by July 1, 2009, or within sixty (60) days of the date the alcohol server begins employment at a licensed establishment and
must maintain that certification throughout his or her employment as a server of alcohol.
B. Licensee Responsibility: Licensees operating establishments where alcoholic beverages are served and consumed on the premises must ensure that
each server of alcohol employed on the premises is either already certified or completes an approved server training program by July 1, 2009, or within
sixty (60) days of the date the server begins employment at the establishment and that each server of alcohol maintains that certification throughout his
or her employment as a server of alcohol. Club licensees are required to have no less than one server of alcohol, whether employed or a volunteer, on
the premises at all times to supervise the service of alcohol to members and the guests of members. Club licensees are required to ensure that all
supervising servers of alcohol have completed an approved server training program by July 1, 2009, or prior to supervision the service of alcohol to
members and the guests of members.
C. Records Maintained:
1. Server: Servers of alcohol must maintain records of their training and show proof of current certification upon request to officers of the Police
Department or other law enforcement officers.
2. Licensee: Licensees must maintain training verification records or proof of current certification for each server employed and must present those
records upon request to officers of the Police Department or other law enforcement officers. Club licensees must maintain records of training and
show proof of current certification for each supervising server of alcohol and must present those records upon request to officers of the Police
Department or other law enforcement officers. (1952 Code § 5-07-03)
3-3B-4: ENFORCEMENT; PENALTY:
A. Misdemeanor: Any person violating any provision of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be subject
to penalty as provided in section 1-4-1 of this Code. (1952 Code § 5-07-04; amd. 2019 Code)
B. Club Licensee: With the exception of club licensees, it is the City intent that this article stand alone and that violations of this article not subject
licensees to the administrative procedure for suspension, revocation or refusal to renew licenses outlined in Idaho Code section 23-933. Violations of
any section of this article by a club licensee shall be referred to the Alcohol Beverage Control for administrative action outlined in Idaho Code section
23-933. (1952 Code § 5-07-04)
Chapter 4
SIDEWALK CAFES
3-4-1: PURPOSE:
In order to provide for the revitalization of the downtown and other areas of City, including the development of social and economic activity, the City
Council finds and determines that sidewalk cafes will permit enhanced use of the public space available, will provide a complement to the businesses
operating from fixed premises, and will promote economic activity in the area. (1952 Code § 5-06-02)
3-4-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and derivations shall have the meanings given herein. When not inconsistent with the
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 83/503
context, words used in the present tense include the future tense, words in the plural number include the singular number, and words in the singular
number include the plural number. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory. Words used throughout this chapter, but not defined
herein or in chapter 1, article A of this title, shall have their plain, ordinary and common meaning. Words in any gender shall apply to the feminine,
masculine and neuter genders.
ADA COUNTY HIGHWAY DISTRICT (ACHD): The district has jurisdiction over public sidewalks in Ada County, Idaho.
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE: Any beverage as defined in section 3-3-5 of this title.
BEVERAGE: Any alcoholic or nonalcoholic liquid sold at retail or intended for human consumption on the premises.
BUILDING DEPARTMENT DIRECTOR: The Building Department Director of the City.
CITY: Boise City, Idaho.
CITY COUNCIL: The City Council of the City.
CLERK: The City Clerk of the City.
FIRE CHIEF: The Chief of the Fire Department for the City or his/her designated agent.
FOOD: Any nonliquid consumable sold at retail or intended for human consumption on the premises.
HOURS OF OPERATION: The allowed hours of operation of a sidewalk cafe serving alcohol shall be from ten o'clock (10:00) A.M. until two o'clock (2:00)
A.M. All service and consumption of alcoholic beverages shall discontinue at two o'clock (2:00) A.M. The hours of operation of a sidewalk cafe not serving
alcoholic beverages shall be unrestricted by this chapter.
LICENSE: A license issued by the Clerk to a qualified person, under which it shall be lawful for the licensee to sell and dispense alcoholic beverages, as
provided by this Code.
LICENSEE: The person to whom a license is issued under the provisions of this chapter and who holds a valid Idaho alcoholic beverage license issued by
the Department of Law Enforcement, Ada County and the City.
PERMIT: A sidewalk cafe permit issued in accordance with this chapter.
PERSON: An individual, firm, co-partnership, association, corporation or any group or combination acting as a unit.
PLACE OF BUSINESS: The place where business is carried on by the owners or agents of owners and under the control of those owners or agents.
POLICE CHIEF: The Chief of Police for the City or his/her designated agent.
POLICE DEPARTMENT: The City Police Department.
PREMISES: The business place in which the sale of any food and/or beverage is authorized under this Code and pursuant to Idaho Statute.
RETAILER: Any person engaged in the sale or distribution of food and/or beverages to the consumer, with the exception of keg beer sold by Idaho State
licensed wholesalers and portable vendors of food and/or nonalcoholic beverages not intended for consumption at the place of sale.
SIDEWALK: That portion of a public right-of-way which is between the curb lines and the adjacent property lines which is improved and designed for and is
ordinarily used for pedestrian travel.
SIDEWALK CAFE: An outdoor dining or sitting area of a retailer, contiguous to the retailer's premises, which is located in whole or in part on a sidewalk
and containing removable tables, chairs, barriers, planters or related appurtenances.
SPECIAL USE PERMIT: A permit that allows an establishment which meets all the requirements except the required egress and ingress from their building
to operate a sidewalk cafe based upon agreement to meet and maintain specified additional conditions for monitoring ingress and egress of pedestrian
traffic.
STATE: The State of Idaho. (1952 Code § 5-06-01; amd. 2019 Code)
3-4-3: PERMIT REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any person or licensee to sell, keep for sale or dispense any food and/or beverage, or to allow consumption of food and/or beverage
at a sidewalk cafe, without first obtaining a permit as required by this chapter. Further, it shall be unlawful for any person to sell, keep for sale or dispense
any food and/or beverage, or allow consumption of any food and/or beverage at a sidewalk cafe, except in accordance with a permit issued under this
chapter. (1952 Code § 5-06-03)
3-4-4: APPLICATION FOR PERMIT:
A. Time Limit For Filing: Any person holding a State retail liquor license, retail beer or wine license and/or eating and drinking license may obtain an
application to operate a sidewalk cafe from the Clerk's Office. The application must be executed by the applicant and filed with the Clerk not less than
thirty (30) days prior to the date the applicant intends to begin operating a sidewalk cafe. Failure to complete the required portions of the application
may result in a denial of the application.
B. Waiver If Less Than Thirty Days: Where an application is filed less than thirty (30) days prior to the operation of a sidewalk cafe, the applicant may
execute a waiver of procedural appeal rights in order to allow for the consideration of the granting of a sidewalk cafe permit. A waiver of procedural
appeal rights is not a guarantee or promise that the permit can or shall be processed or granted. The filing fee is not refundable in any case.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 84/503
C. Information Required: The applicant shall file with the Clerk an application, in writing, signed by the applicant and containing such information and
statements relative to the applicant and the premises (in existence or to be constructed in accordance with plans and specifications contained in the
application and approved by the City) where the food and/or beverages are to be sold. The application shall be verified by the affidavit of the person
making the same and shall be accompanied with the permit fee herein required. In addition to setting forth the qualifications required by other
provisions of this chapter, the application must contain: (Ord. 48-13, 12-3-2013)
1. The name, address and phone number of the applicant;
2. The identity of the retailer, the street address and names of any managers or agents;
3. A detailed diagram or description of the premises for which a permit is sought and its location. A description of the design, including a detailed scale
drawing of the sidewalk cafe, its portable barriers (if alcohol is to be consumed) and the placement of tables, chairs, planters, canopies, umbrellas,
etc.;
4. Dates and hours requested during which the permit is to be effective;
5. An executed indemnification agreement in favor of the City and ACHD;
6. If the sidewalk area sought to be permitted is not owned by the applicant or the Ada County Highway District (ACHD), then a certified copy of a
document showing that the owner of the sidewalk area consents to the sale of food and/or beverages on such sidewalk; (1952 Code § 5-06-04)
7. If, during the period of any permit issued hereunder, any change shall take place in any of the requirements of this section, the permittee shall
forthwith make a report of such change to the Clerk; (1952 Code § 5-06-04; amd. 2019 Code)
8. If the applicant contemplates the consumption of alcoholic beverages along with food on the area to be permitted and for the time for which the
application is made, the application shall be accompanied with:
a. A copy of the alcohol beverage license issued by the Director of the Department of Law Enforcement of the State for the premises and for the time
for which the application is made, which license shall be returned to the applicant after examination by the Clerk;
b. A copy of the alcohol beverage license issued by the Board of Ada County Commissioners for the premises and for the time for which the
application is made, which license shall be returned to the applicant after examination by the Clerk;
c. A valid City eating and drinking license;
d. A sample of a sign which shall be placed at all exits. This sign will be no smaller than nine inches by twelve inches (9" x 12") and displayed at a
height of five feet (5'). It shall read "It is unlawful to consume alcoholic beverages not purchased at (premises name) or to remove same from the
boundaries of this sidewalk cafe";
e. A signed special use agreement if the public access is not through a retailer's premises;
9. If the applicant contemplates the consumption of food and/or nonalcoholic beverage on the area to be permitted, the application shall be
accompanied with:
a. The permit issued by Central District Health Department for the premises and for the time for which the application is made, which permit shall be
returned to the applicant after examination by the Clerk; and
b. A valid City eating and drinking license.
D. Liability Insurance: The applicant shall be required to maintain in full force and effect comprehensive general liability insurance with liability limits of not
less than five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) for the term of the sidewalk cafe permit applied for. The insurance policy shall name the City and
ACHD as "additional named insureds" and a copy of the insurance binder shall be filed with the Clerk prior to the issuance of the said permit. (1952
Code § 5-06-04)
3-4-5: QUALIFICATIONS OF APPLICANT IF SERVING ALCOHOL:
If applicant is proposing to offer alcoholic beverages, all of the qualifications must be met as specified in section 3-4-6 of this chapter. (1952 Code § 5-06-
06)
3-4-6: PERMIT DETERMINATION BY CLERK:
A. Authority Of Clerk: The City Council has determined that the Clerk or the Clerk's designee shall be delegated the authority to process, grant or deny all
sidewalk cafe applications.
B. Denial Of Application: Whenever the Clerk shall deny any application, the Clerk shall specify in writing:
1. The statutes, ordinances and standards used in evaluating the application;
2. The reasons for denial; and
3. The actions, if any, that the applicant could take to obtain the license, transfer or renewal thereof.
C. Review Of Application:
1. Complete Application; Forward For Recommendation: The Clerk shall review the application for a sidewalk cafe permit for completeness and forward
said application to the Police Chief, Fire Chief, Building Director, ACHD and Department of Planning and Development Services (PDS) for their
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 85/503
recommendation;
2. Recommendation Of Officials:
a. The Police Chief, Fire Chief, Building Director, ACHD and PDS shall make a recommendation to the Clerk to approve or deny the application.
(1) The City Clerk or the Clerk's designee shall run a background check on the applicant and verify compliance with the provisions set forth herein.
These findings are to weigh in the Clerk's consideration for approval or denial of the sidewalk cafe permit.
(2) The Police Chief, Fire Chief, Building Director and PDS may recommend approval of the sidewalk cafe permit to promote and carry out the
interests of the City.
b. The Police Chief may recommend conditions, terms or a reduction in the number of requested dates or times as determined reasonable to carry
out the policies of the City, which include protection of the health, safety and welfare of the public, or to prevent an unlawful disturbance or
nuisance. Such conditions may include posting of appropriate signs and hiring at applicant's expense additional licensed, bonded security
personnel. Any such conditions must be attached and displayed as a part of the sidewalk cafe permit or special use permit.
c. Where the Police Chief determines that due to the anticipated number of participants, location of the sidewalk cafe, pedestrian or vehicular traffic,
occurrence of special events, ingress or egress of customers, or presence of minors requires additional physical configuration or limitation of the
premises for enforcement purposes, the Chief may recommend that the sidewalk cafe be maintained in a specified manner as a condition of the
permit.
d. Where the Fire Chief determines that the proposed size, configuration or number of participants of the sidewalk cafe will impede access of
emergency vehicles and/or personnel to the area, the Chief may recommend that the sidewalk cafe and its specifications be maintained in a
specified manner as a condition of the sidewalk cafe permit or special use permit.
D. Issuance Of Permit Or Denial Of Application: The Clerk shall issue a permit for a sidewalk cafe if all of the following criteria are met and shall deny the
application for a permit if any of the following criteria are not met:
1. The applicant is qualified;
2. The Police Chief and Fire Chief recommends issuance of a permit either absolutely or conditionally;
3. The PDS designee recommends issuance of a conditional use permit either absolutely or conditionally;
4. The Building Department issues an occupancy permit for the sidewalk cafe or determines such permit is required;
5. ACHD's approval as to minimum clear space required for pedestrian traffic;
6. An applicant proposing to offer food and/or nonalcoholic beverages:
a. Abuts or is contiguous to the food establishment in which food preparation, sanitation and related services are performed; and
b. Complies with subsections 3-4-4C8a and C8b of this chapter.
7. An applicant proposing to offer alcoholic beverages:
a. Abuts or is contiguous to the on premises retailer in which the beverage is prepared for consumption, sanitation and related services are
performed;
b. The boundaries of the sidewalk cafe are proposed to be identified by the placement of one or more continuous physical barriers with a minimum
height of three feet (3') and that meet specified criteria, access of the public to and from the area in which alcoholic beverages are consumed is
through the retail establishment abutting or contiguous to the sidewalk cafe, unless by special use agreement to allow ingress and egress from the
designed sidewalk cafe area; and
c. The proposed placement and description of signs is satisfactory to the Police Chief;
8. The detailed diagram or description of the premises accompanying the application reflects:
a. That none of the sidewalk cafe furnishings, tables, chairs or barriers are closer than eight feet (8') from the curb. If no curb, the edge of the
pavement, where street trees or parking meters are installed; and
b. An unimpeded pedestrian corridor no less than five feet (5') at its narrowest width continuing in a linear direction more or less parallel to the rightof-
way the full length of the sidewalk past the sidewalk cafe. (1952 Code § 5-06-05; amd. 2019 Code)
3-4-7: FEES FOR PERMIT:
Each application for a sidewalk cafe shall be accompanied by the required nonrefundable permit fees in an amount established by the City Council and
listed on the most current City Clerk license fee schedule along with:
A. Any fee imposed by PDS for review for a zoning certificate.
B. Any fee imposed by Building Department for occupancy permit. (1952 Code § 5-06-08)
3-4-8: QUALIFICATIONS CONTINUED:
A person to whom a sidewalk cafe permit is issued must continue throughout the permit period to have all of the qualifications and none of the
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 86/503
disqualifications provided in this chapter. (1952 Code § 5-06-07)
3-4-9: EXPIRATION OF PERMIT:
All permits for the operation of sidewalk cafe within the City shall terminate at twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight on December 31 of the year in which such
permit is issued, unless application for renewal has been made. If application for renewal has been made, the current permit shall remain in force until the
Clerk has acted on the application for renewal and has given notice of the action taken. (1952 Code § 5-06-09)
3-4-10: RENEWAL:
Renewal of a permit shall be on forms prescribed and furnished by the Clerk. Renewal forms shall be submitted thirty (30) days prior to the expiration of
the current permit. The required permit fee in an amount established by the City Council and listed on the most current City Clerk license fee schedule and
an affidavit verifying that the information contained in the original application is unchanged or reflecting any changes must accompany a renewal form.
(1952 Code § 5-06-10; amd. 2019 Code)
3-4-11: TRANSFERABILITY:
A permit may be transferred only to the successor in interest to any licenses or permits issued to the permittee, but the transferee, including any executor,
administrator or trustee in bankruptcy of the estate of the retailer shall not be authorized to operate a sidewalk cafe until the transferee shall have filed
under oath an application therefor containing the same information required in an application for a permit, and if the transferee possesses the qualifications
and none of the disqualifications of an applicant as provided in this chapter, the Clerk shall approve such transfer and shall amend the license to reflect the
transfer.
A. No fee shall be collected for transfer of a permit in the following events:
1. The transfer of a permit between husband and wife in the event of a property division; or
2. The transfer of a permit to a receiver, trustee in bankruptcy or similar person or officer; or
3. The transfer of a permit to the heirs or personal representative of the estate in the event of the death of the permittee; or
4. The transfer of a permit arising out of the dissolution of a partnership where the permit is transferred to one or more of the partners; or
5. The transfer of a permit within a family to members within the second degree of consanguinity.
B. The fee for transferring a sidewalk cafe permit shall be in an amount established by the City Council and listed on the most current City Clerk license
fee schedule. (1952 Code § 5-06-11)
3-4-12: DISPLAY OF PERMIT REQUIRED:
The applicant or the applicant's designee is required to carry, display or post the original sidewalk cafe permit with any conditions that have been imposed
upon recommendation by the Police and Fire Chiefs on the premises which abuts or is contiguous to the sidewalk cafe. (1952 Code § 5-06-12)
3-4-13: DENIAL, TERMINATION, REVOCATION AND APPEAL:
A. Temporary Suspension; Revocation: The City Clerk may issue a temporary suspension of the permit for up to ten (10) days or shall revoke a permit
issued under this chapter when:
1. Subsequent to the issuance of the permit, it is determined that the applicant did not meet the requirements set forth in this chapter;
2. There are grounds for revocation provided in chapter 1, article A of this title. (1952 Code § 5-06-13)
B. Procedure For Denial, Termination, Appeal:
1. Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, the procedures for denial, termination and appeal in chapter 1, article A of this title shall be followed.
2. Where there exists a clear endangerment to the health, safety and welfare of the public resulting from the use of the permit, or where the applicant or
agent of the applicant fails to perform in conformance with the conditions and terms set forth on the permit, the Police Chief, Fire Chief, City Clerk or
designated representative may revoke the sidewalk cafe permit issued under the provisions of this chapter by immediately demanding and seizing
the permit from the applicant or co-applicant.
3. Applicant, as a condition of permit, accepts that the sidewalk cafe permit can be seized, and shall surrender upon demand by the Police Chief, Fire
Chief, City Clerk or designated representative. (1952 Code § 5-06-14)
3-4-14: ACCESS TO PREMISES FOR ENFORCEMENT:
All police officers of the City shall have the right at any time to enter in and upon any such licensed premises, and it shall be unlawful to refuse any officer
of the police force, City Clerk and/or license enforcement officers of the City admittance to or access to such premises for the purpose of police control,
regulation and inspection of such premises. (1952 Code § 5-06-15)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 87/503
3-4-15: REGULATIONS AND VIOLATIONS:
A. Failure To Obtain; Display Permit: Any person failing to obtain, display or surrender a sidewalk cafe permit as provided in this chapter shall be guilty of
an infraction for a first time offense.
B. Endangering Public: Any person holding a sidewalk cafe permit, or any person employed or acting on the behalf of the person holding a sidewalk cafe
permit, who wilfully endangers the health, safety, public welfare by permitting, allowing or failing to correct, conduct in violation of the conditions or
terms of a sidewalk cafe permit is guilty of an infraction for a first time offense.
C. Alcohol Consumption By Minor; Employee Exception: Any person under the age of twenty one (21) years buying, possessing or consuming alcoholic
beverages at a sidewalk cafe shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Provided, however, it is lawful for persons who are nineteen (19) years of age or older
to sell, serve, possess or dispense liquor, beer or wine in the course of their employment in any place defined in Idaho Code section 23-942, or in any
other place where liquor, beer or wine are lawfully present, so long as such place is the place of employment for such person under twenty one (21)
years of age.
D. Age Verification: The applicant or any person employed by or acting on behalf of the applicant who serves another an alcoholic beverage has the duty
to routinely check valid driver's licenses, State identification cards and military identification cards to verify the age of those served alcoholic beverages.
Any person who fails to check appropriate identification which subsequently results in the serving of an alcoholic beverage to a person under twenty
one (21) years of age shall be guilty of an infraction for a first time offense.
E. Signage: Any person who fails to post a sign that meets the following requirements at all exits is guilty of an infraction for a first time offense. This sign
shall be no smaller than nine inches by twelve inches (9" x 12") and displayed at a height of five feet (5'). It shall read "It is unlawful to consume
alcoholic beverages not purchased at (premises name) or to remove same from the boundaries of this sidewalk cafe".
F. Furnishings: The applicant fails to remove all furnishings related to the sidewalk cafe from the sidewalk when not used for more than one hundred
twenty (120) hours is guilty of an infraction for a first time offense.
G. Trash, Debris: The applicant fails to collect or deposit trash or debris that has accumulated within twenty feet (20') of any sidewalk cafe is guilty of an
infraction for a first time offense.
H. Pedestrian Corridor: Any person holding the sidewalk cafe permit and/or agent, employee, servant or other person on behalf of the person holding the
sidewalk cafe permit who fails to maintain an unimpeded pedestrian corridor as described in subsection 3-4-6D8b of this chapter is guilty of an
infraction for a first time offense.
I. Removal Of Debris: Dirty dishes, glasses, flatware and all debris shall be removed within twenty (20) minutes of a patron leaving the sidewalk cafe. An
applicant who fails to comply with this provision is guilty of an infraction.
J. Bottles: Beer bottles or other bottles that contain or did contain an alcoholic beverage are prohibited after twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight. This
prohibition does not apply to seven hundred fifty milliliters (750 mL) wine or champagne bottles. An applicant who fails to comply with this provision is
guilty of an infraction.
K. Alcoholic Beverages Storage Devices: No taps, kegs, coolers or other alcoholic beverage storage devices are allowed on the sidewalk. An applicant
who fails to comply with this provision is guilty of an infraction.
L. Acts Of Agents, Employees: A violation of any of the provisions of this section by any agent, employee, servant or other person on behalf of the person
holding the sidewalk cafe permit, shall be presumed a violation by the person holding the sidewalk cafe permit. (1952 Code § 5-06-16; amd. 2019
Code)
3-4-16: PENALTY:
A. Infraction: Any peace officer, the City Licensing Officer or the City Licensing Enforcement Officer shall have the authority to enforce this chapter. Any
person violating the provisions of this chapter declared an infraction shall be assessed a penalty as provided in section 1-4-2 of this Code, excluding
court costs and fees. An infraction is a civil public offense, not constituting a crime. There is no right to a trial by jury of a citation or complaint for an
infraction and such trials shall be held before the court without a jury. A second and any subsequent conviction for the same violation of the provisions
of this chapter within five (5) years shall constitute a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine as provided in section 1-4-1 of this Code.
B. Misdemeanor: Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter declared a misdemeanor shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon
conviction thereof, subject to penalty as provided in section 1-4-1 of this Code. (1952 Code § 5-06-17; amd. 2019 Code)
C. Suspension: Any licensee violating any of the provision of this chapter shall, in addition to the penalties prescribed by law as a punishment for an
infraction or a misdemeanor, be subject to a temporary suspension of the license violated for period not to exceed ten (10) days. Such temporary
suspension shall be effective ten (10) days from the date of written notice to the licensee or the operator of the licensed sidewalk cafe. A violator may
be served with notice of temporary suspension pursuant to this chapter even though no infraction or misdemeanor charge is filed. Any operation of a
sidewalk cafe during the period of such temporary suspension shall be deemed a separate offense for each day. Any licensee provided such
suspension may appeal before the City Council. In the event that a suspension is appealed, said suspension shall be automatically stayed pending the
appeal. (1952 Code § 5-06-17)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 88/503
Chapter 5
RETAIL TOBACCO BUSINESSES
3-5-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and derivations shall have the meanings given herein. When not inconsistent with the
context, words used in the present tense include the future tense, words in the plural number include the singular number, and words in the singular
number include the plural number. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory. Words used throughout this chapter, but not defined
herein or in chapter 1, article A of this title, shall have their plain, ordinary and common meaning. Words in any gender shall apply to the feminine,
masculine and neuter genders.
BUSINESS: Any company, partnership, firm, sole proprietorship, association, corporation, organization or other legal entity, or a representative of the
foregoing entities.
DISTRIBUTE: To give, deliver, sell, offer to give, offer to deliver, offer to sell or cause any person to do the same or hire any person to do the same.
EQUIPMENT OR MATERIAL USED FOR THE CONSUMPTION OF A TOBACCO PRODUCT: Any product designed to be or used to hold any tobacco
product for consumption, including, but not limited to, cigarette papers, holders, pipes, smokeless tobacco pouch or sachet, or snuff tube or spoon.
MINOR: A person less than eighteen (18) years of age.
PHOTOGRAPHIC IDENTIFICATION: State, district, territorial possession, provincial, national or other equivalent government driver's license, identification
card or military card, in all cases bearing a photograph and a date of birth, or a valid passport.
RETAIL TOBACCO BUSINESS: A business which during the normal course of business primarily distributes any tobacco product or provides any
equipment or material used for the consumption of tobacco and which permits smoking on premises owned, operated or used by the business as a
smoking area, whether indoors or outdoors, during any portion of its hours of operation within the last thirty (30) days.
SELLER: The person who physically sells or distributes tobacco products.
SMOKING: The possession of any lighted tobacco product in any form.
SMOKING AREA: Any area used by the business in which smoking or any other method of consumption of any tobacco product is permitted.
TOBACCO PRODUCT: Any substance that contains tobacco, including, but not limited to, cigarettes, cigars, pipes, snuff, smoking tobacco, tobacco
papers or smokeless tobacco.
UNANNOUNCED INSPECTION: Any inspection of a retail tobacco business by a law enforcement agency, whether random or not, with or without the
assistance of a minor, to monitor compliance of this chapter. (1952 Code § 5-09-01; amd. 2019 Code)
3-5-2: OPERATIONAL REQUIREMENTS:
A. Signage, Barriers Required: Every retail tobacco business shall keep a sign conspicuously posted over or on each entrance to the retail tobacco
business, giving public notice that persons under eighteen (18) years are restricted from admittance to the premises and shall not enter, remain or loiter
in or about the premises of any retail tobacco business.
1. Entrances to any retail tobacco business must contain the following words in plainly visible lettering of at least one inch (1") in height: "Admittance of
persons under the age of eighteen (18) years is prohibited by law". Such sign must be placed conspicuously over or on the door of each entrance to
the licensed premises and must be clearly visible from the exterior of the retail tobacco business.
2. Any outdoor facilities of a retail tobacco business in which equipment or materials used for the consumption of tobacco is furnished or serviced, and
from which tobacco is consumed, must be identified by the placement of one or more continuous physical barriers with a minimum height of three
feet (3') and along the outside of which at intervals of no less than ten feet (10') must be signs affixed at the three foot (3') level containing the
following words in lettering of at least one inch (1") in height: "Minors are prohibited from loitering within ten feet (10') of this smoking area" and
"Admittance of persons under the age of eighteen (18) years is prohibited by law". Access of the public to and from such outdoor facility is to be
through the building housing the retail tobacco business abutting or contiguous to the outdoor facility.
B. Identification Required Prior To Entrance: Every retail tobacco business shall employ a person to sit or stand at each entrance to the retail tobacco
business and such person shall demand photographic identification from each person desiring entrance to the retail tobacco business. No person
under the age of eighteen (18) years shall be allowed entrance to the retail tobacco business, except as provided in section 5-2-2 of this Code.
C. Employment Of Minors Prohibited: It is unlawful for a retail tobacco business to employ persons under the age of eighteen (18) years in any capacity,
including, but not limited to, custodians, DJs, entertainers, musicians, singers or sellers or distributors of tobacco products or equipment or material
used for the consumption of a tobacco product.
D. Equipment Or Materials To Minors Prohibited: It is unlawful for a retail tobacco business to sell, furnish, lend, rent or otherwise permit any person under
the age of eighteen (18) years to purchase, borrow, use or possess any equipment or materials used for the consumption of tobacco. (1952 Code § 5-
09-02)
3-5-3: HOURS OF OPERATION:
No retail tobacco business shall permit any customer to enter or remain on the business premises from two o'clock (2:00) A.M. to six o'clock (6:00) A.M. It
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 89/503
shall be the duty of every person who owns, manages or is employed at or upon the premises operated or used by a retail tobacco business to lock up and
keep locked up in a locked room or cabinet all open tobacco products, stow on shelving or cabinets any unopened or sealed packages of tobacco
products, to extinguish all smoking, cease any other consumption of tobacco products, and remove from use any equipment used for the consumption of a
tobacco product owned or used by the retail tobacco business during the hours and at such times set forth in this section. Any such person who fails to
perform the duty provided herein shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. (1952 Code § 5-09-03)
3-5-4: EXAMINATION OF PREMISES:
Any law enforcement officer shall have the right at any time to make an examination of the premises of any retail tobacco business in order to ensure
compliance with any of the provisions of this chapter. Any person who interferes with a law enforcement officer's exercise of the right to examine the
premises of a retail tobacco business is guilty of a misdemeanor and any other offenses committed while interfering, obstructing or delaying the officers.
Any person on the premises of a retail tobacco business who refuses admittance to a law enforcement officer is guilty of a misdemeanor. (1952 Code § 5-
09-04)
3-5-5: PENALTY:
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, subject to penalty as provided in section 1-4-1 of this
Code. (1952 Code § 5-09-05; amd. 2019 Code)
Chapter 6
CHILDCARE FACILITIES
3-6-1: LEGAL AUTHORITY:
Idaho Code sections 50-301 and 50-307 authorize the City to adopt and enforce ordinances, rules and regulations governing standards and procedures
for licensing persons who engage in or operate a trade or business within the City. Idaho Code section 39-1108 specifically authorizes cities and counties
to adopt and enforce ordinances, rules and regulations governing the standards and procedures for licensing daycare services within their boundaries.
Under 42 USC section 9858f, the City is required to check certain records for childcare workers and facilities. (2019 Code)
3-6-2: PURPOSE:
The purpose of City's Childcare Licensing Program is to promote a childcare environment where children receive safe, healthy and developmentally
appropriate care. (2019 Code)
3-6-3: SCOPE:
This chapter establishes minimum standards and procedures for licensing and operating a daycare business and working as a childcare worker within the
City. (2019 Code)
3-6-4: GENERAL LICENSING PROVISIONS APPLICABLE:
To the extent not inconsistent with this chapter, the licensing provisions set forth in chapter 1, article A of this title, shall apply with full force and effect to all
provisions and sections of this chapter. (2019 Code)
3-6-5: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and derivations shall have the meanings given herein. When not inconsistent with the
context, words used in the present tense include the future tense, words in the plural number include the singular number, and words in the singular
number include the plural number. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory. Words used throughout this chapter, but not defined
herein or in chapter 1, article A of this title, shall have their plain, ordinary and common meaning. Words in any gender shall apply to the feminine,
masculine and neuter genders.
APPLICANT: A person making application for a license or the renewal of a license to operate a childcare facility or to act as a childcare worker, juvenile
childcare worker or volunteer.
BABYSITTING: The occasional or irregular care of a neighbor's, relative's or friend's child by a person not ordinarily in the business of providing childcare.
Babysitting is temporary care of a child in the home or residence of the parent, guardian or a person with the duties and powers of a guardian of the child
being cared for.
CHIEF AGENT OR DESIGNATED RESPONSIBLE PERSON: A person who has authority to act on behalf of or represent the owner of a childcare facility.
These terms are used interchangeably throughout this chapter.
CHILD: Any person who is under thirteen (13) years of age who is being provided childcare.
CHILD/WORKER POINT SYSTEM: The methodology used to determine the number of licensed childcare workers required to provide childcare for a given
number of children.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 90/503
CHILDCARE: The care and supervision provided for compensation (to the childcare facility owner) during part of a twenty four (24) hour day, for a child
under thirteen (13) years of age, not related by blood, marriage, adoption or legal guardianship to the person or persons providing the care, in a place
other than the child's own home.
CHILDCARE FACILITY: Any home, business or other place where childcare is provided. There are the following types of childcare facilities:
Commercial Childcare Center: A childcare facility that provides childcare for more than twelve (12) children or uses a nonresidential building.
Family Childcare Home: A childcare facility that provides care for six (6) or fewer children in a building inhabited by one or more people who use the
building as their home or residence.
Group Childcare Home: A childcare facility that provides care for seven (7) to twelve (12) children in a building inhabited by one or more people who use
the building as their home or residence.
Residential Childcare Center: A childcare facility that provides care for seven (7) to twelve (12) children in a home or residential building in which no
person resides.
CHILDCARE FACILITY RESIDENT: Any person thirteen (13) years of age or older who resides in any childcare facility.
CHILDCARE WORKER: Any person employed by, or who otherwise works at, a childcare facility who has direct and regular contact with the children in
such facility.
CLINIC: An outpatient health facility.
DIRECT SUPERVISION: Being physically present with immediate and direct line of sight to the person or object of supervision.
ENHANCED CLEARANCE CHECK: A search of confidential databases or registries in states or jurisdictions other than the State of Idaho in which the
licensee or applicant resided during the five (5) years preceding his application or renewal of a license.
ENROLLED: Any child who has been placed within a childcare facility by agreement, contract or arrangement between the parents or guardians of the
child and the childcare facility owner or authorized childcare worker shall be deemed "enrolled" in that facility.
FLAME SOURCE UTILITY: Any device that uses open flame combustion as a means of heating a space, surface or fluid. Common examples
(noninclusive) are: wood, gas, coal, kerosene heaters, propane space heaters, gas water heaters or stoves, gas or kerosene furnaces, and wood or gas
fireplaces.
HEALTH FACILITY: Any facility that is operated for the diagnosis, care, prevention and treatment of human illness or injury, including children's therapeutic
outdoor programs, and any facilities providing treatment, therapy or rehabilitation for children required to be licensed by the State of Idaho under any
sections of the Idaho Code, other than title 39, chapter 11.
JUVENILE CHILDCARE WORKER: Any person employed by a childcare facility who has direct contact with a child or children and is under the age of
eighteen (18), but is thirteen (13) years of age or older. Every juvenile childcare worker shall be under the direct supervision of a licensed childcare worker.
OFFICER: Any person who holds a position of authority or trust in an organization or corporation that owns, possesses or operates any childcare facility,
including, but not limited to, all partners, officers, directors, members or principal stockholders.
OWNER: A person who has, owns, possesses or operates a childcare facility. The person who is ultimately responsible for the management, supervision
and operation of a childcare facility.
PUBLIC RECREATION PROGRAM: Any recreation program operated by the State, a county, a city, a special district, a college or a university, which
operates less than twelve (12) weeks during a calendar year or not more often than once a week.
VISITOR: Any person who is a guest at a childcare facility on a random or infrequent basis to provide a prearranged performance, presentation or event,
or to visit a child. Every visitor shall be under the direct supervision of a licensed childcare worker. A visitor shall not count in the child/worker ratio.
VOLUNTEER: Any person who periodically or intermittently provides a service to a childcare facility without pay or remuneration of any kind. Every
volunteer shall be under the direct supervision of a licensed childcare worker while volunteering at a childcare facility. A volunteer shall not count in the
child/worker ratio. (Ord. 36-14, 9-30-2014; amd. Ord. 29-17, 9-19-2017; 2019 Code)
3-6-6: TYPES OF LICENSES; LICENSES REQUIRED; STANDARDS AND REQUIREMENTS FOR LICENSE APPLICATION AND
RENEWAL; FEES; LICENSE REMAINS VALID DURING RENEWAL:
A. Types Of Licenses: Pursuant to this chapter, there are the following types of licenses:
1. Childcare facility license;
2. Childcare worker license;
3. Juvenile childcare worker license; and
4. Volunteer license.
B. Licenses Required:
1. No person shall own or operate a childcare facility without first obtaining and maintaining a valid childcare facility license as provided in this chapter
and chapter 1, article A of this title.
2. No person shall act as a childcare worker, juvenile childcare worker or volunteer without first obtaining and maintaining such license as provided in
this chapter and chapter 1, article A of this title.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 91/503
C. General Standards And Requirements For License Application And Renewal: In addition to the minimum requirements set forth in chapter 1, article A of
this title, the general standards and requirements for license applications pursuant to this chapter are as follows:
1. Application for any license pursuant to this chapter shall be made to the City Clerk in the form and manner prescribed by the City Clerk.
2. Every application containing untrue or misleading information may be denied without refund or consideration, and may result in criminal charges or
penalties as prescribed by law.
3. Every applicant and licensee has an ongoing affirmative duty to update all information provided on the application for a license, in the event such
information becomes outdated, untrue or otherwise incorrect, within ten (10) business days of such change.
4. Applicant and licensee shall report all misdemeanor and felony criminal convictions immediately, which shall mean no more than two (2) business
days. This duty shall include, but not be limited to, any conviction on the applicant, licensee, employee or resident who resides at an in home
childcare facility.
5. Applicant and licensee shall report all pending disqualifying crimes and outstanding warrants for the applicant, licensee, employee or resident who
resides at an in home childcare facility immediately, which shall mean no more than two (2) business days.
D. License Fees: Every application for a license required by this chapter shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable license fee in an amount established by
the City Council and listed on the most current City Clerk license fee schedule. License applicants are also responsible for any additional costs paid to
agencies or criminal jurisdictions in other states for enhanced clearance checks.
1. The required license fee, and all other required costs and fees, shall be paid at the time of application for such license.
2. A license fee shall not be imposed upon the State or any of its agencies, departments or political subdivisions.
E. Licenses Remain Valid During Renewal Application Investigation: Upon the timely submission of a completed renewal application or a signed and dated
certification or declaration made under penalty of perjury that circumstances are unchanged, the current childcare facility, childcare worker, juvenile
childcare worker or volunteer license shall remain valid until the City Clerk reviews the applicant's qualifications and either denies the renewal
application or reissues the license. (Ord. 36-14, 9-30-2014; amd. 2019 Code)
3-6-7: CHILDCARE FACILITY LICENSE APPLICATION AND RENEWAL REQUIREMENTS; EXPIRATION:
A. Childcare Facility License Applications And Renewals: All childcare facility license applications and renewals shall comply with the minimum
requirements set forth in chapter 1, article A of this title, and also submit to the City Clerk the following additional required information:
1. Fingerprints and authorization to conduct background checks on the applicant and all other people subject to the background check requirement.
2. Copies of certificates of attendance, training logs or educational transcripts showing completion of the number of training hours required by section
3-6-18 of this chapter shall be submitted for license renewal for all continuing education required during the license term.
3. If there has been any lapse of licensure for any reason within the preceding two (2) years prior to reinstatement, the person must meet all
requirements for licensure, including all training requirements. Copies of certificates of attendance, training logs or educational transcripts showing
completion of the number of training hours required by section 3-6-18 of this chapter shall be required for the entire period of licensure and lapse.
Example: If a licensed childcare worker's license expired in 2012, and the worker wanted to reapply in 2014, they must complete all training
requirements for 2013 and 2014 prior to being eligible for licensure in 2014.
4. Proof that all required inspections required pursuant to this chapter were satisfactorily completed.
5. All childcare facility license renewals shall be submitted to the City Clerk's Office no more than sixty (60) days prior to the expiration of the current
and valid childcare facility license.
B. License Expiration: Each childcare facility license shall expire upon the earlier of:
1. One year from the date of issuance;
2. The date on which a licensee sells or otherwise transfers any amount or degree of ownership or control of the childcare facility, except when the
change of ownership applies to the transfer of stock when the childcare facility is owned by a corporation and such transfer does not constitute a
majority of the issued shares of such corporation;
3. The date on which a licensee surrenders the license to a licensing officer; or
4. The date on which a licensee moves the childcare facility from one location to another.
C. Owner Licensed As Childcare Worker: An individual licensed as the owner of a childcare facility shall be considered licensed as a childcare worker in
that facility and not charged an additional fee for a childcare worker license, if he/she meets all requirements and possesses all qualifications of a
childcare worker. (2019 Code)
3-6-8: CHILDCARE WORKER LICENSE APPLICATION AND RENEWAL REQUIREMENTS; EXPIRATION:
A. Childcare Worker License Application And Renewal: All childcare worker license applications and renewals shall comply with the minimum
requirements set forth in chapter 1, article A of this title, and also submit to the City Clerk the following additional required information:
1. Fingerprints and authorization to conduct background checks on the applicant as required pursuant to this chapter.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 92/503
2. Copies of certificates of attendance, training logs or educational transcripts showing completion of the number of training hours required by section
3-6-18 of this chapter shall be submitted with the application for license renewal for all continuing education required during the license term.
3. If there has been any lapse of licensure for any reason within the preceding two (2) years prior to reinstatement, the person must meet all
requirements for licensure, including all training requirements. Copies of certificates of attendance, training logs or educational transcripts showing
completion of the number of training hours required by section 3-6-18 of this chapter shall be required for the entire period of licensure and lapse.
Example: If a licensed childcare worker's license expired in 2012, and the worker wanted to reapply in 2014, they must complete all training
requirements for 2013 and 2014 prior to being eligible for licensure in 2014.
4. All childcare worker licenses shall be submitted to the City Clerk's Office for renewal no more than sixty (60) days prior to the expiration of the
current and valid license.
B. License Expiration: Childcare worker licenses shall expire at the end of one year from the date of issuance. No childcare worker license shall be
transferable to another person. (2019 Code)
3-6-9: JUVENILE CHILDCARE WORKER AND VOLUNTEER LICENSE APPLICATION AND RENEWAL REQUIREMENTS;
LIMITATIONS; EXPIRATION:
A. Juvenile Childcare Worker And Volunteer Licenses Application And Renewal: All juvenile childcare worker license and volunteer license applications
and renewals shall comply with the minimum requirements set forth in chapter 1, article A of this title, and also submit to the City Clerk the following
additional required information:
1. Fingerprints and authorization to conduct background checks on the applicant as required pursuant to this chapter. All applications for juvenile
childcare worker licenses shall include a signed parental or guardian approval form granting permission to the City Clerk to conduct the juvenile
criminal history and background checks as required pursuant to this chapter.
2. All juvenile childcare worker or volunteer licenses shall be submitted to the City Clerk's Office for renewal no more than sixty (60) days prior to the
expiration of the current and valid license.
B. Limitations Of Juvenile Childcare Worker And Volunteer Licenses: No juvenile childcare worker or volunteer shall be left alone with any childcare facility
child at any time. Volunteers are exempt from the training standards required of directors, childcare workers and juvenile childcare workers pursuant to
section 3-6-18 of this chapter.
C. License Expiration: All juvenile childcare worker and volunteer licenses shall expire at the end of one year from the date of issuance. No juvenile
childcare worker or volunteer license shall be transferable to another person. (2019 Code)
3-6-10: CHILDCARE FACILITY AND WORKER LICENSE EXEMPTIONS; CRIMINAL BACKGROUND CHECKS REQUIRED;
LICENSING OPT-IN:
A. Exemptions: The childcare facility and worker licensing requirements of this chapter do not apply to any of the following:
1. Health facility.
2. Clinic.
3. Any facility that:
a. Is a religious school for educational purposes for children over four (4) years of age and older; or
b. Is a public or private elementary school meeting the standards established by the State Board of Education, including that the facility operates
during normally established school hours, and provides instruction for the same total number of teaching days and hours. Upon request by the City
Clerk's Office, any public or private elementary school shall provide proof that such school is currently meeting State Board of Education school
standards as required for childcare licensing exemption.
4. Any arrangement for the childcare of the niece, nephew, first or second generation cousin, grandchild, brother or sister, son or daughter, related
either by blood or marriage to the childcare provider, unless childcare is at the same time being provided to an unrelated child. When determining the
child/worker ratio within a licensed childcare facility, all related and unrelated children under the age of thirteen (13) shall be counted. The total
number of related and unrelated children shall not exceed the number for which the facility is licensed.
5. Babysitting.
6. The provision of occasional care exclusively for children of parents who are simultaneously in the same building.
7. Any recreation program for children conducted by the Girl Scouts, Boy Scouts, Boys Club, Girls Club, Camp Fire or similar organization, and any day
camps, programs and religious schools operating for less than twelve (12) weeks during a calendar year or not more often than once a week.
8. Any public recreation program.
9. Any person enrolled in a program that meets the standards established by the State Board of Education and has a curriculum requirement of
interaction/observation at a childcare facility. This person shall not be counted in the child/worker ratio and shall be supervised at all times.
10. Any cooperative childcare arrangement between parents or guardians of children where no payment is involved, and where the childcare occurs in
the home of the parents or guardians of one or more of the children for whom childcare is provided. This exemption may not be applied between
parents or guardians of children in which childcare is provided for payment occasionally with one of the parties acting as a licensed childcare facility.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 93/503
11. Any arrangement between the parent, guardian or person with the duties and powers of a guardian of a child or children and a close friend of the
parent, guardian or person with the duties and powers of a guardian; provided, that such arrangement is not for financial profit, does not exceed ten
(10) hours per week, and is not provided for the children of more than one family. Childcare provided pursuant to this subsection that exceeds ten
(10) hours per week shall not be prohibited when provided on an occasional, nonrecurring, temporary basis for reasons, including, but not limited to,
family emergencies, vacation or military leave. This exemption may not be applied between parents or guardians of children in which childcare is
provided for payment occasionally with one of the parties acting as a licensed childcare facility.
12. Any agency, person, program, facility or institution defined as a health facility, as defined in section 3-6-5 of this chapter, and foster homes,
children's residential care facilities, residential schools and substance abuse treatment facilities exempted from the licensing requirements of Idaho
Code title 39, chapter 12, except those which provide only childcare as defined in section 3-6-5 of this chapter.
B. Criminal History And Background Checks Required: Notwithstanding the licensing exemptions set forth herein, any person who owns, operates or is
employed by a private school for children four (4) through six (6) years of age, or a private kindergarten, shall comply with the criminal history check
requirements in chapter 1, article A of this title and this chapter.
C. Licensing Opt-In: Any person who is otherwise exempt from the licensing requirements of this chapter may apply for any type of childcare license. Upon
a determination that all applicable standards and qualifications of this chapter are met, the applicant shall be issued the license. Application fees shall
be paid by the applicant prior to issuance of the license. (2019 Code)
3-6-11: INVESTIGATION AND INSPECTION UPON APPLICATION FOR LICENSING:
A. Standards Investigation: Upon the receipt of an application for a license, the Licensing Officer shall conduct an investigation to determine whether the
standards established by this chapter and chapter 1, article A of this title are met. (Ord. 29-17, 9-19-2017; amd. 2019 Code)
B. Resident Investigation: The Licensing Officer shall conduct an investigation on any resident in a childcare facility who is thirteen (13) years of age or
older consistent with this chapter and chapter 1, article A of this title. (Ord. 29-17, 9-19-2017)
C. Criminal History And Background Checks:
1. All licenses issued under this chapter require that the following persons submit to and pass a criminal history and background check:
a. Childcare facility owners, officers and directors;
b. Childcare workers, juvenile childcare workers and volunteers;
c. All employees of a childcare facility who have direct contact with children;
d. Any other individuals who are thirteen (13) years of age or older and who have unsupervised, direct contact with children; or who are regularly on
the premises of a childcare facility.
2. No new childcare licenses shall be issued without the Licensing Officer first obtaining all of the necessary and required criminal history and
background checks for such license. Issuance of the license may be denied for failure of the criminal history and background check by any of the
persons required to submit to such investigation pursuant to subsection C1 of this section. Any childcare facility license may be denied, suspended
or revoked for failure by applicant and licensee to notify the City Clerk of any person subject to criminal history and background checks pursuant to
subsections 3-6-7A1, 3-6-8A1 and 3-6-9A1 of this chapter.
3. For all persons eighteen (18) years of age or older, subject to the provisions of this chapter and State law, the required criminal history and
background check, shall include a search of the following:
a. Statewide Criminal Identification Bureau;
b. Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) criminal history;
c. National Crime Information Center;
d. Any state's or Federal sex offender registry; and
e. Any state's or Federal Statewide child abuse registry.
4. Criminal history and background check on those persons under eighteen (18) years of age shall include a check of the juvenile justice records of
adjudications of the Magistrate Division of the District Court; County Probation Services; and department records as authorized by the minor and his
parent or guardian. (2019 Code)
D. Premises Inspection: Prior to issuing or renewing a childcare facility license, the City Clerk shall conduct an inspection of the premises at which the
applicant will operate the childcare facility, to ensure that the premises is in compliance with the requirements of this chapter. (Ord. 29-17, 9-19-2017)
E. Enhanced Clearance Checks: An enhanced clearance check consisting of a search of State-based child abuse and neglect registries and databases
shall be conducted on all license applications in the states where the applicant physically resides or resided during the preceding five (5) years. (2019
Code)
F. New Criminal History Check: Any agency, the employer, or the City Clerk's Office, at its discretion, may require an individual to complete a new criminal
history and background check or enhanced clearance check at any time. (Ord. 29-17, 9-19-2017)
3-6-12: REQUIREMENTS FOR ISSUANCE AND MAINTENANCE OF LICENSES:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 94/503
A. Standards And Qualifications Met: No license governed by this chapter shall be issued unless and until the Licensing Officer determines that all
applicable license standards and qualifications contained herein are met, and that the applicant does not possess any disqualifications. (Ord. 36-14, 9-
30-2014; amd. 2019 Code)
B. Maintenance; Suspension, Revocation: Every licensee shall continue to have and maintain all of the qualifications and none of the disqualifications
provided in this chapter throughout the license period or, in addition to the criminal penalties prescribed therefor, the Licensing Officer shall suspend or
revoke all licenses issued pursuant to this chapter that are held by the licensee. The procedures for suspension and revocation, including the right of
appeal are as set forth in section 3-6-22 of this chapter and chapter 1, article A of this title. (Ord. 29-17, 9-19-2017)
C. Childcare Facility License Requirement:
1. Valid License Possessed And Maintained: No person owning or operating a childcare facility shall employ or otherwise utilize any person as a
childcare worker, juvenile childcare worker or volunteer unless such person possesses a valid license as provided in this chapter. Unless exempted
by this chapter, every person on the applicant's staff who has direct contact with any child or children at the childcare facility shall possess and
maintain a valid license of the type required by this chapter.
2. Childcare Facility Staffing Requirements:
a. At least one licensed adult childcare worker (18 years of age or older) must be present at all times when a child or children are present.
b. The Director must be eighteen (18) years of age or older.
c. At all times a childcare facility is open or operating, the owner shall ensure a designated responsible person or chief agent is present at the
childcare facility.
d. The person designated as the responsible person or chief agent shall be a licensed childcare worker.
e. The person designated as the responsible person or chief agent shall be responsible for all children and all conditions at the childcare facility.
f. Every juvenile childcare worker and volunteer shall be under the direct supervision of a licensed childcare worker. No childcare facility owner or
childcare worker shall leave an unsupervised juvenile childcare worker or volunteer in charge of one or more children.
g. Every visitor shall be under the direct supervision of a licensed childcare worker while visiting a childcare facility. No owner or childcare worker
shall leave an unattended visitor in the presence of children, unrelated to the visitor, who are under the care or supervision of the childcare facility.
h. Every childcare worker who is caring for one or more children shall be within sight or hearing of all such children at all times, including nap time,
and shall be capable of immediately assisting a child in an emergency.
i. Only childcare workers and juvenile childcare workers who are primarily engaged in caring for the children shall be counted in calculating the
child/worker point system. The number of childcare workers and juvenile childcare workers who are supervising or caring for children shall be
sufficient to comply with the child/worker point system required by this chapter. Volunteers shall not be counted in calculating the child/worker point
system.
D. Childcare Worker Staffing Requirements:
1. Child/Worker Point System: The maximum allowable child/worker ratio shall not exceed twelve (12) points. The number of points shall be determined
by using the following point system:
a. Each child in attendance in a group who is under the age of twenty four (24) months: 2.4 points;
b. Each child in attendance in a group who is twenty four (24) months or older, but under thirty six (36) months of age: Two (2) points;
c. Each child in attendance in a group who is thirty six (36) months or older, but under five (5) years of age: 1.2 points;
d. Each child in attendance in a group who is five (5) years of age or older, but under thirteen (13) years of age: One point.
NUMBER OF CHILDREN ALLOWED
Number Of Staff Required
Maximum Children
Less Than
2 Years 2 Years 3 - 4 Years 5 - 12 Years
1 5 6 10 12
2 10 12 20 24
3 15 18 30 36
2. More Restrictive Regulations: If the child/worker point system contained in the Idaho Statutes and regulations is more restrictive than this chapter,
the point system contained in the Idaho Statutes and regulations shall control.
3. Counting: Each and every child present or in attendance on the premises (both indoor and outdoor) of a childcare facility shall be counted to
establish the maximum allowable points for determining compliance with the child/worker point system set forth in this chapter.
4. Exemption For Accredited Montessori Schools:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 95/503
a. A Montessori school accredited by one or more of the accrediting organizations named herein shall not be required to comply with the child/worker
point system set forth in this chapter.
b. The authorized accrediting organizations include:
(1) Association Montessori Internationale (AMI);
(2) American Montessori Society (AMS);
(3) International Montessori Council; and
(4) Montessori School Accreditation Commission (MSAC).
c. To qualify for and receive this exemption from the child/worker point system, a Montessori school shall provide a copy of the certificate of
recognition or accreditation issued by the accrediting organization to the City Clerk.
d. An accredited Montessori school's exemption from the child/worker point system does not exempt that Montessori school from any of the other
requirements of this chapter.
e. Failure to maintain authorized accreditation shall immediately revoke such Montessori school's exemption from the point system required pursuant
to this chapter. Proof of current and valid accreditation from an authorized accrediting organization must be provided upon request by the City
Clerk. (Ord. 36-14, 9-30-2014; amd. 2019 Code)
3-6-13: RECORDKEEPING REQUIREMENTS:
A. Childcare Facility Recordkeeping Requirements For Each Enrolled Child:
1. Every childcare facility owner shall maintain on the premises of the childcare facility, a file or record for each and every child enrolled at, attending or
present at the childcare facility. The files and records shall be indexed and filed together in a secure, but readily available, location. Every child's file
and records shall be purged by the childcare facility owner within six (6) months of the date the child withdraws from enrollment at the childcare
facility, unless otherwise required to be maintained under State or Federal law. All records required pursuant to this section must be made available
by the childcare provider at the time of request by any Licensing Officer.
2. The required file or record shall contain, at a minimum, the following documents and information:
a. The child's full name.
b. The child's birthdate.
c. The full name, telephone number and address of each child's parent, guardian, emergency contact person or agency which placed the child.
d. A medical treatment consent form signed by the child's parent or guardian, which authorizes emergency medical treatment by a physician if the
parent or guardian cannot be reached.
e. The name, address and telephone number of a physician designated by the child's parent or guardian, including any hospital preference if
emergency medical treatment is required.
f. Information regarding the child's allergies, medication and other health related needs.
g. Within fourteen (14) days of initial attendance, the childcare facility must obtain from the child's parent or guardian a current immunization record
for each enrolled child unless the child's parent or guardian has submitted to the Childcare Facility Director:
(1) A certificate provided by the child's parent or guardian and signed by a physician licensed by the State Board of Medicine stating that the
physical condition of the child is such that all or any of the required immunizations would endanger the life or health of the child; or
(2) A signed statement objecting to immunizations upon religious grounds.
h. The immunization record of each child shall contain the immunizations required by the State Board of Health and Welfare's rules adopted under
the provisions of Idaho Code title 67, chapter 52.
i. Immunization records must be signed by a physician or his representative, or another licensed healthcare professional, and shall verify that the
child has received or is in the process of receiving immunizations as specified by the State Board of Health and Welfare; or can effectively
demonstrate, through verification in a form approved by the State Department of Health and Welfare, immunity gained through prior contraction of
the disease.
B. Childcare Worker Records: Every childcare facility owner, chief agent or designated responsible person shall maintain on the premises of the childcare
facility training records for every childcare worker and juvenile childcare worker. These records shall contain:
1. The number of hours of workshop attendance;
2. The name of every training session attended;
3. The subject content; and
4. The name of the instructor. (Ord. 36-14, 9-30-2014; amd. 2019 Code)
C. Criminal History And Background Check Records: Every childcare facility owner shall maintain a copy of the printed, signed and notarized childcare
license for all individuals required to obtain a criminal history and background check or enhanced clearance check. This copy must be readily available
for inspection to verify compliance with the criminal history and background check clearance requirement and enhanced clearance check. An employer
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 96/503
who chooses to use a criminal history and background check or enhanced clearance check obtained for a previous employer must comply with all
criminal history and background check requirements as set forth in chapter 1, article A of this title and this chapter. (Ord. 29-17, 9-19-2017)
D. Posting Of Records And Documentation: Training records and the following documentation and information shall be posted in a conspicuous place or
available for inspection within the pick up and drop off area of every childcare facility:
1. A copy of this chapter or a notice that a copy may be obtained from the childcare facility upon request;
2. A current CPR and first aid certification for every childcare worker and juvenile childcare worker employed at the childcare facility;
3. A current City license for the childcare facility and the current City licenses of every childcare worker, juvenile childcare worker and volunteer
employed or being utilized at that childcare facility;
4. An illness policy;
5. A discipline policy outlining and describing all methods of discipline employed at the facility;
6. A fire escape plan;
7. A fire inspection certificate;
8. A policy on enrolling children without current immunizations;
9. Written documentation identifying every person who is authorized to pick up a child from the facility. Only the child's parent or guardian, or those
people approved in advance and in writing by the child's parent or guardian, may pick up a child from a facility; and
10. A "Permission to Provide Transportation" form signed by the child's parent or guardian, if applicable. (Ord. 36-14, 9-30-2014; amd. Ord. 29-17, 9-
19-2017; 2019 Code)
3-6-14: TRANSPORTATION SAFETY:
Every person employed or utilized by a childcare facility to transport children using any vehicle or resource owned, operated or arranged by the childcare
facility shall:
A. Signed Form Required: Verify that every child being transported has a current and valid "Permission to Provide Transportation" form signed by the
child's parent or guardian and on record at the facility at the time the transportation is provided;
B. State Driver's License: Possess a valid State issued driver's license appropriate for the vehicle being driven;
C. City License: Possess a valid childcare worker license issued by the City;
D. Vehicle Registration, Insurance: Ensure that the vehicle is registered and insured according to State law;
E. Unattended Children: Not leave any child or children unattended or unsupervised in a vehicle at any time, for any length of time;
F. Front Passengers: Not transport any child under the age of thirteen (13) in the front passenger side of any vehicle with an enabled passenger side
airbag;
G. Driving Under Influence; Reckless Driving: Not have been convicted, pleaded guilty to or received a withheld judgment for driving under the influence or
reckless driving in the State, or any substantially conforming crimes in another state within the previous five (5) years; and
H. Restraint System: Have a restraint system for each child in the vehicle. Every restraint system shall comply with Idaho Code section 49-672 and
Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standard 213. Buses or other vehicles specifically designed for transporting children which are exempted from restraint
system requirements under State and Federal law are also exempted from this rule. (Ord. 36-14, 9-30-2014; amd. 2019 Code)
3-6-15: HEALTH AND SANITATION STANDARDS:
A. Inspection; Practices: Every childcare facility shall be inspected by the Central District Health Department for acceptable public health practices to
prevent the spread of communicable diseases. These practices include, but are not limited to:
1. Every childcare facility shall be maintained in a sanitary condition;
2. Food for use in childcare facilities shall be prepared and served in a sanitary manner with sanitized utensils and on surfaces that have been cleaned,
rinsed and sanitized prior to use to prevent contamination;
3. All food that is to be served in a childcare facility shall be stored in such a manner that it is protected from potential contamination;
4. Any water supply, where the source is other than a public water system, shall be approved by the Central District Health Department prior to its
original use and annually thereafter;
5. Medicines, cleaning supplies and other hazardous substances shall be stored out of children's reach.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 97/503
B. Sanitary Conditions: Every childcare facility shall conform to appropriate sanitation conditions, including, but not limited to:
1. Every child who is ill shall be excluded from the general population;
2. Diaper changing shall be conducted in such manner as to prevent spread of communicable diseases;
3. Sleeping areas, play areas and fixtures shall be maintained in a safe and sanitary condition;
4. Children and workers shall be provided with individual or disposable towels for hand washing. The hand washing area shall include soap and hot
and cold running water. Every childcare worker, juvenile childcare worker, volunteer or other childcare facility employee shall wash their hands after
changing a diaper, using the restroom and prior to preparing or serving food or drink at the childcare facility;
5. Every restroom in a childcare facility shall be maintained in a sanitary condition;
6. Every kitchen in a childcare facility shall be maintained in a sanitary condition;
7. Smoking or alcohol consumption is prohibited on the premises of a childcare facility during the childcare facility's hours of operation;
8. Health and safety inspectors, including Central District Health or City Clerk inspectors shall not be denied access to a childcare facility during hours
of operation for purposes of control of communicable disease or inspection.
C. Immunizations: Every childcare facility shall require all children to be age appropriately immunized within fourteen (14) days of initial attendance as
provided in subsection 3-6-13A2g of this chapter. (Ord. 36-14, 9-30-2014; amd. 2019 Code)
3-6-16: SAFETY STANDARDS:
A. Carbon Monoxide Detector: Every licensed childcare facility having a flame source utility on their premises shall be required to have a carbon monoxide
detector operating at all times in the area where children are present. A multi-floor childcare facility with a flame source utility shall have a minimum of
one carbon monoxide detector operating on each floor where any child is present.
B. Responsibility For Special Needs: All licensed childcare workers, owners, chief agents or designated responsible persons shall be responsible for the
special needs of all children under their supervision, including:
1. The ability to recognize and respond to potentially hazardous and emergency situations; and
2. The mental and physical capability of assisting and supervising young children, including, but not limited to, the ability to lift children, equipment and
supplies, and to quickly move young children out of harm's way.
C. Specific Standards: In addition to all other safety standards contained in this chapter, every childcare facility shall comply with the following health and
safety standards:
1. Fire and smoke alarms as required by the City Fire Code shall be present and maintained in good working condition;
2. Fire extinguishers as required by the City Fire Code or the Fire Department shall be present and maintained in good working condition;
3. All exits shall be maintained free and clear of all obstructions, and marked in such a way as to be easily identified and located;
4. A functioning telephone shall be located on the childcare facility premises during hours of operation;
5. Every firearm or other weapon kept, stored or otherwise present on the premises of a childcare facility shall be kept in a locked container that is
inaccessible to any child;
6. All cribs must meet Federal safety standards, including those enumerated in 16 CFR sections 1219 and 1220;
7. Every pool, hot tub, pond and other body of water on the property of a childcare facility shall provide the following safeguards:
a. The area surrounding a body of water must be fenced and locked in a manner that prevents access by children and meets the following
requirements:
(1) Except as provided herein, the pool, hot tub, pond or other body of water shall be completely surrounded by a fence or barrier at least four feet
(4') high, having no vertical opening more than four inches (4") wide, designed so that a young child cannot climb it or squeeze under or through
it; and
(2) The required fence or barrier shall:
(A) Include an installed gate that is equipped with a self-closing mechanism that causes the gate to close automatically, and is equipped with a
self-latching mechanism, located out of the reach of small children;
(B) Have no gaps, holes or openings that could allow unsupervised entry by any child; and
(C) Have all equipment and mechanisms required by this chapter present and maintained in good working condition.
b. If a house forms one or more sides of the fence or barrier, every door with access to the pool, hot tub, pond or other body of water shall be
equipped with an alarm that produces an audible sound when the door is opened.
c. No furniture or other object shall be left near the fence required by this chapter that would enable or allow a child to climb on the furniture or other
object to gain access to the pool, hot tub, pond or other body of water.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 98/503
d. If a pool, hot tub, pond or other body of water is not fenced, gated and locked as required by this chapter, there shall be a secured protective
covering placed over it such that access to the pool, hot tub, pond or other body of water by a child is impossible.
e. Wading pools must be empty when not in use by children supervised pursuant to this chapter.
f. Children must be under direct supervision of at least one adult childcare worker while using a pool, hot tub, pond or other body of water.
D. Building And Related Codes: Every building in which a childcare facility is operated shall comply with all applicable building, fire, health and zoning
standards provided by law, including the safety standards specifically set forth in Idaho Code section 39-1109(1). Licensing by the City Clerk does not
exempt the childcare facility from any other requirements, including Building Code, Fire Code and zoning ordinances. It is a violation of this subsection
to operate any childcare facility in contravention of any applicable building, fire, health and zoning standards provided by law.
E. Notification Of Injury: All licensed childcare workers, owners, chief agents or designated responsible persons shall notify parents in a timely manner for
any injury to a child while in the care of a childcare facility or provider.
F. More Restrictive Regulations: If any health, sanitation or safety regulation contained in the Idaho Statutes or regulations is more restrictive than this
chapter, then the Idaho Statutes or regulations shall control. (Ord. 36-14, 9-30-2014; amd. 2019 Code)
3-6-17: HEALTHY INITIATIVES:
The City shall monitor and disclose to the public each childcare facility's compliance with regards to physical activity, screen time, nutrition menus and
infant feeding standards as defined in this chapter. All records as required by this chapter shall be available for inspection by any member of the public.
The healthy initiatives established by this chapter shall not be required for licensure by the City.
A. Physical Activity:
1. A child over the age of one year should receive a minimum of twenty (20) minutes of indoor or outdoor daily physical activity, weather permitting,
every three (3) hours between the hours of seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. and seven o'clock (7:00) P.M.:
a. Unless child is unable to participate in physical activity due to illness or disability; or
b. The child is not awake.
2. A daily time record showing blocks of time assigned to types of physical activity for each age group of children shall be maintained.
B. Screen Time:
1. A daily limitation on sedentary, noneducational screen time (media and computer) of no more than one hour per day or five (5) hours per calendar
week during the childcare facility's hours of operation.
2. A daily time record for each age group of children showing the minutes that any screens are on shall be maintained, including, but not limited to,
televisions, computers, tablet devices, cell phones, video game systems or any other media device.
3. Screen time shall be deemed sedentary and noneducational unless the owner has maintained a contemporaneous record documenting the specific
educational objectives of the screen time and as approved by the Licensing Officer.
4. Use of screen time for a child's homework assignments or for a child with healthcare needs who require assistive and adaptive computer technology
shall not be deemed sedentary and noneducational.
C. Nutrition Menus:
1. A menu which meets the USDA's Child and Adult Care Food Program (CACFP) meal patterns for infants and children. Facilities not providing meals
or snacks are exempt from this requirement.
2. A weekly menu record shall be maintained of all meals and snacks provided by the facility. Records are not required if meals and snacks are not
provided by the facility or if the facility is participating in one of the following meal programs:
a. Nutrition Works;
b. State Department of Education; or
c. Under the Umbrella.
3. Exemptions will be provided for medical purposes or religious beliefs in accordance with a written request from the child's parents, guardians or
medical provider. Written requests about food shall be kept on site in the child's file.
D. Infant Feeding:
1. A private, designated location, other than a restroom, for breastfeeding shall be provided at childcare facilities.
2. The area shall be maintained in a sanitary condition, with access to an electrical outlet, chair and near running water.
E. Exemptions: All childcare facilities which hold one of the following accreditations are exempt from Healthy Initiative training and Healthy Initiative
inspection requirements:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 99/503
1. National Association for the Education of Young Children;
2. National Association for Family Childcare; or
3. Authorized Montessori schools accreditation as defined in subsection 3-6-12D4 of this chapter. (2019 Code)
3-6-18: TRAINING STANDARDS FOR DIRECTORS AND WORKERS:
A. Levels Designated; Criteria: Childcare facility directors and workers shall have their vocational and academic experience levels reviewed and be
designated as a level I (assistant teacher), level II (teacher) or level III (senior teacher) for the purpose of establishing the number of training hours
required for licensing. The following criteria shall be used to establish childcare experience levels and training requirements:
1. Level I (assistant teacher):
a. Has less than five (5) years full time experience in the childcare profession; and
b. Does not possess any formal academic degrees in early childhood education, development or psychology; and
c. Does not possess all of the professional childcare certifications identified within the level II definition.
d. Every level I assistant teacher is required to successfully complete at minimum fourteen (14) hours of training annually.
2. Level II (teacher):
a. Has at least five (5) years but less than ten (10) years of full time experience in the childcare profession; or
b. Possesses an Associate's Degree from an accredited university in early childhood education, development or psychology; or
c. Possesses a professionally recognized credential or certification in early childhood education, child development, child psychology or childcare.
d. Every level II teacher is required to successfully complete at minimum ten (10) hours of training annually.
3. Level III (senior teacher):
a. Has more than ten (10) years of full time experience in the childcare profession; or
b. Possesses a Bachelor's Degree or higher from an accredited university in early childhood education, development or psychology; or
c. Possesses an elementary or secondary teaching credential from the Board of Education of any state within the United States.
d. Every level III senior teacher is required to successfully complete at minimum eight (8) hours of training annually.
4. Training shall include the areas of childhood development, childhood education, childhood psychology, business management, safety or health
(including CPR and first aid training).
5. Copies of training certificates indicating completion of the required training shall be included with the renewal application at the time of license
renewal. Such training sessions are to be approved by the Licensing Officer.
Level Hours Of Required Training
Level I (assistant teacher) 14
Level II (teacher) 10
Level III (senior teacher) 8
6. New license holders have one year to meet training hours as defined above, with the exception of CPR and first aid, which are required upon
application or prior to license issuance.
B. Healthy Initiatives Training: Every childcare facility license applicant shall complete a one time Healthy Initiatives training prior to licensure, except those
facilities which are accredited by one of the following organizations:
1. National Association for the Education of Young Children;
2. National Association for Family Childcare; or
3. Authorized Montessori schools accreditation organizations as defined in subsection 3-6-12D4 of this chapter.
C. First Aid Training:
1. Every childcare worker and juvenile childcare worker shall maintain current adult, child and infant first aid and CPR certification from the American
Heart Association, American Safety and Health Institute or the American Red Cross. CPR and first aid certifications shall remain current throughout
the licensing period. CPR, first aid courses and qualified instructors shall meet American Heart Association, American Safety and Health Institute or
the American Red Cross certification and instruction requirements. The materials covered in the certification must meet the following minimum
requirements:
a. General principles of first aid; victim and rescuer safety; checking the adult, child or infant for injuries and illnesses.
b. Rescue breathing for adults, children and infants.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 100/503
c. Signs and actions for adult, child and infant choking.
d. Adult, child and infant cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR), including special situations; use of a mask.
e. Adult and child automated external defibrillation (AED) training.
f. Medical emergencies: medical problems; diabetes and low blood sugar; seizures and shock.
g. Injury emergencies: bleeding; wounds; head, neck and spine injuries; breaks, sprains and bruises; burns and electrocution.
h. Environmental emergencies: bites and stings; temperature related emergencies; poisons; drowning.
2. All first aid and CPR classes must be hands on and in person training; courses cannot be entirely online. (Ord. 36-14, 9-30-2014; amd. 2019 Code)
3-6-19: STANDARDS APPLICABLE TO CHILDCARE FACILITIES OPERATION AND CHILDCARE WORKERS:
A. Criminal History And Background Checks:
1. Each applicant seeking licensure for a childcare facility must require that the following individuals complete and successfully pass a criminal history
and background check by the Clerk's Office as set forth in this chapter and chapter 1, article A of this title for every: (Ord. 36-14, 9-30-2014; amd.
Ord. 29-17, 9-19-2017; 2019 Code)
a. Owner, officer, childcare worker, juvenile childcare worker and volunteer;
b. Childcare facility resident; and
c. All other individuals thirteen (13) years of age or older who:
(1) Are regularly on the premises; or
(2) Would have a right of access based upon marriage, familial or intimate relationship; or
(3) Have right of access based upon their status as an owner or officer during hours of operation.
2. The applicant, or if the applicant is a business association and not an individual, the applicant's officers, chief agents and any childcare facility
residents, if any:
a. May not have had a childcare facility license, childcare worker license or other similar permit or license revoked or suspended by the City, or any
other state or local agency, within the five (5) years preceding the date of application;
b. Shall not have any outstanding warrants in the State or any other jurisdiction;
c. Shall not have pleaded guilty to, been convicted of (regardless of the form of judgment) or received a withheld judgment within the five (5) years
preceding the date of application of any crime in this State, of any Federal crimes or any other crimes in another jurisdiction which, under the laws
of the State, would be a felony. (Ord. 36-14, 9-30-2014; amd. 2019 Code)
d. Shall not have pleaded guilty to, been convicted of, regardless of the form of judgment, or received a withheld judgment within the five (5) years
preceding the date of application of any crime set forth in Idaho Code section 39-1113(3) and Idaho Administrative Procedures Act
16.05.06.210.02 and as may be amended from time to time.
e. Is currently listed in any state or Federal child abuse or neglect registry or database.
3. No person who pleads guilty to, has been found guilty of, or has received a withheld judgment for any offense involving neglect or any physical injury
to, or other abuse of a child, including the offenses set forth in Idaho Code section 39-1113(2) and Idaho Administrative Procedures Act
16.05.06.210.02, as each may be amended from time to time, or a similar provision in another jurisdiction, shall be eligible for a license under the
provisions of this chapter, including, but not limited to: (Ord. 29-17, 9-19-2017)
a. Aggravated assault, Idaho Code section 18-905;
b. Aggravated battery, Idaho Code section 18-907(1);
c. Attempted strangulation, Idaho Code section 18-923; and
d. Misdemeanor injury to a child, Idaho Code section 18-1501(2).
4. The applicant, or if the applicant is a business association and not an individual, the applicant's officers, chief agents and any childcare facility
residents:
a. Shall not be a registered sex offender or be a person who has failed to register as a sex offender in the State, or any other state as required by
law.
b. Shall not have ever been diagnosed by a licensed counselor, psychologist, psychiatrist or court appointed examiner as a pedophile.
c. Shall not have pleaded guilty to, been found guilty of or received a withheld judgment within one year preceding the date of application of any
crime involving the use of alcohol, or the sale, possession or use of drugs, to include the use or possession of drug paraphernalia.
d. Shall immediately report to the City Clerk all misdemeanor and felony criminal convictions or withheld judgments committed after a license
application has been submitted or a license granted, which shall mean no more than two (2) business days.
B. Childcare Facilities Operation Standards And Childcare Worker Duties:
1. Every childcare worker shall be constantly aware of the name, number and special needs of every child under his or her supervision.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 101/503
2. Every juvenile childcare worker and volunteer shall be under the direct supervision of a licensed childcare worker while in direct contact with any
child.
3. It is the duty of every childcare worker and facility owner or manager to ensure a designated responsible person or chief agent is present at the
childcare facility at which the childcare worker is working during hours of operation.
4. Childcare workers who are primarily engaged in caring for children must be within sight or hearing of the children who are inside and outside the
childcare facility at all times, including nap time, and must be available and able to immediately assist a child in an emergency. (Ord. 36-14, 9-30-
2014; amd. 2019 Code)
3-6-20: RIGHT TO INSPECT:
The Licensing Officer or health inspector may, upon presentation of proper identification, enter immediately and inspect any childcare facility at any time
during the business hours of such facility, with or without advance notice. This inspection may include all portions of the premises or facility whether or not
used regularly for childcare purposes or is child accessible. The Licensing Officer shall have the absolute right to enter the premises of any childcare
facility as often as necessary to secure compliance with, or to prevent a violation of, this chapter. The failure of a licensee or other person to grant access
to the Licensing Officer shall be express grounds for revocation of all City licenses held by the licensee, in addition to any criminal penalties that may be
assessed. Violation of this provision is a criminal offense pursuant to section 3-6-23 of this chapter, and punishable as stated in section 3-6-24 of this
chapter. (Ord. 29-17, 9-19-2017)
3-6-21: VISITATION:
Any parent or legal guardian shall have the absolute right to enter the premises of any childcare facility during the period of care for the parents' or
guardians' child or children. Any failure or refusal to allow entry to a parent or guardian may be grounds for revocation of the license pursuant to section 3-
1A-19 of this title and section 3-6-22 of this chapter. If a parent or guardian has been granted limited visitation or has been denied visitation rights by a
court of competent jurisdiction, this section shall not confer a right to visitation. Violation of this provision shall be a criminal offense pursuant to section 3-
6-23 of this chapter and punishable as stated in section 3-6-24 of this chapter. (Ord. 29-17, 9-19-2017)
3-6-22: LICENSE DENIAL, REVOCATION, SUSPENSION AND REVIEW:
A. Procedures: Except as otherwise provided herein, the procedures for denial, suspension, revocation and review of a license shall be as set forth in
chapter 1, article A of this title.
B. Penalty Proportionate: Every civil license penalty imposed by the Licensing Officer shall be proportional to the type and severity of the violation.
C. License Denial: In the event the Licensing Officer determines that an applicant fails to qualify for a license governed by this chapter, the Licensing
Officer may deny such applicant a license by following the procedures set forth in chapter 1, article A of this title. Additionally, every application which
contains materially false or misleading information in connection to the applicant's background check shall be unconditionally denied, and may result in
criminal charges or penalties as prescribed by law.
D. License Revocation: Pursuant to the requirements and procedures set forth in this chapter and chapter 1, article A of this title, the following violations, if
found substantiated by the Licensing Officer, may result in the revocation of all applicable licenses governed by this chapter:
1. The licensee has plead guilty to, has been found guilty of, or has received a withheld judgment for, or has been sentenced for a violation of this
chapter and chapter 1, article A of this title. In addition to the criminal penalties prescribed therefor, the licensee may have the affected license
governed by this chapter revoked, and be ineligible for reapplication, reinstatement or issuance of any license governed by this chapter for a period
of up to five (5) years.
2. In the event a licensee fails to take corrective action within the timeframe specified in a notice of suspension to resolve or correct the basis for a
suspension of the license governed by this chapter and chapter 1, article A of this title, held by that licensee, the Licensing Officer may revoke the
affected license. Such revocation may prevent the licensee from obtaining or reinstating any license governed by this chapter for a minimum period
of one year from the date of revocation.
3. If the Licensing Officer determines that a licensee failed to continue to have and maintain all of the qualifications and none of the disqualifications
provided in this chapter and chapter 1, article A of this title, throughout the license period, the Licensing Officer may revoke the affected license.
Such revocation may prevent the licensee from obtaining or reinstating any such license until the licensee qualifies for the license and applies anew
for said license.
4. If the Licensing Officer determines that an application for a license included fraud, misrepresentation or any material false statement, the Licensing
Officer may revoke all licenses governed by this chapter held by that licensee. This revocation may prevent the licensee from obtaining or reinstating
any such license for a period of up to five (5) years.
5. If the Licensing Officer determines that the activity, use or privilege conducted pursuant to the license is being or has been exercised so as to be
detrimental to the public health, safety or welfare, the Licensing Officer may revoke the affected license. Such revocation shall prevent the licensee
from obtaining or reinstating any such license until the Licensing Officer determines the detriment has ceased.
6. If the Licensing Officer determines that the license issued is being or has been exercised contrary to the terms or conditions of such license, or in
violation of any law, the Licensing Officer may, in his/her discretion, revoke the affected license. Such revocation may prevent the licensee from
obtaining or reinstating any such license for a minimum period of one year from the date of revocation.
7. A third license suspension within one license term shall be deemed a revocation.
8. A person whose license is revoked shall be required to reapply for a new license, rather than apply for reinstatement of the revoked license.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 102/503
E. License Suspension: Upon a finding of any of the following violations by the licensee, the Licensing Officer shall follow the procedures set forth in
chapter 1, article A of this title, as applicable, in suspending any affected license governed by this chapter:
1. Every licensee who violates any provision of the Idaho Code or this Code, in addition to the criminal or civil penalties prescribed by law for such
violation, may have all licenses governed by this chapter suspended for a period not to exceed one hundred eighty (180) days by the Licensing
Officer.
2. A license governed by this chapter may be suspended even though no criminal charge or infraction is filed.
3. Unless otherwise provided in a notice of suspension, every license suspension shall be effective at twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight on the third day
following the date written notice of the suspension is sent to the licensee. Every license suspension shall be effective immediately if hand served
upon the licensee, unless otherwise determined by the Licensing Officer.
4. Upon determining that a licensee is in violation of any provision of the Idaho Code or this Code, but that the licensee does not pose an immediate
threat of harm to the public health, safety or welfare, the Licensing Officer may precede the suspension of a license governed by this chapter with a
notice of violation.
a. Every notice of violation issued pursuant to this chapter shall comply with section 3-1A-15 of this title.
b. The Licensing Officer shall not be required to serve a licensee with a notice of violation prior to suspending the affected license.
c. No notice of suspension shall be required to be served upon the licensee for a suspension following a notice of violation to take effect. The notice
of suspension contained within the notice of violation shall suffice to provide notice of suspension.
F. Review: Every applicant who, upon application, is denied a license governed by this chapter, or who has a license governed by this chapter suspended
or revoked, shall have a right of review. Unless otherwise expressly provided herein, review procedures shall follow those set forth in chapter 1, article
A of this title. (Ord. 36-14, 9-30-2014; amd. 2019 Code)
3-6-23: ENFORCEMENT:
The Licensing Officer is authorized to carry out the policies and procedures herein described, and may enforce the provisions of this title and chapter by
imposing administrative license penalties, including suspension or revocation of the license, by initiating criminal charges by serving an Idaho uniform
citation, or by referring a written report to the City Attorney's Office for review and filing of a complaint and summons or warrant in the Magistrate's Division
of the District Court, or by both such administrative license penalties and criminal penalties. (Ord. 36-14, 9-30-2014)
3-6-24: PENALTY:
Unless otherwise provided herein, every violation of this chapter shall constitute a general misdemeanor, and every person deemed guilty thereof shall,
upon conviction, be subject to penalty as provided in section 1-4-1 of this Code, unless Idaho Code or this Code provides a specific lesser penalty for the
violation set forth in this chapter. (Ord. 36-14, 9-30-2014; amd. 2019 Code)
Chapter 7
PAWNBROKERS
3-7-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and derivations shall have the meanings given herein. When not inconsistent with the
context, words used in the present tense include the future tense, words in the plural number include the singular number, and words in the singular
number include the plural number. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory. Words used throughout this chapter, but not defined
herein or in chapter 1, article A of this title, shall have their plain, ordinary and common meaning. Words in any gender shall apply to the feminine,
masculine and neuter genders.
CHATTEL MORTGAGE: A transfer of a legal right in personal property as security for payment of money.
CITY: City of Boise City, Idaho.
DEPOSIT: A delivery of goods or property to be held in trust as security for payment of money. Also includes the term bailment.
MONEY: United States currency, money orders, certified checks, traveler's check and any other circulating medium of exchange.
PAWNBROKER: A person whose business is to lend money on security of personal property deposited with him or pledged to him. A person licensed to
conduct such business in Boise City.
PAWNSHOP: The room, store or place licensed as the business location for a pawnbroker in Boise City.
PERSON: Any natural person, individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, association, corporation, trust or any other group acting as a unit.
PERSONAL PROPERTY: All property subject to ownership, except real estate.
PLEDGE: A promise to deliver goods or property as security for payment of money.
REGULATED TRANSACTION: A business dealing conducted by a pawnbroker or designee that is regulated by this chapter. (1952 Code § 5-16-01; amd.
2019 Code)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 103/503
3-7-2: LICENSE REQUIRED:
A. Pawnbroker Transactions Further Defined: The following transactions constitute the business of a pawnbroker, and any and all such transactions
require a valid City license:
1. Loaning or advancing money to any person on the deposit of personal property of any kind as security for such loan or advancement, when the
personal property may be repurchased by the party upon paying a sum of money;
2. Loaning or advancing money upon a chattel mortgage on personal property, where the said property is taken into the possession of the lender as
security for the advancement or loan upon an assignment or pledge of future earnings;
3. Purchasing previously owned or used personal property on the condition that it may be repurchased by the seller within a fixed period of time for a
fixed sum of money. For purpose of this chapter, purchasing shall also include trade. (1952 Code § 5-16-02.01)
B. Prima Facie Evidence Of Pawnbroker Business: It shall be prima facie evidence of a pawnbroker business for any person or place of business to
advertise for any of the transactions listed in subsection A of this section, regardless of any other name, term or phrase by which the business can be
described. (1952 Code § 5-16-02.02)
C. Single Act May Constitute Pawnbroker Business: The doing of any single act enumerated in subsection A of this section shall constitute a pawnbroker
business within the meaning of this chapter. (1952 Code § 5-16-02.03)
3-7-3: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE; INVESTIGATION:
A. Form Of Application: An application to conduct pawnbroker business shall be made to the City Clerk in the form and manner as prescribed by that
office.
B. Fingerprints: An applicant who did not have a previous pawnbroker license within the year immediately preceding the current application shall be
required to submit their fingerprints, obtained through an approved agency, with the completed application.
C. Investigation: Upon receipt of an application, the City Clerk shall cause an investigation to be made by the Police Department to determine if the
applicant meets the qualifications enumerated in section 3-7-4 of this chapter. In addition, the premises which the applicant seeks to use must be
deemed suitably located for enforcement purposes having due regard to the type and character of business and traffic in the locale of the proposed
business. The proposed premises must also comply with all zoning regulations of the City and all State and local fire regulations.
D. Issuance; Nonrefundable Fee: If, upon a completed investigation, the applicant is determined to be qualified for a pawnbroker license, and the premises
is deemed suitable, the City Clerk shall tender the license upon payment of the annual nonrefundable licensing fee in an amount established by the
City Council and listed on the most current City Clerk license fee schedule.
E. Term Of License: The pawnbroker's license shall expire at the end of one year from the date of its issuance, unless sooner revoked, suspended or
relinquished. Licenses shall not be transferable either as to person or place.
F. Applicant Determined To Be Pawnbroker: The successful applicant for a pawnbroker's license shall be considered a pawnbroker for purposes of the
requirements of this chapter. (1952 Code § 5-16-02.04)
3-7-4: QUALIFICATIONS OF LICENSEE:
A. Minimum Age: The applicant and the person who will be principally in charge of the business must be eighteen (18) years of age or older.
B. Prior License Denied, Revoked, Suspended: The applicant must not have had a previous business license of any type denied, revoked or suspended
by the City or any other state or local agency within the five (5) years prior to the application date.
C. Convictions: The applicant must not have been convicted of a felony or theft related offense within the five (5) years prior to the application date. (1952
Code § 5-16-02.05)
3-7-5: BUSINESS REGULATIONS GENERALLY:
A. Display Of License Required: It shall be the duty of every person to whom a pawnbroker license is issued to prominently display such license in a
conspicuous manner at all times on the premises to which the license relates. (1952 Code § 5-16-03.01)
B. Inspection Of Premises: Upon request of the Chief of Police or designee, the pawnbroker or anyone acting on behalf of the pawnbroker shall permit the
inspection of the licensed pawnshop premises and all property kept or stored therein. Any such inspection shall occur during the pawnshop's regular
and usual business hours. (1952 Code § 5-16-03.02)
C. Minors: Minors may not enter into any transactions regulated by this chapter. (1952 Code § 5-16-03.03)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 104/503
D. Pawnshop Employees: No pawnbroker shall employ a person under the age of eighteen (18) to conduct transactions regulated by this chapter. In
addition, any employee conducting transactions regulated by this chapter shall meet the qualifications enumerated in section 3-7-4 of this chapter.
(1952 Code § 5-16-03.04)
E. Intoxicated Persons: No pawnbroker or a person acting on behalf of a pawnbroker shall enter into a transaction regulated by this chapter with a person
under the influence of drugs or alcohol. (1952 Code § 5-16-03.05)
F. Prohibited Transaction: No pawnbroker or a person acting on behalf of the pawnbroker shall enter into any regulated transaction in which the property at
interest is such property that is manufactured or produced with a serial or identification number, and the said number has been removed, altered or
rendered unreadable. (1952 Code § 5-16-03.06)
G. Property Retention/Restriction On Subsequent Sales: Property received by the pawnshop through a regulated transaction must be retained by the
pawnbroker, free of any subsequent sales agreement, for thirty (30) days, except purchase transactions, which property must be retained for twenty
(20) days. (1952 Code § 5-16-03.07)
3-7-6: RECORDS MAINTAINED:
A. Records Inspection: Upon request of the Chief of Police or designee, the pawnbroker or anyone acting on behalf of the pawnbroker shall produce any
records required to be kept pursuant to this chapter and shall permit the Chief of Police or designee to examine them. Any such inspection shall occur
during the pawnshop's regular and usual business hours. (1952 Code § 5-16-04.01)
B. Details Of Transactions: It shall be the duty of every pawnbroker to maintain in his place of business a permanent electronic record of the complete
description of all transactions and of all parties entering into transactions regulated by this chapter. This record shall include all voided and deleted
transactions. The pawnbroker or the pawnbroker's designee shall require a person's photo identification issued by a governmental agency before
conducting a transaction with that same person. The following information must be included in the required records:
1. Name, address, telephone number and store number of the pawnshop in which the transaction took place; and the name of the employee
conducting the transaction;
2. Full name, complete current residential address, current phone number, date of birth, race, sex, height, weight, hair and eye color of the person or
persons with whom the transaction is made;
3. Type, including State or governmental agency, of issue, and identifying number of the personal photo identification used by the person with whom
the transaction is made;
4. Nature and date of the transaction and an identification number for the transaction;
5. Complete description of the property purchased, pledged, traded or cosigned, including, as applicable: brand name, make, model, serial number and
owner applied number or other identifying marks. Jewelry shall be described with the type, weight, color, number and description of stones, style,
size or length, any engraving, and whether it is considered a man's, woman's or child's piece. CDs, DVDs, videos, tapes, records, etc., shall be
described with any owner identification marks and the category of movie or music to which it belongs. The title and artist should also be documented
if practicable. Vehicles shall be described with the VIN, make, model and color. Firearms shall be described with the make, brand, model number,
serial number, caliber, type, barrel length and finish. (1952 Code § 5-16-04.02)
C. Transaction Document: Every transaction shall be memorialized in writing and signed by the person with whom the transaction is made. This
transaction document shall include a digitalized photo or thumbprint of the person with whom the transaction is made, along with the date of the
transaction, the term of the loan or repurchase period, and the date on which the loan is due and payable or the repurchase option expires. All parties
to the transaction are entitled to receive a copy of this document, and the original shall remain on file at the pawnshop for a minimum of one year.
(1952 Code § 5-16-04.03)
D. Records Transmittal: All records described in this chapter shall be electronically stored in addition to paper records. These electronic records shall be
transmitted by twelve o'clock (12:00) noon the next business day to the Police Department in a method and fashion approved by the Chief of Police or
his designee. (1952 Code § 5-16-04.04)
E. Records Retention: All records described in this chapter shall be retained by the pawnbroker at the licensed pawnshop for a minimum of one year;
except that records pertaining to firearms transactions shall be kept for a minimum of twenty (20) years pursuant to Federal regulations. (1952 Code
§ 5-16-04.05)
3-7-7: STOLEN PROPERTY:
A. Hold Status: Upon verbal notification from the Chief of Police or designee that the pawnshop or pawnbroker has received allegedly stolen or lost
property, the pawnbroker shall not sell or permit to be redeemed the property in question for a period of ten (10) working days, pending written
notification of the property status. If written notification of the same is received within the ten (10) day period, or if written notification is received in lieu
of a verbal notification, the property shall be held separate from other property, safe from alteration or damage, and with a clearly identifiable marking
as to the hold status. It shall remain in this condition, without being sold or redeemed, for a period of forty five (45) days from the date of written
notification. The pawnbroker shall notify the police of the impending release date no later than ten (10) days prior to the expiration of the hold period to
gain approval to release the hold. At such time, the police may renew this hold for an additional forty five (45) day period by responding in writing with
such request. The police may cancel this hold at any time by issuing written notification to the pawnbroker. The pawnbroker shall not sell or allow to be
redeemed any property held in this fashion without notification by the police that the property may be released.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 105/503
B. Notification To Police: It is the responsibility of every pawnbroker to notify police whenever they have reason to believe they or the pawnshop are in
receipt of property that may have been lost or stolen. This notification shall include the documents on file pertaining to the transaction which resulted in
the receipt of said property. The property shall not be sold or allowed to be redeemed until the police have notified the pawnshop that the property may
be released.
C. Release Of Hold: The police shall provide written notification to pawnshops when property can be released which is being held pursuant to these
provisions. This notification shall be made as soon as practical after a finding that the held property is not stolen or lost, or other circumstances exist
that lead police to allow the release.
D. Transfer Custody To Police: Any property determined to be stolen or lost shall be transferred to the custody of the Police Department upon request. The
police shall retain custody of the property pending a court determination of the rightful owner. This may include a criminal conviction for the theft of the
property in which the rightful owner has taken part in the prosecution of the crime.
E. Owner Not Responsible For Costs: The rightful owner of stolen or lost property shall not be liable to the pawnshop for any amounts expended with
respect to the stolen or lost property.
F. Pawnbroker Not Responsible For Return To Owner: A pawnbroker shall not be responsible for returning stolen or lost property directly to a rightful
owner. (1952 Code § 5-16-05)
3-7-8: PROHIBITED ACTS AND ACTIVITIES:
A. Unlawful Acts: The following acts by a pawnbroker or any person acting on behalf of the pawnbroker, including the employees and agents of a
pawnbroker, will constitute a violation of this chapter:
1. Failure to make a record of any transaction as described in this chapter.
2. Falsifying any official record or entry on an official record required to be kept pursuant to this chapter.
3. Obliterating, destroying or removing from the place of business any records required to be kept pursuant to this chapter.
4. Refusing to allow the Chief of Police or designee to inspect the business premises, or any books, records or other goods located or required to be
located at the place of business, during regular and usual business hours.
5. Transmittal of any false record to the police.
6. Failure to report the possession of property that may be lost or stolen.
7. Removal or allowing removal of property from the business premises within thirty (30) days after the receipt of said property, or twenty (20) days if
the property was obtained through a purchase, unless redeemed by the rightful owner.
8. Receipt of property from a person under the age of eighteen (18).
9. Receipt of property from a known thief or receiver of stolen property, or known associates of such, whether the person is acting on their own behalf
or as the agent of another.
10. Employment of an person not meeting the qualifications of this chapter.
11. Any other violation of the specific provisions of this chapter not specifically enumerated above. (1952 Code § 5-16-06.01)
B. Furnishing False Information: It shall be a violation for any person to furnish false information to a pawnbroker if the provided information is required to
be recorded pursuant to this chapter.
C. Pledging Leased Property: It shall be a violation for any person to pledge or sell any property to a pawnbroker or the pawnbroker's employees or
agents, knowing the property is leased, or let to him or another by any instrument in writing under a contract of purchase which is not yet fulfilled. (1952
Code § 5-16-06.03)
3-7-9: PAWNBROKER RESPONSIBLE FOR COMPLIANCE:
The holder of any pawnbroker's license shall be responsible for the compliance of all the provisions of this chapter by the agents and employees of the
pawnbroker. Any violations by such persons may be used in the revocation or denial of a pawnbroker's license. (1952 Code § 5-16-06.02)
3-7-10: DENIAL, SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION:
A violation of the provisions of this chapter may result in suspension, revocation or denial of a pawnbroker license. The procedures, rights and
responsibilities enumerated in chapter 1, article A of this title shall apply to any such denial, suspension or revocation. (1952 Code § 5-16-02.06)
3-7-11: PENALTY:
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be subject to penalty as provided in
section 1-4-1 of this Code. (1952 Code § 5-16-06.04; amd. 2019 Code)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 106/503
Chapter 8
AUCTIONS AND AUCTIONEERS
3-8-1: LEGAL AUTHORITY:
Idaho Code sections 50-301 and 50-307 authorize the City to adopt and enforce ordinances, rules and regulations governing standards and procedures
for licensing persons who engage in or operate a trade or business within the City. (2019 Code)
3-8-2: PURPOSE:
The purpose of the regulations and standards established within this chapter is to ensure sound merchandising practices and to protect the public from
fraudulent or false bidding practices at auctions within the City limits. (2019 Code)
3-8-3: SCOPE:
This chapter establishes minimum standards and procedures for licensing and operating an auction business or working as an auctioneer within the City.
(2019 Code)
3-8-4: GENERAL LICENSING PROVISIONS APPLICABLE:
To the extent not inconsistent with this chapter, the licensing provisions set forth in chapter 1, article A of this title shall apply with full force and effect to all
provisions and sections of this chapter. (2019 Code)
3-8-5: DEFINITIONS:
A. For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and derivations shall have the meanings given herein. When not inconsistent with
the context, words used in the present tense include the future tense, words in the plural number include the singular number, and words in the singular
number include the plural number. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory. Words used throughout this chapter, but not defined
herein or in chapter 1, article A of this title, shall have their plain, ordinary and common meaning. Words in any gender shall apply to the feminine,
masculine and neuter genders.
B. Every person who shall at public outcry offer for sale, either as principal or agent, to the highest bidder on the spot, any article or merchandise or
property, shall be deemed an auctioneer, and every such sale shall be deemed an auction; provided, however, that nothing in this chapter shall apply to
judicial sales, nor to sales by executors, administrators or trustees under court order, or regular auctions as hereinafter defined, or to auction sales of
jewelry, precious stones, etc. (1952 Code § 5-30-01; amd. 2019 Code)
3-8-6: CLASSIFICATION:
For the purpose of regulation, auctions shall be divided into the following classes:
A. Class 1, Regular Auctions: Regular auctions shall be those conducted in a fixed place of business which shall be known and advertised as an auction
house; whether the same shall be their own property or whether they sell the same as agents or employees of others.
B. Class 2, Temporary Auctions: Temporary auctions shall be auctions temporarily conducted for the sale of bankrupt, damaged or other goods. All sales
shall be deemed and defined to be temporary if they consist of stocks, wares or merchandise brought to the City and so offered within a year of their
arrival, or when the party conducting said sale cannot give satisfactory evidence to the contrary to the Clerk.
C. Class 3, Closing Out Auctions: Closing out auctions shall be auctions of stock on hand conducted by persons retiring from business; provided, however,
that no license shall be issued for a closing out auction unless the person applying for such license shall have been continuously in business in the City
as a retail or wholesale merchant for the period of three (3) years next preceding such sale. (1952 Code § 5-30-02; amd. 2019 Code)
3-8-7: LICENSE REQUIRED:
A. License Required; Fee: It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in conducting an auction, whether of his own goods or as agent of another, without
first securing a license so to do and paying any requisite fees as set forth in chapter 1, article A of this title, and this chapter.
B. Exceptions: The licensing requirements governed by this chapter shall not apply to sheriffs' or constables' auctions under judicial process. (1952 Code
§ 5-30-03; amd. 2019 Code)
3-8-8: AUCTION AND AUCTIONEER LICENSE APPLICATIONS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 107/503
In addition to the minimum licensing qualifications set forth in chapter 1, article A of this title, all individuals licensed under this chapter must also comply
with the following requirements and qualifications:
A. Application; Time Limit: Any person desiring to engage in business as an auction house or to conduct an auction, shall make application to the Clerk at
least thirty (30) days prior to the opening of such place of business or of such sale.
B. Information Required: All applications for auction licenses shall contain the address of the place where such auction house or auction is to be
conducted, the names of the auctioneers, and such other and further pertinent information as the Clerk may require.
C. Additional For Class 2 And Class 3: In case of an application for a license to conduct a Class 2 or Class 3 auction, in addition to the foregoing required
application requirements, the applicant shall also furnish to the City Clerk's Office a certified, itemized inventory list of the stock of goods or property to
be sold at auction with a description of each item and its identifying marks, if any.
D. Statement For Class 3: All Class 3 auctions applicants shall be required to provide a certified statement that:
1. The applicant is acting in good faith to dispose of his stock for the purpose of retiring from business; and
2. All of the stock which shall be sold at the "closing out sale" governed under this auction class, is in fact a bona fide part of the applicant's stock in
trade and was not secured, purchased or brought into his business for or in anticipation of such sale. (1952 Code §§ 5-30-04, 5-30-13, 5-30-14; amd.
2019 Code)
3-8-9: ATTRACTING ATTENTION UNLAWFULLY:
No auctioneer shall ring a bell or permit the same to be rung, in or about or in front of the premises where he is conducting a sale before, after or during
such sale. Neither shall he permit music, singing or loud noise, or soliciting, to be made for the purpose of attracting the public. (1952 Code § 5-30-06)
3-8-10: FRAUD AND FALSE BIDDING:
At all auctions conducted within the City limits, it shall be unlawful for any person to act or to employ another to:
A. Act as a by-bidder (or what is commonly known as a "capper" or "booster"), by which an individual bids at auction for the sole purpose of raising the
price of the item for the benefit of the seller;
B. Make or accept any false or misleading bid; or
C. Pretend to buy or sell any article sold or offered for sale. (1952 Code § 5-30-07; amd. 2019 Code)
3-8-11: SPECIFIC REGULATION OF CLASS 3 AUCTIONS:
In addition to the other auction regulations set forth in this chapter, all Class 3 auctions shall also comply with the following regulations and requirements:
A. Days; Limitation: All closing out auctions, as defined in this chapter, shall be held on successive days, Sundays and legal holidays excepted, and shall
not continue for more than thirty (30) days in all from the commencement of said sale.
B. Replenishing Stock Prohibited; Itemized Statement: It shall be unlawful for any person during the progress of such sale to replenish his stock by
substitution, "fill-ins", leaders or goods of any character whatsoever, and at the close of each day's business and before the opening of the next day's
sale, the licensee shall file with the Clerk an itemized list of the articles sold on the previous day's sale, which list shall identify such articles on the
inventory filed with the application as heretofore provided.
C. Failure To File Sales List: Failure to file such sales list shall be deemed a violation of this chapter and the right to conduct further sale under such
license shall be suspended during such delinquency; provided, that the full time list shall continue to run during such delinquency. (1952 Code § 5-30-
08; amd. 2019 Code)
3-8-12: SALES BOOK TO BE KEPT:
Failure to keep and maintain sales book shall be sufficient cause for the immediate revocation of the license. (1952 Code § 5-30-09; amd. 2019 Code)
3-8-13: PENALTY:
Unless otherwise provided herein, every violation of this chapter shall constitute a general misdemeanor, and every person deemed guilty thereof shall,
upon conviction, be subject to penalty as provided in section 1-4-1 of this Code, unless Idaho Code or this Code provides a specific lesser penalty for the
violation set forth in this chapter. A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or which a violation occurs or continues. (1952 Code
§ 5-30-16; amd. 2019 Code)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 108/503
ARTICLE A. PAWNBROKER OR JEWELRY AUCTIONS
3-8A-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and derivations shall have the meanings given herein. When not inconsistent with the
context, words used in the present tense include the future tense, words in the plural number include the singular number, and words in the singular
number include the plural number. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory. Words used throughout this chapter, but not defined
herein or in chapter 1, article A of this title, shall have their plain, ordinary and common meaning. Words in any gender shall apply to the feminine,
masculine and neuter genders.
AUCTION OR AUCTIONEER: Every person who shall at public outcry offer for sale, either as principal or agent, to the highest bidder on the spot, any
article of merchandise or property, shall be deemed an auctioneer, and every such sale shall be deemed an auction. Provided, however, that nothing in
this article shall apply to judicial sales nor to sales by executors, administrators or trustees under court order. (1952 Code § 5-17-01; amd. 2019 Code)
3-8A-2: CLASSIFICATION OF AUCTIONS:
Closing out auctions shall be auctions of stock on hand conducted by persons in fact retiring from business. Pawnbroker auctions shall be auctions of
personal property on hand theretofore bona fide received and dealt with as pawned or pledged articles in accordance with law by one regularly engaged in
the City in the business of pawnbroking, as defined by chapter 7 of this title, and unredeemed. No license shall be issued for any such auction unless the
person applying for such license shall have been continuously in business in the City as a retail or wholesale merchant or pawnbroker for the period of
three (3) years next preceding such sale. (1952 Code § 5-17-02)
3-8A-3: LICENSE REQUIRED; DATES PERMITTED:
Except sales under judicial process, it shall be unlawful for any person to sell, dispose of or offer for sale in the City, at public auction, any platinum, gold,
silver or plated ware, precious or semiprecious stones, or imitations thereof, watches, clocks or jewelry, whether the same be his property, or whether he
shall sell or offer the same for sale as agent, factor or employee of others; provided, however, that a closing out or pawnbroker auction, conducted by
persons in fact retiring from business as retail and/or wholesale jewelry merchants, or by persons regularly engaged as pawnbrokers in the City, may be
held, but no such auction shall be permitted unless and until the person desiring to hold such auction shall obtain a license therefor, and provided, only
one pawnbroker auction shall be held in any year, and then only between August 15 and October 15. (1952 Code § 5-17-05)
3-8A-4: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE; BOND, FEE:
Any person qualified to hold a closing out or pawnbroker auction as in this article provided, shall file with the Clerk, at least sixty (60) days prior to the
opening day of such auction, a written application under oath for a license so to do, showing:
A. Proof Of Term Of Business: The person has been continuously engaged in business in the City as a retail and/or wholesale merchant for the sale of
jewelry or as a "pawnbroker", as defined by chapter 7 of this title, for a period of three (3) years next preceding such application;
B. Term Of Ownership: The applicant, at the time of making such application, has owned the goods to be auctioned for a period of six (6) months prior
thereto, or that the articles to be auctioned were bona fide received and dealt with as pawned or pledged articles by the applicant as a pawnbroker in
the City, in accordance with law, and that the redemption period therefor ended one month or more prior to the application;
C. Continuous Business At Same Premises: The applicant, for a period of one year immediately preceding such application, has been continuously
engaged in the jewelry or pawnbroker business upon the same premises where the auction is proposed to be held;
D. Prior Auctions: No auction has been held by the applicant, or by any copartnership, association or corporation, and no auction license has been issued
for any auction to any of the above named, or a predecessor thereof, in any capacity in any place in the City at any time within three (3) years in the
case of closing out auctions, or within one year in the case of pawnbroker auctions, next preceding the closing date of such proposed auction;
E. Bond: The applicant tenders with the application a good and sufficient bond in the sum of two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00), conditioned for
the observance of the provisions of this article and for the indemnification, including a reasonable attorney fee, of any purchaser at such auction
suffering loss by reason of fraud or misrepresentation, or other violation of this article, in the sale of any article described in section 3-8A-3 of this
article, and as assurance to the City that said applicant will pay the sums due as license fees and as indemnity to the City and as indemnity to any and
all persons, in any manner, who sustain monetary loss in any contractual or other relation as a result of the conduct of said auction;
F. Good Faith Retirement: The applicant intends in good faith to retire from business at the close of such auction, or to dispose of no articles described in
section 3-8A-3 of this article, except such as are bona fide unredeemed pledged or pawned articles as herein provided;
G. Auction Conducted By: The auction shall be conducted by and the auctioneering carried on by the actual owner, manager or officer of the applicant,
who shall have been such owner, manager or officer for a period of at least one year prior to such auction sale, or by an auctioneer, giving his name
and address and the terms other than the amount of compensation of his contract or agreement for such auction;
H. Dates; Place: The dates and place when and where such auction will be conducted, which dates must be within the times specified in this article;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 109/503
I. Sale By Auctioneer: If the sale is to be by an auctioneer, the application for the auction shall be accompanied by an application for a closing out or
pawnbroker auctioneer's license, and such auctioneer's daily nonrefundable license fee in an amount established by the City Council and listed on the
most current City Clerk's license fee schedule. The form of application for either a closing out or pawnbroker auctioneer's license shall be furnished by
the Clerk, which form shall be signed in the applicant's handwriting and shall show the name, age, place of residence, length of time the applicant has
resided in the State. Upon receipt of such application, and the bond, and the notarized true copy of the inventory, hereinafter provided for in section 3-
8A-5 of this article, the Clerk may issue such license, specifying the class thereof and the date therefor, which dates must be within the times herein
provided. (1952 Code § 5-17-06)
3-8A-5: REGULATIONS FOR CONDUCTING AUCTION:
All auctions, as in this article defined, of articles described in section 3-8A-3 of this article, shall be held on successive days, Sundays and legal holidays
excepted, and on the dates specified in the application, and in the case of pawnbroker auctions only between August 15 and October 15, and shall not
continue for more than thirty (30) consecutive calendar days in all from the commencement of said auction. The applicant must at or before the date of
such application file a notarized, true copy of the inventory with the Clerk, and thereafter at all times until fifteen (15) days after the closing date of such
auction keep at the place of auction subject to the inspection and copy by the Chief of Police or other persons designated by the Council, an itemized and
numbered descriptive inventory of all articles of the character described in section 3-8A-3 of this article to be offered at such auction, and such inventory
shall show in connection with each item, if acquired within the previous three (3) months, the date of acquisition by the application, and as to all items
forfeited after date hereof, the pawn ticket number therefor, and no other article shall be added to such inventory or offered or sold at such auction;
provided, that an article not pledged or pawned and which was theretofore for more than three (3) months a bona fide part of the stock of the pawnbroker
and not acquired in anticipation of such auction, may be offered at the pawnbroker auction if shown on the inventory as filed with the application. It shall be
unlawful for any licensee, for or in anticipation of such auction, before or during the progress of any auction, to bring into said business or purchase, or add
to or replenish his stock by substitution fill-ins, leaders or goods of any character whatsoever, and no merchandise other than shown on the inventory
when filed shall be sold or offered for sale at said auction. Any false or fraudulent statement or representation made by any applicant for the purpose of
procuring a license, or any failure to make, keep, permit inspection of, or note sales upon, such inventory, or any other violation of this article shall forfeit
the right to conduct further auctions under such license, which forfeiture may be declared by the Chief of Police or the Council; provided, that the Council
may suspend such auction during any delinquency, but such suspension shall not extend the time for closing such auction. (1952 Code § 5-17-07)
3-8A-6: TAGS AND LABELS:
A. Required: No licensee shall offer for sale or sell at any auction any article as described in section 3-8A-3 of this article, unless there is at the time
securely attached thereto a tag or label upon which there is plainly written or printed, in English, a true and correct statement of the markings thereon
and the meaning thereof relating to the kind and quality of the metal of which such article is made or composed, and the percentage of karat of purity of
such metal, and in case such articles are plated or overlaid, of the kind of plate and percentage of purity of such plating and the kind of material or
metal covered; and as to precious or semiprecious stones the true names; calipered or actual weight, quality and fineness of said stones; limitations
shall be stated to be such; the names of manufacturers shall be stated; no parts of the movements or mechanism of watches or clocks, nor parts of
other articles, shall be substituted or contain false or misleading names or trademarks, nor shall secondhand or old movements be offered for sale in
new cases, without in each instance a true statement to that effect attached thereto. If any of the foregoing are unmarked and unknown, the tag or label
shall so state and shall also state each of the foregoing requirements to the best of the licensee's knowledge and belief. Such tag or label shall show
the pawn ticket number as hereinbefore provided for the inventory, if pawned or pledged, and the number identifying such article with the inventory
thereof required by section 3-8A-5 of this article. (1952 Code § 5-17-08)
B. Removal Of Tags Or Labels Prohibited: Such tag or label shall remain securely attached to any article or merchandise, shall be delivered to the
purchaser as a true and correct description and representation of the article sold, and shall be deemed prima facie evidence of intent to defraud, in
case said written statement is not a true and correct description and representation of such articles sold. (1952 Code § 5-17-09)
3-8A-7: INVENTORY MAINTAINED; SIGNATURE OF PURCHASER REQUIRED:
At any closing out or pawnbroker auction, there shall be kept and maintained the applicant's copy of the inventory, which shall contain the identical
information shown on the inventory filed with the Clerk, and at the time of each sale the purchaser shall sign on the applicant's copy of the inventory in the
space provided and sign in his own handwriting his name, address and all monies paid. Tags showing the inventory number, and the pawn ticket number,
as hereinbefore provided for the inventory, if pawned or pledged, of each article shown, must remain on the article until after the purchaser has signed in
the blanks provided on the inventory. The purchaser must sign said inventory before any other article shall be exposed for sale on all sales over five
dollars ($5.00). Failure to keep and maintain such inventory shall be sufficient cause for the immediate revocation of said license. In the event that a sale
has been declared to have been made but no purchaser comes forward and signs the inventory, then the article shall be immediately reoffered, beginning
at the next highest bid, and the sale thereof completed before any other article is offered; provided, that the seller may refuse to sell where only one bid
has been made, but not otherwise. (1952 Code § 5-17-10)
3-8A-8: AUCTIONEER TO RETAIN MONEY:
The licensee so selling and offering for sale any article described in section 3-8A-3 of this article shall retain in his possession as auctioneer the money or
other valuable thing received for the article sold for at least twenty four (24) hours from the time such sale was made. (1952 Code § 5-17-11)
3-8A-9: RETURN OF PURCHASE PRICE:
If any purchaser of such article or thing sold shall, within twenty four (24) hours, make a claim against said licensee upon the ground that the article sold to
him at auction was not as represented and shall demand the return of the money or other consideration, and shall offer to return the article purchased,
then and in such case said licensee shall return to the purchaser the purchase price, or deposit with the Chief of Police, taking his receipt therefor, said
purchase price as a fund to answer and pay any judgment that may be recovered against said licensee by the purchaser; provided, that if no action
therefor shall be commenced within fifteen (15) days from the date of such sale, the Chief of Police shall no longer be required to hold such money
deposited with him and upon presentation of the receipt may return said money; provided, that the purchaser shall have the right to commence and
maintain an action directly on the bond provided for by this article, in the name of the City. (1952 Code § 5-17-12)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 110/503
3-8A-10: PROHIBITED ACTS AND ACTIVITIES:
A. Ringing Bell: No auctioneer or licensee shall ring a bell or permit the same to be rung, nor permit singing or loud noises, or soliciting by persons for the
purpose of attracting the public, in or about or in front of the premises where an auction is conducted before, during or after such auction. (1952 Code
§ 5-17-03)
B. Fraud And False Bidding: It shall be unlawful for any person to act or to employ another to act as a by-bidder, or what is commonly known as a "capper"
or "booster" or "switcher", at any auction sale; or to make or accept any false or misleading or self bid, or to bid or purchase in the name or pretended
name of another, or to pretend to buy, or sell or deliver, any such aforesaid articles sold or offered for sale at any such auction, or to reoffer or resell or
replace in stock for offer or sale at or during such auction any article declared sold and delivered to a purchaser or pretended purchaser during such
auction. (1952 Code § 5-17-04)
3-8A-11: PENALTY:
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, subject to penalty as provided in section 1-4-1 of this Code.
(1952 Code § 5-17-16; amd. 2019 Code)
Chapter 9
PRECIOUS METAL DEALERS
3-9-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and derivations shall have the meanings given herein. When not inconsistent with the
context, words used in the present tense include the future tense, words in the plural number include the singular number, and words in the singular
number include the plural number. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory. Words used throughout this chapter, but not defined
herein or in chapter 1, article A of this title, shall have their plain, ordinary and common meaning. Words in any gender shall apply to the feminine,
masculine and neuter genders.
ESTABLISHED DEALER: Any precious metal dealer conducting business at a fixed location with Boise City on a permanent basis. Permanent shall mean
thirty (30) consecutive days or more.
GEMS: Precious and semiprecious stones customarily used in jewelry and any item containing such stones.
ITINERANT DEALER: Any precious metal dealer engaged in any temporary or transient business conducted in a shop, room, motel room or other
premises rented for less than thirty (30) consecutive days or used on temporary basis.
PRECIOUS METAL: Any item composed in whole or in part of gold, silver or platinum. The term precious metal shall not include any coin or any gold or
silver ingot or bar.
PRECIOUS METAL DEALER: Any person, firm, partnership or corporation who buys precious metals or gems from the general public with an intent to
obtain a monetary profit for himself or for a principal.
PURCHASE: The acquisition of precious metals or gems for a consideration of cash, goods or other precious metals or gems. Except as specified in
subsection 3-9-3F of this chapter, trade-ins shall be covered by the provisions of this chapter. (1952 Code § 5-20-01; amd. 2019 Code)
3-9-2: APPLICABILITY:
This chapter shall be applicable to the principals of any entity performing any activity regulated by this chapter and to their agents and employees, and to
persons forming a partnership for the purpose of engaging in any activity subject to regulation by this chapter. Every dealer regulated hereunder shall be
liable for all the penalties provided herein for violation for any provision of this chapter, whether such violation be committed by himself or his agent, clerk
or employee. (1952 Code § 5-20-02)
3-9-3: EXEMPTIONS:
This chapter shall not apply to:
A. Licensed pawnbrokers.
B. Any person who, solely as a hobby, collects items regulated by this chapter and who purchases, sells or exchanges such items in pursuit of that hobby.
C. Persons or transactions associated with bona fide trade shows or conventions where all transactions of purchase, sale or exchange are made in
connection with such trade shows or conventions and within the confines of the trade show or convention site.
D. Purchases of precious metals or gems directly from manufacturers or wholesalers for retail or wholesale inventories or from other dealers; provided,
that the selling dealer has complied with the provisions of this chapter.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 111/503
E. Purchases of precious metals or gems from a duly qualified fiduciary who, in the administration of an estate, is disposing of the assets of the estate.
F. Acceptance by a retail merchant or dealer of trade-in merchandise previously sold by such retail merchant or dealer to the person presenting that
merchandise for trade in. (1952 Code § 5-20-03)
3-9-4: LICENSE REQUIRED; INVESTIGATION:
A. License Required: It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, partnership or corporation to engage in the business of a precious metal dealer unless a
valid license therefor has been issued as herein provided and said license is in full force and effect. (1952 Code § 5-20-04)
B. Application; Fingerprinting; Background Check: Application for such license shall be made to the City Clerk in such form and manner as he or she may
prescribe. Such application shall include, but not necessarily be limited to the following information:
1. The name and address of the applicant, and if a partnership, the names and addresses of each partner, and if a corporation or association, the
names and addresses of the principal stockholders, and the name of the operating manager of the business;
2. Whether the applicant is seeking a license to do business as an established precious metal dealer or an itinerant precious metal dealer, and if an
itinerant dealer, the length of time for which the right to do business is desired;
3. Whether the applicant has had a similar license revoked by the City or any other city of this State, or of the United States or any state of the United
States within the past five (5) years;
4. Whether the applicant has been convicted of any felony or misdemeanor, other than minor traffic violations, the nature of the offense, and the date,
and the punishment or penalty assessed therefor. (Ord. 38-15, 8-25-2015)
C. Investigation; Time Limit For Completing; Provisional License: Upon receipt of an application for a license, the City Clerk shall cause an investigation to
be made of the applicant or applicants. Such investigation shall be completed within thirty (30) days; provided, however, that investigation of an
application by an itinerant precious metal dealer shall be completed within five (5) working days. A provisional license may be issued pending
completion of the required investigation.
D. Prohibited Persons: No person shall be issued a license to engage in the business of a precious metal dealer when that person:
1. Is under the age of eighteen (18) years;
2. Is not the bona fide owner of such business;
3. Has had a similar license revoked by this City or any other city of this State or of the United States or any other state of the United States within the
five (5) years immediately preceding the date of the filing of the application;
4. Has been convicted of any felony, or has been convicted of any other crime, whether felony or misdemeanor, involving moral turpitude within the five
(5) years immediately preceding the date of the filing of the application;
5. Has misrepresented or made a false or fraudulent statement of material or relevant facts contained in the application; or
6. Has engaged in a fraudulent transaction or enterprise.
E. Qualifications: An affirmative showing with respect to the qualifications herein specified shall be required to be made with respect to each applicant and
to each partner of a partnership applicant and to each officer, director or member of the governing board of a corporation or association.
F. Issuance Of License: Upon completion of the investigation, the City Clerk shall notify the applicant whether his license request is approved and upon
payment of the prescribed license fee shall issue a license. Such license shall show the name and address of said licensee, the amount of fee paid, the
date of issuance and the date of expiration.
G. Notice Of Denial; Appeal: The City Clerk shall notify the applicant if his license request is disapproved, the reasons therefor and advise him of the
appeal procedure.
H. Nontransferable; Display Required: Licenses shall not be transferable, either as to person or place. The license issued hereunder shall be posted
conspicuously in each place of business named therein. (1952 Code § 5-20-04)
3-9-5: FEE FOR LICENSE; TERM; RENEWAL:
A. Established Dealer; Renewal: The nonrefundable license fee for an established precious metal dealer in an amount established by the City Council and
listed on the most current City Clerk's license fee schedule shall be paid to the City Clerk. The license to conduct the business of an established
precious metal dealer shall expire on December 31 of each year. Renewal of the license and payment of the license fee shall be made on or before
January 1 of the year for which such renewal is desired.
B. Itinerant Precious Metal Dealer: The nonrefundable license fee for an itinerant precious metal dealer in an amount established by the City Council and
listed on the most current City Clerk's license fee schedule shall be paid to the City Clerk. The license shall be issued only for the period specified in
the application and shall specify the date or dates upon which business may be conducted. (1952 Code § 5-20-05)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 112/503
3-9-6: RECORDS MAINTAINED:
A. Information Required: Every precious metal dealer shall keep a record of every article purchased by him or her, or sold by him or her, and this record
shall be open to the inspection of any police officer at any time during the hours of business. Such record shall be upon the form as may be required by
the Chief of Police and shall provide the following information:
1. Name, address and license number of the precious metal dealer;
2. The name, age, sex, driver's license number or social security number, and street address of the person with whom the transaction is conducted;
3. The date of the transaction, the article pledged or sold, together with its description, serial number or other identification, and the amount and terms
of the transaction;
4. The seller's motor vehicle operator or chauffeur's license number and the state of issue;
5. Signature lines or space for the execution by both precious metal dealer and the seller.
B. Execution; Verification: Every record shall be executed by the precious metal dealer at the time of purchase or sale, the precious metal dealer shall
compare the picture and signature upon the motor vehicle operator's license or State issued identification card with that upon the record.
C. Title Of Articles: Every precious metal dealer shall be required to ascertain title in and to any article purchased or sold to him or her. This subsection
shall apply to all secondhand purchases for resale, but shall not apply to articles of new merchandise purchased by a precious metal dealer in the
ordinary channels of trade.
D. Records Of Purchase And Sale: All records of purchase or sale shall be made in triplicate, one copy to be retained by the precious metal dealer and
two (2) copies to be transmitted to the Police Department.
E. Term Of Records Retention: All records of purchase or sale shall be retained by the precious metal dealer for a one year period.
F. Availability For Inspection: All records required by this section shall be made available during ordinary business hours for inspection by any law
enforcement officer.
G. Lost, Stolen Property: Every precious metal dealer having good cause to believe that any property in his possession has been previously lost or stolen
shall forthwith report such fact to the Police Department, together with the name of the owner, if known, and the date when and the name of the person
from whom the property was received. (1952 Code § 5-20-06)
3-9-7: GOODS RETAINED FOR SEVEN DAYS:
The precious metal dealer shall retain all precious metals or gems purchased for a minimum of seven (7) days from the date of purchase. Until the
expiration of this period, the dealer shall not sell, alter or dispose of a purchased item in whole or in part, or remove it from the City. All articles required to
be held under this section shall be open to and made available for inspection by any law enforcement officer during normal business hours. (1952 Code
§ 5-20-07)
3-9-8: VIOLATIONS:
A. Specified: It shall be unlawful for any precious metal dealer and any clerk, agent or employee of a precious metal dealer to:
1. Acquire, by purchase, trade, exchange or otherwise, goods bearing evidence of a serial number which has been tampered with or scratched or
obliterated in any manner, unless such person immediately contacts the Police Department;
2. Accept, buy or exchange any articles prior to examining the identifying credentials of the person selling or exchanging said articles;
3. Fail to maintain the record required under section 3-9-6 of this chapter, or fail to maintain such record as to any item of which record is required to be
maintained under section 3-9-6 of this chapter, or fail to make an entry of any material matter in the record of any transaction;
4. Make any false entry in the record required by section 3-9-6 of this chapter;
5. Obliterate or destroy the record required by section 3-9-6 of this chapter; provided, however, that such records may be destroyed at the expiration of
the one year retention period prescribed in subsection 3-9-6E of this chapter;
6. Refuse to allow any law enforcement officer to inspect the record required by section 3-9-6 of this chapter, or any articles in his possession during
normal business hours;
7. Report any material matter falsely to a law enforcement officer;
8. Acquire by purchase, trade, exchange or otherwise, any articles from any person under eighteen (18) years of age, without the express written
consent of his or her parent or guardian, or unless said minor is the head of a family;
9. Fail to report forthwith to the Police Department the receipt of any property which he has good cause to believe has been lost or stolen, together with
the name of the owner, if known, and the date when and the name of the person from whom the property was received;
10. Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement made in the course of carrying on the business of a precious metal dealer.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 113/503
B. Falsification: It shall be unlawful for any person to use a false name, a fictitious address or any address other than the true address, or to furnish any
false, untrue or misleading information or statement relating to the information required by section 3-9-6 of this chapter. (1952 Code § 5-20-08)
3-9-9: PENALTY:
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be subject to penalty as
provided in section 1-4-1 of this Code. (1952 Code § 5-20-11; amd. 2019 Code)
Chapter 10
MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT LICENSING
3-10-1: LEGAL AUTHORITY:
Pursuant to Idaho Code sections 50-301 and 50-307, the Idaho legislature has authorized the City to adopt and enforce ordinances, rules and regulations
governing standards and procedures for licensing persons who engage in or operate a trade or business within the City. (2019 Code)
3-10-2: PURPOSE:
A. Specified: The City's purpose in adopting this chapter is to promote the public health, safety and welfare of its citizens by regulating businesses,
owners, managers and employees within the massage industry without restraining, burdening or over regulating the businesses or occupations of
those who operate within the confines of the licensing scheme and all other applicable laws and regulations. The City finds that massage
establishments are sometimes used for unlawful purposes regardless of the number of self-regulating businesses and thus strict compliance with the
requirements of this chapter and those regulations found in chapter 1, article A of this title are necessary.
B. Nonliability Of City: The issuance of a license pursuant to this chapter does not constitute a representation of any affirmance to any person who
transacts business with a person licensed pursuant to this chapter that said licensee is free from risk. The City shall not be liable for, nor shall a cause
of action exist for, any loss or damage based upon the failure of any person licensed under this chapter to meet the standard contained in this chapter.
(2019 Code)
3-10-3: SCOPE:
This chapter establishes minimum standards and procedures for licensing owners and employees of a massage establishment and the operation of a
business as a massage establishment. (2019 Code)
3-10-4: TITLE:
This chapter shall be known as the MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT LICENSING ORDINANCE. (Ord. 17-13, 6-18-2013)
3-10-5: GENERAL LICENSING PROVISIONS APPLICABLE:
To the extent not inconsistent with this chapter, the provisions set forth in chapter 1, article A of this title, shall apply with full force and effect to all
provisions and sections of this chapter and chapter 1, article A of this title is hereby incorporated herein by reference and applies to those rights and
responsibilities not further defined herein. (2019 Code)
3-10-6: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and derivations shall have the meanings given herein. When not inconsistent with the
context, words used in the present tense include the future tense, words in the plural number include the singular number, and words in the singular
number include the plural number. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory. Words used throughout this chapter, but not defined
herein or in chapter 1, article A of this title, shall have their plain, ordinary and common meaning. Words in any gender shall apply to the feminine,
masculine and neuter genders.
APPLICATION: The document completed and submitted by an applicant for a City massage establishment license, including all required supporting
information and documentation.
CLIENT: A person who receives a massage, massage therapy or any other service within a massage establishment.
EMPLOYEE: Any person employed by a massage establishment who is not an owner, a manager or a massage therapist.
MANAGER: A. Any person who oversees or directs any element or aspect of the operation of a massage establishment.
B. Evidence that a person is a manager may include, but is not limited to, indicia that the person has power or authority to:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 114/503
1. Hire, fire or discipline the massage establishment's employees or massage therapists;
2. Set or control the massage establishment's hours of operation;
3. Create rules or policies applicable to the massage establishment's operation, or its employees or massage therapists; or
4. Spend money on behalf of the massage establishment.
C. A manager may be:
1. The owner of a massage establishment;
2. An employee of a massage establishment; or
3. A massage therapist.
MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT: A. A fixed place of business of two (2) or more individuals, or of a partnership, firm, association, corporation or business
entity, or any other combination of individuals, which:
1. Uses the word "massage" in any solicitation or advertisement; or
2. Engages in, conducts, carries on or permits massage or massage therapy to be conducted or carried on, for money or other consideration.
B. That portion of a premises operated as above in which massage or massage therapy is ancillary to the primary business.
MASSAGE THERAPIST: Defined in Idaho Code section 54-4002.
MASSAGE THERAPY (MASSAGE OR THE PRACTICE OF MASSAGE THERAPY): The practice of massage therapy is defined in Idaho Code title 54,
chapter 40. By way of illustration, the definition includes any method of manual manipulation of, pressure on, or friction against, the external part of the
body of another by rubbing, stroking, kneading, slapping, pounding, tapping, vibrating or other stimulation with the hands or other body parts, or with the
aid of mechanical or electrical devices, with or without supplementary aids, such as oils, rubbing alcohol, liniments, antiseptics, powders, creams, lotions,
ointments or other similar preparations commonly used in the practice of massage. For purposes of this chapter, the terms "massage" and "massage
therapy" are included in this definition and may be used interchangeably.
OWNER: A person having any ownership interest in a massage establishment, including, but not limited to, an officer, director, manager or partner of a
corporation, a partnership, or any other business entity, formation or relationship. (Ord. 17-13, 6-18-2013; amd. 2019 Code)
3-10-7: LICENSE REQUIRED; EXEMPTIONS:
A. Application: Application for a license shall be made to the City Clerk's Office as set forth in section 3-1A-6 of this title. No owner or manager of a
massage establishment shall permit or allow any person to engage in, or attempt to engage in, the practice of massage therapy within a massage
establishment unless the massage establishment:
1. Possesses a valid City massage establishment license; or
2. Is exempted by this Code from the massage establishment license requirement.
B. Exemptions: The following are exempt from the massage establishment license requirement:
1. Hospitals, residential care facilities and assisted living facilities licensed by the State;
2. Public and private secondary schools or accredited colleges and universities eligible to disburse Federal financial aid, and the athletic programs of
such schools, colleges and universities;
3. Sports venues at which massage may be conducted on the members of professional sports franchises by athletic trainers employed by professional
sports franchises. Where a sports venue shares a structure with another business or businesses, such as a hotel or motel, this exemption shall not
apply to any other existing business within the structure where massage or massage therapy may take place;
4. The business locations of persons currently certified or licensed in or by the State in medicine, surgery, osteopathy, physical therapy, chiropractic,
podiatry, nursing or kinesiology;
5. The business locations in which barbers and cosmetologists, currently licensed by the State, practice massage limited to the neck, face, scalp, hair,
hands or feet, when such massage is conducted in conjunction with a cosmetic service, such as a haircut or styling, shave, manicure or pedicure;
6. A massage establishment in which only one massage therapist is employed or practices massage or massage therapy. Any massage establishment
having two (2) or more massage therapists employed or practicing massage or massage therapy shall not qualify for this exemption. (Ord. 17-13, 6-
18-2013; amd. 2019 Code)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 115/503
3-10-8: APPLICATION AND RENEWAL INFORMATION:
In addition to the requirements found in chapter 1, article A of this title, every application for a new or renewed massage establishment license shall
include:
A. Occupancy Permit: A copy of the occupancy permit for the building in which the massage establishment will operate; and
B. Information; Documents: The following information and documents for every owner and manager of the massage establishment shall be provided:
1. Social security number;
2. Date of birth;
3. Vital information (height, weight, hair color, eye color, and sex);
4. A photograph, taken by a City Clerk's Office representative;
5. A photocopy of valid State issued photo identification;
6. Employment history for the five (5) years preceding the application date; and
7. A photocopy of the massage therapist license issued by the State for every person who performs or will perform massage in the massage
establishment during the term of the massage establishment license. (Ord. 17-13, 6-18-2013; amd. 2019 Code)
3-10-9: QUALIFICATIONS AND RESPONSIBILITIES:
A. Qualifications: No massage establishment license shall be issued to any applicant if any person required to be on the application:
1. Is under the age of eighteen (18) years; or
2. Is not the bona fide owner or lessee of the premises within which the massage establishment is to be operated.
B. Violations: A massage establishment shall not be issued a license, and an existing license shall be revoked pursuant to the revocation authority set
forth in this chapter, if the operation of the massage establishment is found to violate any existing law, ordinance or regulation, including, but not limited
to, building, zoning and health regulations. Issuance of a massage establishment license does not exempt any person from obedience to any other law,
ordinance or regulation. (Ord. 38-15, 8-25-2015; amd. 2019 Code)
3-10-10: REVOCATION AND SUSPENSION:
A. License Revocation:
1. A third license suspension within three (3) years shall be deemed a revocation.
2. Every license revocation shall be effective at twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight on the third day following the date written notice is sent to the licensee.
B. License Suspension:
1. Every licensee who violates any provision of the Idaho Code or this Code, in addition to the criminal or civil penalties prescribed by law for such
violation, shall have their massage establishment license suspended for a period not to exceed one hundred eighty (180) days.
2. Every license suspension shall be effective at twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight on the third day following the date written notice of the suspension is
sent to the licensee. (Ord. 17-13, 6-18-2013; amd. 2019 Code)
3-10-11: RIGHT OF REVIEW:
Every applicant who, upon application, is denied a license governed by this chapter, or who has a license governed by this chapter suspended or revoked,
shall have a right of review. Review procedures shall follow those set forth in chapter 1, article A of this title. (Ord. 17-13, 6-18-2013; amd. 2019 Code)
3-10-12: OPERATING AND SANITARY REQUIREMENTS:
A. Standards And Requirements: Every massage establishment shall be constructed, operated and maintained in compliance with the following minimum
standards and requirements:
1. Physical Facilities:
a. All massage therapy in a massage establishment shall be in a room, cubicle or area dedicated to that purpose.
b. Steam rooms, shower compartments, steam compartments, tub compartments, toilet rooms and adjacent exit areas shall have smooth,
nonabsorbent and easily cleanable floors and walls.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 116/503
c. Floors of wet and dry heat rooms shall be adequately sloped to one or more floor drains properly connected to an approved sewer system, except
that dry heat rooms with wooden floors need not be provided with sloped floors and floor drains.
d. A source of water, compliant with the State Plumbing Code (as adopted and as amended by title 9, chapter 4 of this Code) shall be available within
the immediate area of the dry and wet heat rooms to facilitate cleaning.
e. The premises shall be equipped with facilities and equipment for disinfecting or sanitizing nondisposable instruments and materials used to
administer massages.
f. Massage tables, exercise tables and benches shall have easily cleanable upholstery or other approved material covering the entire surface that
may come into contact with a client during a massage.
g. Pools, tubs and similar equipment designed for multiple use without the water being changed, shall comply with all State and other applicable
laws. The water contained in tubs, baths and similar equipment designed for a single use shall be emptied after each use, thoroughly cleaned and
properly sanitized prior to the next use.
h. No massage establishment shall be used as a shelter or living quarters for any person. The owner and family members of a massage
establishment operated as a home occupation, as defined by subsection 11-012-02.5 of this Code, are exempt from this prohibition. If a massage
establishment is located within, but is ancillary to, a business, such as a hotel or motel, this prohibition shall apply only to the areas designed,
designated or used as a massage establishment.
i. Restroom and toilet facilities shall be provided in a convenient location separate from a room in which massage is performed, to provide privacy.
j. Each hand washing facility shall include hot and cold running water, soap or detergent, and sanitary single service towels or an air hand dryer. A
common towel shall not be provided or used for hand drying.
k. No room, cubicle or area that is designed to accommodate the practice of massage or massage therapy shall have a door that is equipped with a
locking mechanism.
2. Cleaning And Maintenance:
a. Every appliance, exercise table and every other piece of equipment, furniture or apparatus within a massage establishment shall be kept clean, in
good repair and maintained in a sanitary condition.
b. Wet and dry heat rooms, steam or vapor rooms, or steam or vapor cabinets, shower compartments and toilet facilities and rooms shall be
thoroughly cleaned after each day the establishment is in operation.
c. Every massage establishment shall provide clients with clean, sanitized sheets, towels or other linens. No common use of sheets, towels or other
linens shall be permitted.
d. Every instrument, apparatus, equipment or appliance designed to be reused shall be sanitized or disinfected after each use.
3. Managers, Massage Therapists And Employees:
a. Every manager, massage therapist and employee shall maintain a high degree of personal hygiene by wearing clean clothes, and conduct the
business and operations of the massage establishment in a sanitary and hygienic manner.
b. Every massage therapist shall wash their hands thoroughly after going to the bathroom, smoking or eating, and before and after administering a
massage or treatment on each client, and as often as necessary to remove soil and contamination during a massage therapy or treatment session.
c. No massage therapist shall administer a massage or give treatment if he or she knows, or should know, that he or she has any contagious or
communicable disease.
4. Hours Of Operation: Every massage establishment shall be closed for business between the hours of ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. and seven o'clock
(7:00) A.M.
B. Required Records:
1. Every massage establishment shall keep and maintain:
a. A book containing the names, dates of birth and a legible photocopy of the State massage license of every massage therapist employed by or
contracting with the massage establishment; and
b. A menu of all services available at the massage establishment, including the price for each service, which shall be posted in plain view of clients.
c. A log, including the date, time and type of massage or massage therapy service performed, the amount of money or other payment received from
the client, including the amount of tip or gratuity.
2. Every document and record required by this chapter shall be dated and kept at the massage establishment for a minimum period of one year from
the date of the last record contained therein, and on or off the premises for the period required by State law or the rules, code of ethics or standards
of practice of the State Board of Massage Therapy.
3. Every owner, manager, massage therapist and employee shall immediately present the records required herein for inspection or review upon request
of any law enforcement officer or Licensing Officer.
C. Insurance Required:
1. Every owner shall possess a policy of insurance that provides general liability coverage in the amount of five hundred thousand dollars
($500,000.00) for all foreseeable risks that may arise from the operation of a massage establishment and from the practice of massage therapy. Said
policy shall be issued by an insurance carrier duly authorized to do business in the State, and a certificate of insurance shall accompany each
application, specifying the City as the certificate holder.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 117/503
2. Every massage therapist performing massage or massage therapy at the massage establishment shall be covered by the policy of insurance
required by this section.
3. Every owner shall maintain, at the massage establishment, documentary proof of compliance with the insurance requirements contained in this
section.
D. Inspections:
1. A Licensing Officer may, at any time during business hours and as frequently as reasonably necessary to ensure compliance, inspect any massage
establishment.
2. Every massage establishment shall obtain and receive every other inspection required by law, including, but not limited to, inspections performed by
the Fire Department, the building inspector, the Central District Health Department, and any other department or agency authorized to conduct a
required inspection. (Ord. 17-13, 6-18-2013; amd. 2019 Code)
3-10-13: ILLEGAL ACTS:
In addition to the illegal acts and omissions proscribed throughout this chapter, each of the following acts or omissions shall be unlawful:
A. Licenses Required: No owner or manager of a massage establishment shall permit or allow any person to engage in, or attempt to engage in, the
practice of massage therapy within the massage establishment unless the massage establishment:
1. Possesses a valid City massage establishment license; or
2. Is exempted by this Code from the massage establishment license requirement.
B. Licenses Generally:
1. Every massage establishment license issued pursuant to this chapter shall remain the property of the City, and shall be surrendered to the City Clerk
within seventy two (72) hours of suspension, revocation or expiration, or immediately upon demand by a Licensing Officer.
2. No person shall have in their possession a massage establishment license issued pursuant to this chapter that has been denied, suspended,
revoked or that has expired.
3. No massage establishment license shall be transferred.
4. Every owner and manager shall notify the City Clerk in writing within two (2) business days upon the change of any of the information provided in the
massage establishment license application submitted to the City Clerk.
5. Every applicant, massage therapist, manager and owner shall continue to have and maintain all the qualifications, and none of the disqualifications,
for licensure pursuant to this chapter.
6. Every applicant, massage therapist, manager and owner shall notify the City Clerk within two (2) business days in the event any person whose name
appears on an application for a massage establishment license loses any qualification or gains any disqualification for licensure pursuant to this
chapter.
7. Every massage establishment license and State issued massage therapist license shall be posted in the massage establishment at all times, and
shall be in full and clear view of clients and potential clients.
8. Every owner, manager and massage therapist, upon request of any law enforcement, Licensing Officer or any client, shall immediately present all
required licenses for inspection.
9. No manager or owner shall employ or allow any person to perform massage or massage therapy in a massage establishment under their
management or ownership, unless such person possesses a valid massage therapy license issued by the State or is specifically exempted in State
Code from the requirement to possess a State massage therapist license.
10. No person with any license governed by this chapter that has expired or has been suspended or revoked shall engage in the practice of massage
or massage therapy, or attempt to practice massage or massage therapy in a massage establishment.
11. No person shall operate or run a massage establishment with a suspended or revoked license.
C. Construction, Operation And Maintenance Of Establishments:
1. Every massage establishment shall comply with the minimum operating and sanitary requirements of section 3-10-12 of this chapter.
2. No massage establishment shall operate or be open for business between the hours of ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. and seven o'clock (7:00) A.M.
3. The owner and manager of every massage establishment shall notify the City Clerk in writing within two (2) business days of every change in
ownership or management of the massage establishment.
4. The owner and manager of every massage establishment shall notify the City Clerk in writing within two (2) business days of every change in
massage therapists employed by, or working at, the massage establishment, whether such change is by new or renewed employment, termination or
discharge, transfer or other employment change.
5. No person shall perform massage or massage therapy in any cubicle, room or area equipped with a locking door.
6. No living or sleeping in massage establishment.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 118/503
a. No person shall use a massage establishment as housing, living quarters or sleeping quarters.
b. No owner or manager shall permit or allow a massage establishment to be used as housing, living quarters or sleeping quarters by any person.
c. Home occupations, as defined in subsection 11-012-02.5 of this Code, are exempted from this prohibition.
D. Required Records:
1. No owner, manager, massage therapist or employee shall fail to keep the records required by this chapter.
2. No owner, manager, massage therapist or employee shall refuse or fail to immediately present all records required to be kept by this chapter to a
Licensing Officer upon request.
E. Inspections:
1. Every massage establishment shall obtain and receive every inspection required by law, including, but not limited to, inspections performed by the
Fire Department, the building inspector, the Central District Health Department and any other department or agency authorized to conduct a required
inspection.
2. No owner, manager, massage therapist or employee shall fail to immediately grant full massage establishment access to a Licensing Officer or any
other person authorized or required by law to inspect the massage establishment.
F. Other Unlawful Practices:
1. No owner, manager, massage therapist or employee shall allow or permit any person under the age of eighteen (18) years to come into or remain in
any massage establishment without parental approval.
2. No owner, manager, massage therapist or employee shall sell, give, dispense, provide or keep, or cause or permit to be sold, given, dispensed,
provided or kept, any alcoholic beverage or liquor within any massage establishment.
3. No owner, manager, massage therapist or employee shall initiate or engage in any sexual contact or sexual act in any massage establishment.
4. No owner, manager, massage therapist or employee shall keep, or allow to be kept, within any massage establishment any item known as or
commonly used as a marital or sexual aid, including, but not limited to, any contraceptive item or device, vaginal or anal lubricant, or any sex toy.
5. No owner, manager, massage therapist or employee shall solicit, initiate, engage in, permit or allow any act that violates Idaho Code section 54-4001
et seq., the rules of the Idaho State Board of Massage Therapy, or the Code of Ethics or standards of practice set forth in IDAPA section 24.27.01 et
seq. (Ord. 17-13, 6-18-2013; amd. 2019 Code)
3-10-14: VIOLATIONS AND PENALTY:
A. Violations: Every violation of a provision of this chapter shall be a misdemeanor. (Ord. 17-13, 6-18-2013)
B. Misdemeanor Criminal Penalty: Every misdemeanor violation of the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to penalty as provided in section 1-4-1 of
this Code. (Ord. 17-13, 6-18-2013; amd. 2019 Code)
C. Administrative License Penalty: In addition to the misdemeanor criminal penalties provided by this section, every person who violates any provision of
this chapter shall be subject to the administrative license penalties of license denial, license revocation or license suspension, as set forth in chapter 1,
article A of this title. (Ord. 17-13, 6-18-2013)
Chapter 11
DOWNTOWN VALET PARKING
3-11-1: LEGAL AUTHORITY:
Idaho Code sections 50-301 and 50-307 authorize the City to adopt and enforce ordinances, rules, and regulations governing standards and procedures
for licensing persons who engage in or operate a trade or business within the City. (1952 Code § 5-13-01; amd. 2019 Code)
3-11-2: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
The primary purpose of public streets and rights-of-way is the free and unobstructed right of travel. The City recognizes that the use of downtown public
streets and rights-of-way for valet parking operations, while providing a public benefit, may also impede travel, interfere with the rights of others using the
downtown streets and rights-of-way, and affect the public safety or create a public nuisance. Therefore, the City Council declares its intent to require valet
parking operations to be permitted in the downtown area and to restrict, or otherwise condition, valet parking operations as a special privilege, and not as a
matter of right. The approval of any permit under this chapter for the use of the public rights-of-way is on a temporary and nonpermanent basis and is for a
nonexclusive use of the public rights-of-way. Permittees shall have neither a property interest in nor any entitlement to the granting or continuation of any
permit for the use of any public rights-of-way. (1952 Code § 5-13-02)
3-11-3: SCOPE:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 119/503
This chapter establishes minimum standards and procedures for licensing and operating a business as a valet parking service within the City. (2019 Code)
3-11-4: GENERAL LICENSING PROVISIONS APPLICABLE:
To the extent not inconsistent with this chapter, the licensing provisions set forth in chapter 1, article A of this title, shall apply with full force and effect to all
provisions and sections of this chapter. (2019 Code)
3-11-5: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and derivations shall have the meanings given herein. When not inconsistent with the
context, words used in the present tense include the future tense, words in the plural number include the singular number, and words in the singular
number include the plural number. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory. Words used throughout this chapter, but not defined
herein or in chapter 1, article A of this title, shall have their plain, ordinary and common meaning. Words in any gender shall apply to the feminine,
masculine and neuter genders.
ADA COUNTY HIGHWAY DISTRICT (ACHD): The single countywide highway district with the exclusive jurisdiction over the public rights-of-way in the
City.
CITY COUNCIL: The City Council of Boise City, State of Idaho.
CITY OFFICIAL: A City representative, department or division with the authority to enforce the rules and regulations set forth within this Code, including,
but not limited to, the Parking Services Office, City Clerk's Office, the Code Enforcement Division of Planning and Development Services, the Boise City
Police Department, or the Boise City Fire Department.
DOWNTOWN: The section of Boise City which is described by exhibit A on file in the City.
DRIVER: A person who drives, operates or is in actual physical control of a vehicle.
MOTOR VEHICLE: Every vehicle which is self-propelled, but excludes all vessels which are solely solar or human powered and electric or motorized
personal assistive mobility devices and wheelchairs.
NONPROFIT VALET PARKING OPERATION: A temporary valet parking service for which no fee is charged and is:
A. Located at a private residence;
B. Operated for a nonprofit organization; or
C. Operated for a public entity.
PARKING SERVICES OFFICE: The Boise City Parking Services Office, or its designee.
SPECIAL EVENT: A preplanned single gathering, or a series of preplanned, related, consecutive, daily gatherings, which include, but are not limited to,
concerts, dances, rallies, assemblages, processions, parades, circuses, fairs, festivals, block parties, speeches, sporting exhibitions or competitions, or
other organized activity conducted for educational, cultural, political, religious or entertainment purposes.
STREET: The entire width between the boundary lines of every public way for vehicular travel use, with jurisdiction extending to the adjacent property line,
including sidewalks, shoulders, berms and rights-of-way not intended for motorized traffic.
TEMPORARY VALET OPERATION: Any nonrecurring valet parking service which is operated for seven (7) consecutive days or less.
VALET OPERATOR (OPERATOR): Any person engaged in the business of valet parking.
VALET PARKING OPERATION: A business which receives or takes possession of, driving, moving, parking or leaving standing, within the downtown area
described by exhibit A on file in the City, any vehicle that is left at one public, on street, metered parking location to be driven to another location for
parking, whether or not a charge is levied, and whether done under contract to the business or organization for which the vehicles are being parked, or
done independently. It does not include operators of public or private off street parking operations or facilities where customers park their own vehicles and
remove the key themselves.
VALET PARKING PLAN: A written plan describing the location where a valet parking operation will be performed, the off street parking location at which
vehicles will be parked, and the number of parking spaces available and not required for off street parking requirements under the Development Code.
VALET PARKING SERVICE: A parking service provided to accommodate patrons of any business establishment, which service is incidental to the
business of the establishment and by which an attendant on behalf of the establishment takes temporary custody of the patrons' motor vehicle and moves,
parks, stores or retrieves the vehicle for the patrons' convenience.
VALET PARKING SIGN: A temporary or permanent sign, approved by the City, which designates the location and hours of an authorized valet parking
operation.
VALET SPONSOR (SPONSOR): Any person who signs a statement that a need for valet service exists, and who seeks to operate, or causes to be
operated, a valet parking operation at the sponsor's downtown residence, place of business, or function. (1952 Code § 5-13-03; amd. 2019 Code)
3-11-6: VALET PERMITS REQUIRED:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 120/503
A. Requirements: No person shall operate, engage in, conduct, manage or cause to be operated, any valet parking operation or any related activity upon
any portion of a downtown public street, sidewalk or other City owned or operated right-of-way, unless that person:
1. Has been issued a current operator's valet parking permit stating the terms and conditions of such operation.
2. Posts an official valet parking sign authorized for the location.
3. Has and maintains all the qualifications and none of the disqualifications provided herein and in chapter 1, article A of this title, throughout the permit
period.
4. Maintains a telephone number, to be provided in the application, which shall be answered during the hours of the valet operation.
5. Obtains the written consent of the Capital City Development Corporation for any proposed valet locations on 8th Street between Bannock and Main
Street, and submits such with a valet permit application.
B. Abandonment: The permit of any valet operation not in service for fifteen (15) consecutive days shall be deemed abandoned and such permit shall
revert to the City for reissue. (1952 Code § 5-13-04; amd. 2019 Code)
3-11-7: REGULAR AND SPECIAL EVENT VALET PARKING PERMITS:
All regular valet parking permits and special event valet parking permits regulated under this chapter shall be issued, maintained and renewed by the City
Clerk's Office.
A. Hour, Time Limits: All permits will include standard conditions which limit the hours of operation and the time allowed for the unloading and loading of
vehicle occupants using the valet services.
1. At a minimum, the standard conditions will prohibit valet operations before six o'clock (6:00) P.M. and after five o'clock (5:00) A.M.
2. Special conditions may also be included which further restrict the six o'clock (6:00) P.M. and five o'clock (5:00) A.M. time of day limits on operations.
3. Unloading and loading of vehicle occupants at valet operations shall not exceed three (3) minutes.
B. Conflicts: No permitted valet parking operations may cause a conflict with an authorized and permitted special event or other authorized use of the
public right-of-way. Where any use, occupation or obstruction of the public right-of-way by an operator, permitted or not, may interfere with public safety
efforts or programs, street improvement activities, special events, construction activities, cleaning efforts or other similar activities, or with the health,
welfare or safety of the public, that use may be suspended in accordance with the provisions contained in this chapter.
C. Regular Valet Parking Permits: All regular valet parking permits are issued only for valet parking locations which shall operate on a daily or regularly
scheduled basis.
D. Special Event Valet Parking Permits: All special event valet parking permits are issued only for valet parking locations which shall operate for a limited
time period of seven (7) calendar days or less. Special event permits are not required for special event valet services conducted entirely on private
property. (1952 Code § 5-13-05; amd. 2019 Code)
3-11-8: APPLICATION FOR PERMITS:
A. Required: All applications for valet parking permits shall be made to the City Clerk's Office as set forth in section 3-1A-6 of this title.
B. Additional Information Required: All valet parking permit applications shall additionally require the following information:
1. A copy of the valet parking plan, which shall include a signed statement by the owner or lessee of any location or facility designated as the parking or
storage location, or an agreement for parking at the location or facility;
2. The name and location of the sponsor's property or site and a signed statement from the sponsor that a need for valet services exists;
3. The hours of operation and the minimum number of employees of the operator engaged for the operation at the specific site;
4. The name, location and telephone number where a responsible person, employee or agent of the operator and of the sponsor will be available at all
times during hours of operation;
5. The routes to be used between any passenger loading zone or other vehicle pick up point and the parking or storage location, and back to the initial
pick up point;
6. A copy of a written contract, license or lease between the sponsor or operator, and the operator of any parking facility or storage area designated as
the parking or storage location, which contract or covenant shall contain a provision that it cannot be canceled without at least thirty (30) days' written
notice to the other party and to the City; and
7. The location of any proposed signs or attendants' stands.
8. Proof that a valid State driver's license is held by each driver who is employed by or contracted to an operator shall be required.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 121/503
C. Regular Valet Parking Permit Specific Application Requirements: In addition to all of the valet application requirements listed above, all regular valet
parking permit applications must additionally be completed and submitted at least twenty (20) business days prior to the proposed commencement of
operation. Failure to comply with this twenty (20) business day requirement may result in delays in processing and permit renewal and may cause an
interruption in the operation.
D. Special Event Valet Parking Permit Specific Application Requirements: In addition to all of the valet application requirements listed above, all special
event valet parking permits must additionally be completed and submitted at least ten (10) business days prior to the proposed commencement of
operation. Failure to comply with this ten (10) business day requirement may result in delays in processing and permit renewal and may cause an
interruption in the operation.
E. Permit Conditions: Permits will contain standard conditions, and may contain special conditions to protect the public safety, to protect the public's right
to equal access of public property and to ensure noninterference with normal pedestrian or vehicle traffic flow. Any application may be denied and any
permit revoked if the City determines at any time that these conditions have not been or cannot be met.
F. Insurance: No valet operator permit, or renewal thereof, shall be issued unless the applicant provides proof to the City Clerk's Office that they have
obtained the required liability insurance coverage as set forth in section 3-11-12 of this chapter.
G. Decision: A decision on the requested permit will be made by the Parking Services Office upon the information submitted by the applicant, subject to
the required findings and, if issued, subject to conditions placed upon a permit by the Parking Services Office. Based on the findings, the Parking
Services Office shall approve, partially approve, disapprove the application, or approve the application subject to standard or special conditions,
including, without limitation, standard or special conditions restricting the hours of valet operation. A notice of the decision shall be mailed to the
applicant. (1952 Code § 5-13-06; amd. 2019 Code)
3-11-9: VALET PARKING PERMIT STANDARDS:
All permits issued pursuant to this chapter shall conform to the following requirements and such regulations as may, from time to time, be issued by the
City. No permit may be issued which does not so conform.
A. Parking Plan: All operators or sponsors must submit a valet parking plan for each location. The sponsor and operator shall be responsible for providing
adequate vehicle storage to accommodate all valet parked vehicles, without using streets or other public property. A plan may not be required if all
driving and parking is entirely on private property. Should any portion whatsoever of any public street, public sidewalk or other public right-of-way be
utilized or driven upon, a plan shall be required. This plan, and any modifications thereof, must be approved in advance and in writing by the City.
B. Signs: No more than two (2) moveable signs may be utilized by an operator. One may be a business sign at the location where an operator takes
possession of a vehicle, and one may be placed near the drop off space so long as it in no way impedes pedestrian or vehicular traffic. All valet signs
must comply with any and all required approvals for placement of objects or signs within the public right-of-way, including the payment of any required
fees. Valet signs must in all circumstances conform to the following requirements:
1. Contents: If only one sign is used, it must be a business sign identifying the name, address and telephone number of the operator, the rates charged
and the hours of operation. If a second sign is used, it may contain the same information, but may also identify the availability of valet parking.
2. Dimensions: Sign face shall not exceed eighteen inches (18") in width and twenty four inches (24") in height.
3. Location: Specific locations shall require approval of the City.
4. Times: Sign may only be posted during operator's business hours. Any signs utilized shall be removed during hours the valet parking is not in
operation.
C. Claim Check: The operator shall, upon the receipt of each vehicle accepted for valet parking, give a claim check to the vehicle's driver. The claim check
shall explicitly state the terms and conditions under which the vehicle is being accepted.
D. Proof: Copies of the operator and sponsors' valet parking permits, business licenses, insurance and route diagram, must be maintained at every valet
parking operation site and readily available upon request by a City official or police officer.
E. Operator Changes: In the event a sponsor changes operators, a sponsor's permit continues to be valid at the approved site. Any new operator at the
site must possess a valid operator's permit. Neither permit type is transferable.
F. Valet Parking Fees: Fees may be charged by the City for valet parking operations. Any City fees will be established and maintained in the City Clerk fee
schedule.
G. Fees Charged By Operator: An operator with a regular permit or special event permit may assess the owner or driver of a motor vehicle which it
accepts for valet parking a reasonable fee for its services; provided, that the sponsor has agreed in writing that fees may be charged of such owners
and drivers; and further provided, that the operator shall provide both the owner and driver advance notice of the applicable fees to be charged.
H. Suspension Of Use Of Public Right-Of-Way By Operator: Use, occupation and obstruction of the public right-of-way which is permitted under this
chapter may be temporarily suspended, without prior notice or hearing, when, in the discretion of the Parking Services Office, or any other City
department or outside entity with jurisdiction, it is determined that such use, occupation or obstruction may interfere with public safety efforts or
programs, street improvement activities, special events, construction activities, cleaning efforts or other similar activities, or with the health, welfare or
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 122/503
safety of the public. While no prior notice or hearing is required, when possible the City shall endeavor to notify operator or valet sponsors, who may be
affected by the temporary suspension either verbally or in writing.
I. Additional Conditions: The City may, in its sole discretion, place additional conditions upon the issuance of the permit in order to ensure the protection of
the public right-of-way, the rights of all adjoining property owners, and the health, safety and welfare of the public.
J. Determination Of Appropriateness: The City shall, in its sole discretion, determine the appropriateness of the proposed area for valet parking services.
The City shall consult with ACHD to determine any traffic operations, motorist or traffic safety issues associated with the permit. The City may consult
with the Downtown Boise Association, or other downtown tenants or landlords in considering the appropriateness of the proposed area. Under no
circumstances may a valet parking operation take place in a travel lane or interfere with pedestrian traffic.
K. No Property Interest: Permits for the use of the public right-of-way shall be considered temporary and revocable, and permittees shall have neither
property interest in nor any entitlement to the granting or continuation of any such permit.
L. Legal Compliance: Permits and activity pursuant to permits shall comply with all other applicable governmental restrictions or requirements. (1952 Code
§ 5-13-07; amd. 2019 Code)
3-11-10: AUTHORIZED VALET PARKING ZONES:
A valet parking operation may be conducted only at a location and during the hours approved by the City and indicated by official valet parking signs.
Permits shall designate the specific location for which a valet parking operation is approved. Valet parking operations are permitted as a special privilege,
not as a matter of right, and thus are considered temporary and revocable, and are for a nonexclusive use of the specific location. Only one valet parking
operation will be allowed in any downtown block face and no more than one operator will be allowed use of the space as contracted with the associated
sponsor. (1952 Code § 5-13-09; amd. 2019 Code)
3-11-11: INDEMNIFICATION:
As a condition of any license governed under this chapter, the licensee, his employees, agents, subcontractors, representatives and any person acting
under or pursuant to an operator's permit, agrees to the maximum extent permitted by law to indemnify, defend and hold harmless the City and ACHD, and
all their elected officials, officers, commission members, employees and representatives, against any and all liability, suits, causes of action, claims or
injuries, damages, costs and expenses to persons or property, whether public or private, that may arise out of, or be occasioned by, the operation of a
valet parking service on the public right-of-way or other property, or any act, omission or misconduct of the licensee or his employees, agents,
subcontractors or representatives. (1952 Code § 5-13-10; amd. 2019 Code)
3-11-12: INSURANCE:
A. Types Identified: Every valet operation governed under this chapter shall be continuously insured and have the following types of insurance:
1. Commercial General Liability: Every valet operation shall carry no less than a one million dollar ($1,000,000.00) limit, commercial general liability
policy of insurance, issued by an insurance carrier duly authorized to do business in the State.
2. Commercial Auto Liability: Every valet operation shall carry no less than a five hundred thousand dollar ($500,000.00) limit, combined single limits
for owned, nonowned and hired vehicles, under a motor vehicle liability policy of insurance issued by an insurance carrier duly authorized to do
business in the State.
3. Garagekeeper's Legal Liability: Every valet operation shall carry no less than a one million dollar ($1,000,000.00) per occurrence limit,
garagekeeper's legal liability policy, which must include comprehensive perils for the vehicle while being stored by the valet operator.
B. Certificate Required: Every valet operator licensee shall tender to the City Clerk's Office a certificate of insurance certifying that insurance of the type
and in the amount required by this chapter is in effect. The certificate of insurance shall list City and the Ada County Highway District separately as
additional insureds. Said certificates of insurance shall specify as the certificate holder Boise City, P.O. Box 500, Boise, Idaho 83701-0500.
C. Notice Of Cancellation Or Changes: Every valet operator licensee shall notify the City Clerk's Office in writing of the voluntary or involuntary cancellation
of, or changes to, any policy of insurance within two (2) business days of such cancellation or change. (1952 Code § 5-13-11; amd. 2019 Code)
3-11-13: SUSPENSION OF OPERATIONS:
Any police officer or City official may suspend all operations of an operator in any location, except for retrieval of vehicles already subject to valet parking,
for the remainder of the day's hours of operation (which suspension may extend to 8:00 A.M. of the following day), upon the occurrence, in said location, of
any traffic accident arising out of operating conditions within or around a valet parking station or valet parking zone, or where otherwise required because
of an emergency situation whether or not arising from the operation of the valet parking operation. (1952 Code § 5-13-12; amd. 2019 Code)
3-11-14: REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION OF PERMIT:
A. Immediate Suspension: The City may immediately suspend any permit, for the protection of the public health, safety or welfare as set forth in section 3-
1A-19 of this title. Permits under this chapter may also be immediately suspended, without a hearing, when the continued valet parking operation:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 123/503
1. Interferes with, or threatens to interfere with, the public's use of the streets or sidewalks, the normal flow of vehicular or pedestrian traffic on any
public right-of-way or City owned, operated or managed property, or any special event; or
2. Fails to maintain the minimum levels and standards of liability insurance or claims reserves.
B. Other Reasons To Suspend Or Revoke Permit: In addition to the reasons to deny, suspend or revoke a permit as set forth in section 3-1A-17 of this title,
the City may also suspend or revoke any permit whenever the City determines that the permittee, or any of its drivers, employees, agents or
subcontractors have:
1. Allowed unlicensed drivers to operate or park vehicles;
2. Failed to comply with or violated any permit conditions, including failure to maintain liability insurance for any period of time;
3. Provided false or incomplete permit application information;
4. Interfered with the public use of the streets or sidewalks, the normal flow of vehicle or pedestrian traffic on any public right-of-way or ACHD or City
owned property; or
5. Created an operation which constitutes a public nuisance, including, but not limited to, a visual blight.
C. Notice: All notices of denial, suspension or revocation of permits governed under this chapter shall follow the standards and requirements as set forth in
section 3-1A-15 of this title. (1952 Code § 5-13-13; amd. 2019 Code)
3-11-15: PROCEDURES FOR DENIAL, SUSPENSION, REVOCATION, APPEAL:
Except as otherwise provided herein, the procedures for denial, suspension, revocation and appeal of a license shall be as set forth in chapter 1, article A
of this title. (1952 Code § 5-13-14; amd. 2019 Code)
3-11-16: COMPLIANCE WITH APPLICABLE LAWS:
Nothing in this chapter is intended to authorize the parking of motor vehicles by operators and sponsors in a manner contrary to, and all permittees shall
comply with, applicable State laws and local parking and traffic regulations, including this Code. (1952 Code § 5-13-16)
3-11-17: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
Every violation of this chapter shall constitute a general misdemeanor, and every person deemed guilty thereof shall, upon conviction, be subject to
penalty as provided in section 1-4-1 of this Code, unless Idaho Code or this Code provides a specific lesser penalty for the violation set forth in this
chapter. (1952 Code § 5-13-17; amd. 2019 Code)
Chapter 12
PRIVATE SECURITY SERVICE
3-12-1: LEGAL AUTHORITY:
Idaho Code sections 50-301 and 50-307 authorize the City to adopt and enforce ordinances, rules and regulations governing standards and procedures
for licensing persons who engage in or operate a trade or business within the City. (2019 Code)
3-12-2: PURPOSE:
The purpose of the regulations and standards established within this chapter is to ensure safe and appropriate private security services within the City.
(2019 Code)
3-12-3: SCOPE:
This chapter establishes minimum standards and procedures for licensing and operating a private security service business within the City. (2019 Code)
3-12-4: GENERAL LICENSING PROVISIONS APPLICABLE:
To the extent not inconsistent with this chapter, the licensing provisions set forth in chapter 1, article A of this title, shall apply with full force and effect to all
provisions and sections of this chapter. (2019 Code)
3-12-5: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and derivations shall have the meanings given herein. When not inconsistent with the
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 124/503
context, words used in the present tense include the future tense, words in the plural number include the singular number, and words in the singular
number include the plural number. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory. Words used throughout this chapter, but not defined
herein or in chapter 1, article A of this title, shall have their plain, ordinary and common meaning. Words in any gender shall apply to the feminine,
masculine and neuter genders.
EVENT SECURITY STAFF: Any person employed for the purpose of maintaining peace and order at public events, including, but not limited to, screening
for weapons and searching purses, bags and persons for prohibited items prior to entry into public events.
PRIVATE PATROL AGENT: Any person employed by the service or who performs individually the functions of a private patrol or private security service.
PRIVATE PATROL SERVICE OR SYSTEM: Any service or system which purports to furnish, or does furnish, for a consideration or otherwise, any
watchman or guard, either uniformed or otherwise, to patrol any district in the City, or to guard or watch any property.
PRIVATE SECURITY SERVICES: Any service or system which purports to furnish, or does furnish, for a consideration or otherwise, any employee or
agent employee or agent to protect any property by means other than physical observation of property.
SECURITY ALARM INSTALLATION SERVICE: Any service or system which purports to furnish, or does furnish, for a consideration or otherwise, any
installation, servicing or monitoring of any type of security, burglary or fire alarm protection system.
SECURITY ALARM INSTALLER: Any person employed by the service or who performs individually the functions of a security alarm installation service.
(Ord. 23-14, 6-17-2014; amd. 2019 Code)
3-12-6: LICENSE REQUIRED AND EXEMPTIONS:
A. Services: It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct, operate or maintain, or permit to be conducted, operated or maintained, or to participate in the
conducting, operation, maintenance or monitoring of a private patrol service, private security service or security alarm installation service unless a valid
license therefor has been issued as provided for in chapter 1, article A of this title, and this chapter, and which is in full force and effect.
B. Agents, Installers: It shall be unlawful for any person to act or to offer to act as a private patrol agent or as a security alarm installer within the City
unless a valid license therefor has been issued as provided for in chapter 1, article A of this title, and this chapter.
C. Hiring Prohibited Unless Licensed: It shall be unlawful for any private patrol or security service to employ or hire the services of a private patrol agent, or
for a security alarm installation service to employ or hire the services of a security alarm installer, until and unless said private patrol agent has been
duly licensed as required by chapter 1, article A of this title, and this chapter.
D. Officers Exempt: This chapter shall not apply to or include regularly appointed police officers, or to any regularly appointed police officers or law
enforcement agents of the State or the United States, or any political subdivision thereof, while acting as their agent.
E. Capacity To Act By Owners, Operators: Any owner or operator of a validly licensed private patrol or security service or system may act as a private
patrol agent for that private patrol or security service or system; or any owner or operator of a validly licensed security alarm installation service may act
as a security alarm installer, without additional bond or fee, and may be issued a license accordingly.
F. Event Security Staff: Event security staff shall be exempt from licensing, but shall be required to undergo and meet the criminal background check
criteria required of licenses governed under this chapter. The company or agency which employs the event security staff shall perform these criminal
background checks. (Ord. 23-14, 6-17-2014; amd. 2019 Code)
3-12-7: UNIFORMS AND EMBLEMS:
A. Unlawful Appearance Or Use: It shall be unlawful for any private patrol or security service, or for any private patrol agent, to use or authorize the use of
any uniform, clothing, uniform emblems or shoulder patches having a color, design and/or shape such as makes any of them individually, or some or all
of them in the aggregate, appear indistinguishable from any uniform, uniform emblems or shoulder patches of the Police Department.
B. Approval And Authorization Required: Every private patrol or security service, and every private patrol agent who performs individually the functions of a
private patrol or security service, prior to being licensed under this chapter, shall obtain approval and authorization of any color, design or shape of any
uniform, clothing, uniform emblems, badges or shoulder patches to be utilized by such licensee. Application for such approval shall be made to the
Licensing Officer. Approval and authorization, if any, shall be made by that officer, in writing, in accordance with guidelines issued by the Police
Department. The written approval and authorization shall be attached to the application for license required by section 3-12-8 of this chapter and shall
describe the color, design and shape of the uniform, patches, badges or emblems, as the case may be.
C. Photographs:
1. Every private patrol or security service, and every private patrol agent who individually performs the functions of a private patrol or security service,
prior to being licensed under this chapter, shall submit color photographs of a size no less than three and one-half inches by three and one-half
inches (31/2" x 31/2"), depicting the following:
a. A full figure view showing:
(1) The entire uniform, front side facing without coat, as approved under subsection B of this section.
(2) The entire uniform, left side facing without coat, as approved under subsection B of this section.
b. If a coat or other outer garment is to be worn at any time:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 125/503
(1) The entire uniform, front side facing with coat or garment, as approved under subsection B of this section.
(2) The entire uniform, left side facing with coat or garment, as approved under subsection B of this section.
c. A close up view of each and every badge, patch or emblem to be worn by a private patrol agent, of sufficient clarity and detail to permit the reading
of all wording on the badge, patch or emblem from the photograph.
2. These photographs shall be filed with the application in the Office of the City Clerk, and shall be available to the Police Department upon request.
D. Subsequent Approval And Authorization: Approval and authorization of uniform clothing, uniform emblems, badges or patches shall be obtained from
the Licensing Officer before the addition, deletion or change of any previously approved and authorized item, or every three (3) years, whichever
comes first. (1952 Code § 5-19-03; amd. 2019 Code)
3-12-8: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
All private patrol, security service or system, alarm installation service or private patrol agent license applications and renewals shall comply with the
minimum license application requirements set forth in chapter 1, article A of this title, and be submitted to the City Clerk's Office. (1952 Code § 5-19-04;
amd. 2019 Code)
3-12-9: QUALIFICATIONS:
In addition to the minimum licensing qualifications set forth in chapter 1, article A of this title, all individuals licensed under this chapter must also be
eighteen (18) years of age or older. (1952 Code § 5-19-05; amd. 2019 Code)
3-12-10: BOND AND INSURANCE REQUIRED:
A. Bond Requirements: Before any license shall be issued to any applicant pursuant to this chapter, the applicant shall tender to the City a fiduciary bond
naming the City in the following respective sums:
1. Private Patrol, Security Service Or Security Alarm Installation Service: Every licensee for these types of licenses shall have a bond in the amount of
ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00).
2. Private Patrol Agent Or Security Alarm Installer: Every licensee for these types of licenses shall have a bond in the amount of two thousand five
hundred dollars ($2,500.00).
B. Insurance Requirements: All applicants shall carry general and personal liability insurance for bodily injury, sickness, disease or death sustained by
persons and arising out of assault, battery, false imprisonment, false arrest, malicious prosecution, abuse of process, libel, slander, misrepresentation,
deceit or interference with property and contract rights. Insurance coverage is required for all employees, representatives and agents of the company,
including volunteers and independent contractors used in the company's operations. The minimum limits for such insurance shall be five hundred
thousand dollars ($500,000.00). Said policy shall be issued by an insurance carrier duly authorized to do business in the State, and a certificate of
insurance shall accompany each application, specifying as the certificate holder Boise City, P.O. Box 500, Boise, Idaho 83701-0500. (Ord. 23-14, 6-17-
2014; amd. 2019 Code)
3-12-11: LICENSE FEES:
All licensing fees under this chapter are governed under chapter 1, article A of this title. (1952 Code § 5-19-09; amd. 2019 Code)
3-12-12: EXPIRATION, RENEWAL OF LICENSE:
A. Expiration: Licenses issued under the provisions of this chapter shall expire as follows:
1. Private patrol agents and security alarm installers, one year from the date of issuance.
2. Private patrol service, security service or security alarm installation service, March 31 of each year.
B. Renewal: Any person holding a license under the provisions of this chapter must renew such license for the following succeeding year by complying
with the license renewal requirements set forth in chapter 1, article A of this title. (1952 Code § 5-19-10; amd. 2019 Code)
3-12-13: FORM OF LICENSE FOR PRIVATE AGENT:
The license for a private agent shall be in the form of a card which shall contain the words "private patrol agent", and shall also bear numerals designating
the year in which such license is in force and effect. (1952 Code § 5-19-11)
3-12-14: UNLAWFUL DISPLAY OF LICENSE:
It shall be unlawful for any person to wear or display any license required or provided for by this chapter unless such person is duly licensed therefor.
(1952 Code § 5-19-12)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 126/503
3-12-15: CONSTRUCTION OF LICENSE AUTHORITY:
The granting or issuance of any license under the provisions of chapter 1, article A of this title, and this chapter, shall not be construed in any manner as
granting or providing any additional or further power of arrest than that granted under the provisions of the Statutes of the State, and the provisions of this
Code, nor shall the provisions of this chapter be construed in any manner as authority or power to carry weapons contrary to the Statutes of the State.
(1952 Code § 5-19-13; amd. 2019 Code)
3-12-16: PENALTY:
Unless otherwise provided herein, every violation of this chapter shall constitute a general misdemeanor, and every person deemed guilty thereof shall,
upon conviction, be subject to penalty as provided in section 1-4-1 of this Code, unless Idaho Code or this Code provides a specific lesser penalty for the
violation set forth in this chapter. Each day such violation is committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable
as such hereunder. (1952 Code § 5-19-15; amd. 2019 Code)
Chapter 13
TRANSPORTATION BUSINESSES
ARTICLE A. TAXICABS
3-13A-1: LEGAL AUTHORITY:
Pursuant to Idaho Code sections 50-301 and 50-307, the Idaho legislature has authorized the City to adopt and enforce ordinances, rules and regulations
governing standards and procedures for licensing persons who engage in or operate a trade or business within the City. (2019 Code)
3-13A-2: SCOPE:
This article establishes minimum standards and procedures for licensing owners and employees of a taxicab and the operation of a business as a taxicab.
(2019 Code)
3-13A-3: FINDINGS AND STATEMENT OF PURPOSE:
A. Findings: The City Council finds as follows:
1. Taxicabs provide an essential component of the transportation options available to citizens of, and visitors to, the City.
2. Taxicabs are operated by private companies or individuals and utilize public streets, roads and other rights-of-way in providing their services.
3. It is important to protect the public health, safety and welfare without restraining, burdening or overregulating the taxicab industry.
4. The protection of the public health, safety and welfare shall be paramount in the enforcement and interpretation of taxicab regulations.
B. Intent: To achieve those goals, it is the City Council's intent, by enacting this article, to ensure:
1. That taxicabs provide a safe means of transportation.
2. Taxicab drivers are trustworthy and competent to carry out their duties in a safe and efficient manner.
3. Taxicab owners carry adequate liability insurance on their taxicabs. (1952 Code § 5-24-01; amd. 2019 Code)
3-13A-4: GENERAL LICENSING PROVISIONS APPLICABLE:
To the extent not inconsistent with this article, the provisions set forth in chapter 1, article A of this title, shall apply with full force and effect to all provisions
and sections of this article and chapter 1, article A of this title is hereby incorporated herein by reference and applies to those rights and responsibilities not
further defined herein. (2019 Code)
3-13A-5: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and derivations shall have the meanings given herein. When not inconsistent with the
context, words used in the present tense include the future tense, words in the plural number include the singular number, and words in the singular
number include the plural number. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory. Words used throughout this chapter, but not defined
herein or in chapter 1, article A of this title, shall have their plain, ordinary and common meaning. Words in any gender shall apply to the feminine,
masculine and neuter genders.
FARE: Money or other value paid for transportation of a person or passenger.
IMMEDIATE OUT OF SERVICE STATUS: The status of a taxicab which, upon written or verbal notice by the Licensing Officer, is such that no person shall
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 127/503
operate the vehicle as a taxicab.
IN SERVICE: A taxicab is deemed to be "in service" whenever in operation upon any public street, road or right-of-way, regardless of its status as available
for hire, already hired, off duty or otherwise unavailable.
INSPECTION DECAL: A decal that is approved, authorized and issued by the Licensing Officer, that demonstrates that the taxicab passed inspection.
INSURANCE: An automobile liability policy for each licensed taxicab in the amount designated within this article, with combined single limits, written by an
insurer authorized by the State of Idaho to write insurance policies, and continuously in force for the full term of each taxicab vehicle license.
MOBILITY DEVICE: A device designed for use by individuals with a mobility disability for the main purposes of indoor or outdoor locomotion, including, but
not limited to, wheelchairs, walkers, crutches, canes, braces or other similar devices.
OPERATOR (OR TAXICAB OPERATOR): Any person who drives or who is in actual physical control of any taxicab, or any person who drives or who is in
actual physical control of any vehicle used as a taxicab.
PASSENGER: A person who hires, employs, directs or otherwise engages a taxicab to transport a passenger between two (2) points, as directed by a
passenger.
RATE CARD: An approved card or other display setting forth the schedule of taxicab fares and rates.
SERVICE ANIMAL: A dog that is individually trained to do work or perform tasks for people with disabilities, including, but not limited to, guiding people
who are blind or have a visual impairment, alerting individuals who are deaf, pulling a wheelchair, alerting and protecting a person who is having a seizure
or reminding a person with mental illness to take prescribed medications.
STREET: The entire width between the boundary lines of every public way for vehicular travel use, with jurisdiction extending to the adjacent property line,
including sidewalks, shoulders, berms and rights-of-way not intended for motorized traffic. The term "street" is interchangeable with highway.
TAXICAB: Any motor vehicle capable of carrying one or more passengers or parcels between points and over such route as may be directed by a
passenger and:
A. Is available for hails or through a dispatch service;
B. Does not require prearranged appointments;
C. Is not operated on a fixed route; and
D. Is a vehicle that is held out to the public as a taxicab.
TAXICAB BUSINESS: A business that leases, owns, operates or controls one or more taxicabs.
TAXICAB STAND: A place alongside the curb of a street or other place designated and reserved exclusively for the use of taxicabs or commercial
transportation vehicles.
TAXIMETER: An instrument attached to a taxicab which measures the distance driven, the waiting time and any other basis upon which the fare is
calculated.
TOP LIGHT: A lighted display device permanently attached to the center front of a taxicab's exterior roof that is illuminated when the taximeter is
deactivated, the illumination of which is sufficient to be clearly seen at night. The device shall act in unison with the taximeter to indicate the service status
of the taxicab to which it is attached.
WAITING TIME: The time when a taxicab is not in motion, beginning at the timely arrival at the place to which it was called, and consisting of the time
when the taxicab is waiting at the direction of the passenger, or is otherwise forced to wait while hired, employed, directed or otherwise engaged in the
transportation of a passenger or parcel. (1952 Code § 5-24-02; amd. Ord. 50-13, 1-7-2014; 2019 Code)
3-13A-6: LICENSES REQUIRED; APPLICATION; STANDARDS AND REQUIREMENTS; EXPIRATION AND RENEWAL:
A. Taxicab Business License:
1. Every person who owns, leases, conducts or operates a taxicab business in the City shall make written application for and obtain a taxicab business
license, as set forth in sections 3-1A-5 and 3-1A-6 of this title.
2. Each application for a new taxicab business license shall be accompanied by the required fee in an amount established by the City Council and
listed on the most current City Clerk license fee schedule.
3. The taxicab business license is not required with annual license renewal application unless:
a. The taxicab business license and related business are sold; or
b. The taxicab business license was exercised in a manner that was noncompliant with the requirements set forth in this article.
4. Taxicab business licenses are not transferrable.
5. Every taxicab business license shall expire on June 30 of each year.
B. Taxicab Vehicle License:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 128/503
1. Every person who owns, leases, conducts, operates or maintains a taxicab in the City shall make written application for and obtain a taxicab vehicle
license as set forth in sections 3-1A-5 and 3-1A-6 of this title.
2. Every taxicab vehicle license shall expire on June 30 of each year.
3. Every licensee who is an applicant for renewal of a taxicab vehicle license shall complete the application process annually. Upon completion of the
application process, the Licensing Officer will issue a renewed taxicab vehicle license to the applicant, provided the applicant meets all of the
qualifications and none of the disqualifications set forth in this article and chapter 1, article A of this title.
4. The taxicab vehicle license of any taxicab not in service for fifteen (15) consecutive days shall be deemed abandoned, and such taxicab vehicle
license shall revert to the City unless the owner, lessee, agent or licensee of such taxicab notifies the Licensing Officer in writing prior to expiration of
the fifteen (15) days that said taxicab is out of service due to major mechanical or structural damage requiring in excess of fifteen (15) days to repair.
In the event such written notification is given, the licensee shall have a reasonable period of time, to be determined by the Licensing Officer, to place
said taxicab back in service. A licensee may, in writing, request permission from the Licensing Officer to exceed the fifteen (15) days not in service
limit if unforeseen special circumstances are likely to prevent the licensee from placing the vehicle back into service. In the event said taxicab is not
placed back in service within the reasonable period of time determined by the Licensing Officer, if no permission for an extension was granted by the
Licensing Officer, such taxicab vehicle license shall be deemed abandoned and shall revert to the City.
5. Every owner, lessee and operator of a taxicab, and every taxicab vehicle licensee, shall notify the Licensing Officer in writing within seven (7)
calendar days of the sale, lease, transfer or loan of the taxicab to any other person.
6. Every owner, lessee and operator of a taxicab, and every taxicab vehicle licensee, shall notify the Licensing Officer in writing within seven (7)
calendar days of the taxicab being taken "off-line" or the taxicab no longer being used as a taxicab. The taxicab vehicle license of such taxicab shall
be returned to the Licensing Officer within ten (10) business days of the taxicab being taken "off-line" or the taxicab no longer being used as a
taxicab.
C. Taxicab Driver's License:
1. Every person who drives, operates, conducts or is in actual physical control, as that term is defined and used in Idaho Code title 18, and as
interpreted by applicable case law, of a taxicab in the City shall make written application for and obtain a taxicab driver's license as set forth in
sections 3-1A-5 and 3-1A-6 of this title. Such license shall be maintained in full force and effect at all times when the person is driving, operating,
conducting or in actual physical control of a taxicab.
2. The applicant or licensee shall notify the Licensing Officer in writing within two (2) business days of any illness, accident, injury or other health issue
that may cause the applicant or licensee to fail to meet any of the physical requirements contained in 49 CFR part 391.41 (medical card). Every
restriction and requirement placed on the applicant or licensee's operation of a motor vehicle by the examining physician who issued the medical
card shall be a restriction or requirement on the taxicab driver's license issued by the Licensing Officer. Every restriction and requirement placed on
the applicant or licensee's operation of a motor vehicle by the State Department of Transportation shall be a restriction or requirement on the taxicab
driver's license issued by the Licensing Officer.
3. Every taxicab driver's license shall expire one year from the date of issuance.
4. Every licensee who is an applicant for renewal of a taxicab driver's license shall complete the application process annually. Upon completion of the
application process, the Licensing Officer will issue a renewed taxicab driver's license to the applicant, provided the applicant meets all of the
qualifications and none of the disqualifications set forth in this article and chapter 1, article A of this title.
5. Every taxicab driver's license issued by the Licensing Officer shall include, at a minimum, the following:
a. The licensee's full name.
b. A photograph of the licensee.
c. The license expiration date.
d. The licensee's license number.
D. Applications; General Standards And Requirements:
1. In addition to the minimum licensing qualifications set forth in chapter 1, article A of this title, every application for a license required by this article
must also include the following information:
a. The name and direct telephone number of the operating manager of the taxicab business under which the applicant will be licensed;
b. If an application for a taxicab business license, a description of every taxicab to be operated pursuant to the taxicab business license, including the
year, make, model, current mileage, license plate number, City taxicab vehicle license number, and vehicle identification number (VIN) of each
vehicle;
c. Whether the applicant has previously applied for any City license or permit; and
d. If a taxicab driver's license application, whether the applicant has previously been licensed as a taxicab driver by the City or by any other
jurisdiction.
2. Every applicant for a license governed by this article shall be able to speak and understand the English language sufficiently to converse with the
general public, to understand road and highway traffic signs and signals in the English language, to respond to official inquiries, and to make entries
on reports and records.
3. In addition to all requirements and qualifications set forth above:
a. No applicant shall be issued a taxicab vehicle license:
(1) When the applicant is not the bona fide owner or lessee of the taxicab;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 129/503
(2) Until the certificate of insurance, of the type and in the amount required by this article, is tendered to the Licensing Officer.
b. No applicant shall be issued, or shall be allowed to maintain, a taxicab driver's license, if the applicant fails to achieve a score of at least seventy
percent (70%) correct on a general local geographic knowledge and communication skill test developed and administered by the Licensing Officer.
Applicants shall pay the fee set forth on the City Clerk fee schedule to cover the cost of administering the tests, which fee shall be in addition to all
other licensing application fees and other fees authorized by this article. The general local geographic knowledge and communication skill test
shall be developed and administered to assess an applicant's ability to recognize various points of interest in the City, to evaluate the applicant's
ability to determine the shortest geographical route between established City landmarks and to evaluate communication skills to adequately
converse with the general public. To achieve the goals of this licensing requirement, every general local geographic knowledge test shall be taken
and completed by the applicant alone, with no help or assistance of any kind from any person, other than the Licensing Officer.
E. Exception To Requirements: The taxicab driver's license requirement of this article shall not apply when all of the following conditions exist:
1. The person driving or operating the taxicab is doing so for the purpose of diagnosing, performing, completing or road testing maintenance or repairs
to the taxicab; and
2. The exterior of the taxicab is clearly marked in such a manner as to indicate that it is being driven solely for the purpose of performing, completing or
road testing maintenance or repairs to the taxicab. (1952 Code § 5-24-03; amd. Ord. 38-15, 8-25-2015; 2019 Code)
3-13A-7: TRANSFER OF LICENSE:
A. Vehicle License; Conditions: A taxicab vehicle license issued pursuant to this article may only be transferred to another vehicle owned by the same
person or business, and only upon successful completion of the license application process as set forth in sections 3-1A-5 and 3-1A-6 of this title.
B. Fee: Every application to transfer a taxicab vehicle license shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable transfer fee in an amount established by the City
Council and listed on the most current City Clerk fee schedule.
C. Conditions: Prior to the issuance of a transferred taxicab vehicle license, the proposed taxicab shall:
1. Meet all requirements of this article and chapter 1, article A of this title;
2. Pass all inspections required by this article; and
3. Be insured as required by this article. A valid certificate of insurance covering the taxicab to which the license will be transferred shall be provided to
the Licensing Officer prior to the effective date of the transfer.
D. Surrender; New License Issued: Every license being transferred shall be surrendered to the Licensing Officer. A new license will be issued by the
Licensing Officer upon successful completion of the transfer.
E. Business License Nontransferable: No taxicab business license shall be transferred.
F. Driver's License Nontransferable: No taxicab driver's license shall be transferred.
G. Penalty: A violation of any provision of this section shall be an infraction, subject to penalty as provided in section 1-4-2 of this Code. (1952 Code § 5-
24-04; amd. 2019 Code)
3-13A-8: DENIAL, REVOCATION AND SUSPENSION:
A. Civil License Penalty: Every civil license penalty imposed by the Licensing Officer shall be proportional to the type and severity of the violation.
B. License Denial: In the event the Licensing Officer, in his/her discretion, determines that an applicant fails to qualify for a license governed by this article,
the Licensing Officer shall deny such applicant a license pursuant to the procedure set forth in sections 3-1A-16 through 3-1A-27 of this title.
2. Notice of a denial shall be deemed properly served if sent by United States Postal Service, certified mail, to the address on file in the City Clerk's
Office that was provided by the applicant, or if notice is hand served upon the applicant. An applicant's failure to accept, acknowledge or receive
notification of a denial shall not invalidate the denial, provided notice was served as provided in this section.
C. License Revocation:
1. A third license suspension within one license term shall be deemed a revocation.
2. Every license revocation shall be effective at twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight on the third day following the date written notice is sent to the licensee.
D. License Suspension: Unless otherwise provided in a notice of violation, every license suspension shall be effective at twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight on
the third day following the date written notice of the suspension is sent to the licensee. (1952 Code § 5-24-06; amd. 2019 Code)
3-13A-9: RIGHT OF REVIEW:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 130/503
Every applicant who, upon application, is denied a license governed by this article, or who has a license governed by this article suspended or revoked,
shall have a right of review. Unless otherwise expressly provided herein, review procedures shall follow those set forth in chapter 1, article A of this title.
(1952 Code § 5-24-07; amd. 2019 Code)
3-13A-10: TAXICABS LICENSED ELSEWHERE:
A. Permitted: Taxicabs and taxicab drivers licensed by a municipality other than the City may transport passengers from outside the City to a destination
within the City.
B. Applicability: This section shall apply only to taxicabs and taxicab drivers licensed by a municipality that grants reciprocal rights to taxicabs licensed by
the City.
C. Prohibition: It shall be unlawful for the owner or driver of a taxicab licensed by a municipality other than the City to seek or accept passengers within the
City, except such passengers whose destination is directly to a point in such other municipality.
D. Unlicensed: Prior to transporting any passenger into the City, and prior to seeking or accepting any passenger within the City, a vehicle or driver that is
not licensed by another municipality that grants reciprocal rights to taxicabs licensed by the City shall obtain all required City licenses.
E. Penalty: A violation of any of the provisions of this section shall be an infraction, subject to penalty as provided in section 1-4-2 of this Code. (1952
Code § 5-24-08; amd. 2019 Code)
3-13A-11: TAXICAB INSURANCE REQUIRED:
A. Insurance Required: Every taxicab in operation within the City shall be continuously insured under a commercial automobile liability policy of insurance
issued by an insurance carrier duly authorized to do business in the State that provides coverage in the amount of five hundred thousand dollars
($500,000.00) combined single limits.
B. Certificate: Every taxicab business licensee and taxicab vehicle licensee shall tender to the Licensing Officer a certificate of insurance designating the
taxicabs covered and certifying that insurance of the type and in the amount required by this article is in effect. Said certificate of insurance shall
specify as the certificate holder Boise City, P.O. Box 500, Boise, Idaho 83701-0500.
C. Changes In Policy: Every taxicab business licensee and taxicab vehicle licensee shall notify the Licensing Officer in writing of the voluntary or
involuntary cancellation of, or changes to, any policy of insurance on any taxicab owned or operated by the licensee within two (2) business days of
such cancellation or change.
D. Additional Civil License Penalties For Insurance Violation:
1. In addition to the criminal penalties prescribed therefor, any one or more of the following acts or omissions shall be grounds for immediate revocation
of all licenses issued pursuant to this article held by that licensee:
a. Failure to maintain valid insurance of the type and in the amount required by this article for all taxicabs owned or operated by the licensee;
b. Failure to notify the Licensing Officer of the cancellation of a policy of insurance on any taxicab owned or operated by the licensee within two (2)
business days of such cancellation;
2. In addition to the criminal penalties prescribed therefor, any one or more of the following acts or omissions shall be grounds for immediate
suspension of all licenses issued pursuant to this article held by that licensee:
a. Failure to tender any insurance certificate required by this article to the Licensing Officer;
b. Failure to notify the Licensing Officer of any changes to a policy of insurance on any taxicab owned or operated by the licensee within two (2)
business days of such change;
c. Failure to provide proof of liability insurance for inspection upon request of the Licensing Officer;
d. Failure of a taxicab driver to have in their possession proof of liability insurance of the type and in the amount required by this article at all times
when the vehicle is operated within the City. (1952 Code § 5-24-09; amd. 2019 Code)
3-13A-12: TAXICABS:
A. Taxicab Age And Usage Limitations:
1. Age Limits: Except as expressly provided herein, no vehicle that exceeds either of the following limits shall be licensed as a taxicab:
a. Age: Seven (7) years of age; or
b. Miles: Five hundred thousand (500,000) miles or more.
2. Computation: The taxicab age shall be computed using the model year of the vehicle and December 31 of the year in which the taxicab vehicle
license is sought. (For example, if a vehicle is a 2004 model year and the application for a taxicab vehicle license is submitted in July 2012, that
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 131/503
vehicle is 8 years of age.)
3. Exemptions:
a. Specified: If the safety and equipment standards and requirements contained in this article are met, the following vehicles may be licensed and
used in taxicab service until the age and/or mileage limits indicated:
(1) A vehicle seven (7) years of age or older may be licensed and used in taxicab service until it reaches ten (10) years of age or one million
(1,000,000) miles on the odometer, whichever occurs first, upon a determination that the vehicle meets or exceeds all standards and
requirements established pursuant to subsection B7 of this section;
(2) A wheelchair accessible vehicle may be licensed and used in taxicab service until it reaches eleven (11) years of age or one million one
hundred thousand (1,100,000) miles on the odometer, whichever occurs first;
(3) A clean fuel or clean air vehicle that meets or exceeds the ultra low emission vehicle standard may be licensed and used in taxicab service until
it reaches eleven (11) years of age or one million one hundred thousand (1,100,000) miles on the odometer, whichever occurs first.
b. Exemption For Classic, Vintage Or Antique Vehicles:
(1) A vehicle that is determined by the Licensing Officer to qualify as a "classic", "vintage" or "antique" vehicle, pursuant to criteria developed,
promulgated and published by the Licensing Officer as an administrative regulation, may qualify for an exemption to the vehicle age and usage
requirements of this article.
(2) An applicant who seeks this exemption shall notify the Licensing Officer at the time of application of the intent to operate a classic, vintage or
antique vehicle as a taxicab.
(3) Every classic, vintage or antique vehicle for which a taxicab vehicle license is sought shall comply with all safety and inspection requirements
set forth in this article.
(4) The process of applying for a taxicab vehicle license for a classic, vintage or antique vehicle may require additional time.
(5) The Licensing Officer may, if reasonably necessary to protect the public health, safety and welfare, place conditions and/or restrictions on the
operation and use of a taxicab vehicle license for a classic, vintage or antique vehicle.
(6) Any person who operates a classic, vintage or antique vehicle as a taxicab and does not comply with the conditions and restrictions placed on
operation of the vehicle by the Licensing Officer is guilty of an infraction, subject to penalty as provided in section 1-4-2 of this Code.
c. Inspection: Every taxicab to which any exemption may apply shall be inspected by the City shop, and must pass said inspection at the beginning
of the process of application for a taxicab vehicle license.
4. Exemption: The vehicle age and usage limits contained herein shall not apply to any taxicab originally licensed prior to the effective date hereof,
provided such taxicab has been licensed continuously at all times since first licensed by the City. Any lapse in the taxicab licensing or transfer of
such vehicle to a different owner or entity shall automatically void this exemption to the taxicab vehicle age and usage limits.
B. Required Taxicab Inspections:
1. Quarterly: Every taxicab shall submit to a quarterly inspection to assess compliance with the standards and requirements contained in this article.
2. Pass Inspection: No vehicle shall be issued a taxicab vehicle license unless and until that vehicle has passed an inspection in accordance with the
standards and requirements contained in this article.
3. Nonconformance: In addition to all other prescribed penalties for violations of this article, any person who owns, leases or operates a taxicab that
does not conform to the minimum inspection standards and requirements set forth in this section shall be subject to immediate suspension or
revocation of the taxicab vehicle license held by that person.
4. Annual Inspection: Every taxicab placed in service or licensed after February 2, 2012, shall submit to and pass an annual inspection conducted by
the City. This annual inspection shall occur in lieu of one quarterly inspection required herein.
5. Time, Place Designated: All taxicab inspections, and all inspections of vehicles for which a taxicab vehicle license application has been filed, that are
conducted by the City, shall be made at the time and place designated by the Licensing Officer.
6. Penalty: A violation of any of the provisions of this subsection B shall be a misdemeanor, subject to penalty as provided in section 1-4-1 of this Code.
7. Standards And Requirements: To pass the quarterly and annual inspections required by this article, all taxicabs shall meet or exceed the following
standards and requirements, unless specifically provided otherwise within this article:
a. Tires:
(1) Tires shall not have cuts, breaks, gaps or show excessive or uneven wear.
(2) Tire wear bars shall not be showing.
(3) Tire tread depth shall be no less than two thirty-seconds (2/32) of an inch of an original tire.
(4) The vehicle shall have a spare tire that is fully inflated and meets the same requirements as tires installed on the vehicle.
(5) The vehicle shall have a jack or other device capable of lifting the vehicle to enable a tire to be changed.
(6) Tires shall all be of the same size and type (either radial or bias).
b. Body Condition:
(1) The vehicle body shall be in good condition, free of holes, excessive wear and torn metal.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 132/503
(2) A front and a rear bumper shall be firmly attached.
(3) The vehicle body shall be free of any unrepaired body damage.
(4) The vehicle shall be completely and properly painted in conformance with the color scheme required by this article and approved in advance by
the Licensing Officer.
c. Lights:
(1) Headlights shall be intact and operable on both high and low beam.
(2) Tail lights, parking lights, brake lights, top light and signal lights shall be intact and operable.
(3) An interior light capable of illuminating the interior shall be operable.
d. Windshield Wipers:
(1) All windshield wipers shall be operable.
(2) Windshield wiper blades shall be in good condition.
e. Brakes:
(1) Both the parking brake and all four (4) wheel brakes shall be operable and in good condition.
(2) All brake shoes and pads shall have a safe amount of wear remaining.
(3) Brake pedal travel shall not exceed two and one-half inches (21/2").
f. Steering:
(1) The steering system shall be in good mechanical order.
(2) All steering components shall meet the minimum specifications and standards set by the manufacturer.
g. Exhaust System:
(1) Mufflers shall not have any holes.
(2) Mufflers shall be firmly attached to the exhaust and tailpipes.
(3) Tailpipes shall extend beyond the passenger compartment, fully to the rear of the vehicle.
(4) All emission control devices shall be attached, and shall be in proper working order.
h. Windows:
(1) The windshield shall be completely free of cracks, and shall be free from chips or pitting that interferes with the driver's vision.
(2) Door windows shall be free of cracks and shall be operable as they were intended by the manufacturer.
i. Door Handles And Locks:
(1) All door handles and latches shall be operable from both the inside and outside of the vehicle.
(2) All door locks shall be operable by the passenger.
j. Seat Belts:
(1) The vehicle shall be equipped with sufficient operable seat belts to provide safety to each passenger.
(2) The seat belts shall comply with State law.
k. Suspension:
(1) There shall be no broken or weak springs.
(2) Shock absorbers shall not be weak or defective.
(3) All suspension components shall meet the minimum specifications and standards set by the manufacturer.
l. Appearance:
(1) The engine compartment shall be kept reasonably clean and free of uncontained combustible material.
(2) The exterior shall be kept clean and well maintained.
(3) The interior shall be kept clean and free of garbage.
(4) The seats and upholstery shall be kept clean and free of holes and tears.
(5) The vehicle shall be kept free from dirt, grime and stains.
(6) No vehicle shall have floor covering, headliner or upholstery that is worn through or torn.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 133/503
(7) No vehicle shall have unauthorized signs, markings or stickers affixed thereto.
(8) Every wheel shall be covered by a matching hubcap, where there is a place for such hubcap.
(9) Every taxicab shall be maintained free of noxious, unhealthy or unpleasant odors, fumes, stenches and smells, including, but not limited to,
urine, feces, smoke, fuel or vomit.
(10) Smoking within a taxicab shall be strictly prohibited as set forth in subsection 5-11-8O of this Code.
8. Emission Standards: Every taxicab shall comply with Ada County Motor Vehicle Emissions Standards and Regulations, regardless of where the
vehicle itself is registered, and shall have a valid certificate of compliance, in addition to the inspection requirements listed above.
9. Performance Of Inspections:
a. When Performed: All inspections required by this section shall be performed prior to the issuance or renewal of a taxicab vehicle license, and
every calendar quarter thereafter.
b. Designation Of Color: The Licensing Officer will designate each taxicab with a color, based upon the month of the taxicab's first inspection:
Color Month Of Taxicab's First Inspection
Green January, April, July or October
Blue February, May, August or November
Orange March, June, September or December
c. Inspection Based On Color: Each taxicab shall be inspected once per calendar quarter, in the month matching the vehicle's designated color, as
shown in the following calendar:
First Quarter
January - Green February - Blue March - Orange
Second Quarter
April - Green May - Blue June - Orange
Third Quarter
July - Green August - Blue September - Orange
Fourth Quarter
October - Green November - Blue December - Orange
10. Rules, Guidelines For Inspections: The Licensing Officer is authorized to establish additional rules and guidelines governing the timing of, and
scheduling procedure for, quarterly and annual taxicab inspections.
11. Additional Inspections: The Licensing Officer may, upon determining the existence of good cause therefor, require any taxicab vehicle applicant or
licensee to submit any taxicab vehicle to an additional inspection.
12. Maintenance Required: Every requirement of this section shall be maintained throughout the inspection quarter, and throughout the term of the
taxicab vehicle license.
13. Inspections Of Vehicles Seven Years Of Age Or Older; Additional Standards And Requirements:
a. Quarterly: Quarterly inspections of all vehicles seven (7) years of age or older shall be completed using inspection standards and requirements
that are more stringent than those set forth herein.
b. Standards, Requirements Established: The inspection standards and requirements for taxicabs seven (7) years of age or older shall be
established and promulgated by the Licensing Officer, in consultation and collaboration with the City shop.
14. Inspection Fees:
a. Required: Every initial quarterly vehicle inspection shall be accompanied by a fee in an amount established by the City Council and listed on the
most current City Clerk license fee schedule.
b. Nonrefundable: All fees are nonrefundable and shall be collected in advance of the inspection.
c. Reinspection: If any inspection results in the need for reinspection of the vehicle, a reinspection fee in an amount established by the City Council
and listed on the most current City Clerk license fee schedule shall be charged.
d. Additional Fee: If any reinspection requires elevation of the vehicle or any reinspection of the taximeter, an additional fee in an amount established
by the City Council and listed on the most current City Clerk license fee schedule shall be charged.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 134/503
15. Approved Inspection Locations:
a. Review, Approve: The Licensing Officer shall review and approve persons that inspect taxicabs pursuant to the requirements of this article.
b. Persons Approved: All inspections required by this article shall be performed by persons approved to conduct such inspections.
c. Conflicts: No person related to or affiliated with the taxicab owner or operator, or related to or affiliated with the taxicab business licensee, shall be
approved to inspect taxicabs pursuant to this article.
C. Taxicab Inspection Decal:
1. Issued: Upon passing the initial or the first quarter inspection required by this article, a taxicab shall be issued two (2) identical inspection decals by
the Licensing Officer.
2. Design, Color, Type: The design, color and type of inspection decal will be determined by the Licensing Officer, with the color of the inspection decal
changing annually.
3. Affix: The Licensing Officer shall affix the inspection decals to the taxicab, with one inspection decal affixed on each side of the taxicab.
4. Nontransferable: Inspection decals shall not be transferable, and shall be affixed or removed only by the Licensing Officer.
D. Approved Color Scheme, Name, Trade Name And License Number:
1. Submission For Approval: Every owner of a taxicab or fleet of taxicabs shall submit a distinctive and uniform color scheme to the Licensing Officer
for approval at the time of making application for a taxicab vehicle license pursuant to this article.
2. Conflicts: No color scheme shall be approved that directly conflicts with an approved color scheme, monogram, trade name, design or insignia that is
already in use on another licensed taxicab.
3. Content On Outside Of Vehicle: Every taxicab shall have, on both sides and on the rear of the vehicle, either painted upon it or permanently affixed
to it by means of a plate or other device approved by the Licensing Officer:
a. Trade Name: The trade name under which the taxicab is operated;
b. License Number: The taxicab vehicle license number; and
c. Telephone Number: The telephone number by which the Licensing Officer or a member of the public will have the ability to contact the licensee.
4. Lettering: All lettering required to be affixed to the exterior of a taxicab shall be at least two inches (2") in height, and shall be of a color that is in clear
contrast to the dominant color of the color scheme.
5. New, Additional Vehicles: New, additional or repainted vehicles owned or operated by the same person shall conform to the same color scheme
approved for that person's taxicabs, and all vehicles owned or operated by the same person shall display the same approved color scheme design,
and trade name. All new, additional or repainted vehicles shall be subject to all inspection and approval requirements set forth in this article.
6. Operating As Other Than Taxicab: No vehicle that bears a taxicab color scheme, has a taxicab top light permanently affixed, is licensed as a taxicab
or holds itself out to be a taxicab, regardless of license status, shall be operated as other than a taxicab, unless:
a. Top Light Covered: The taxicab top light is completely and securely covered in such a way that it is not visible; and
b. Logos, Trade Names Covered: All taxicab logos and trade names visible to the exterior of the vehicle are completely and securely covered, such
that they are not visible; and
c. Approval Of Covering Devices: All covering devices used to comply with this subsection shall be approved by the Licensing Officer prior to use on
the taxicab.
7. Unapproved Stickers, Signs: No taxicab shall have affixed to it any unapproved or unauthorized sticker, sign, banner or magnet.
8. Penalty: A violation of any of the provisions of this subsection D shall be an infraction, subject to penalty as provided in section 1-4-2 of this Code.
E. Taximeters:
1. Required: Every taxicab shall be equipped with, and have permanently attached thereto, a taximeter that automatically registers the amount of the
fare charged. Every fare shall be:
a. Miles Traveled: Automatically computed and registered in proportion to the miles traveled by the taxicab; or
b. Combination Of Miles, Time: Automatically computed and registered by a combination of miles traveled and time elapsed.
2. Installation; Display: Every taximeter shall be installed so the taximeter and the amount of fare displayed thereon shall be plainly visible to the
passengers riding in the taxicab.
3. Illumination: The face of every taximeter shall be illuminated by a suitable light, or shall bear letters and numbers that are sufficiently backlit, to be
plainly visible to a passenger seated in the rear seat.
4. Connection, Operation: Every taximeter shall be connected to and operate from a wheel or from the transmission of the motor of the taxicab.
5. Calibration, Inspection, Testing: The taximeter shall be calibrated, inspected and tested for each rate or fare required and set by this article, and the
taximeter case shall be sealed by the City shop or such other person designated by the Licensing Officer.
6. Conflicts: No person related to or affiliated with the taxicab owner or operator, or related to or affiliated with the taxicab business licensee, shall
calibrate, inspect, test or seal any taximeter.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 135/503
7. Requirement Of Owner: It shall be the duty of the owner of the taxicab to have the taximeter inspected and approved as required by this article.
F. Top Light ("For Hire" Signal):
1. Required: Every taxicab shall be equipped with a top light, which shall be connected to and activated by the taximeter to denote whether or not such
taxicab is available for hire.
2. Illumination While Carrying Passengers Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any taxicab driver, while carrying passengers or while under employment,
to illuminate a top light.
3. Requirements: Every top light shall be:
a. Permanent: Permanently affixed to the roof of the taxicab.
b. Color: White or yellow, and emit only white or yellow light.
c. Daylight: Visibility: Clearly visible during daylight hours from a distance of at least one hundred fifty feet (150').
d. Night Visibility: Clearly visible at night, when illuminated, from a distance of at least three hundred feet (300').
4. Penalty: A violation of any of the provisions of this subsection F shall be an infraction, subject to penalty as provided in section 1-4-2 of this Code.
(1952 Code § 5-24-10; amd. 2019 Code)
3-13A-13: IMMEDIATE OUT-OF-SERVICE:
A. Notification: Subject to a right of review, every taxicab owner or operator shall remove any taxicab from operation or service immediately upon
notification from the Licensing Officer that the taxicab qualifies for "immediate out-of-service" designation.
B. Conditions: A taxicab qualifies for "immediate out-of-service" designation when any of the following conditions are present:
1. The vehicle is found to be in an unsafe operating condition.
2. Noncompliance with this article, that poses a clear and immediate threat to the health, safety and welfare of the public.
3. A notice of violation or infraction citation was issued for vehicle or equipment defect or condition, with due notice given to correct the defect,
deficiency or condition, and the defect, deficiency or condition was not corrected within the time period stated on the notice of violation or infraction
citation.
4. The vehicle has not passed an inspection required by this article.
5. The vehicle does not contain proof of valid insurance of the type and in the amount required by this article.
C. Operation Prohibited: A taxicab designated "immediate out-of-service" bearing such notification or decals shall not be operated, except as may be
necessary to return the taxicab to the residence or place of business of the owner or operator, or to a garage or repair facility, until the taxicab has been
deemed to be in conformance with all requirements of this article.
D. Reinspection; Fee: Every taxicab designated "immediate out-of-service" shall be reinspected and cleared by the Licensing Officer prior to returning to
service or operation. A reinstatement fee in an amount established by the City Council and listed on the most current City Clerk license fee schedule
shall be required prior to the taxicab being placed back in service. (1952 Code § 5-24-11; amd. 2019 Code)
3-13A-14: RATES AND FARES:
A. Schedule: Every taximeter shall be set and calibrated such that the rate or fare shall not exceed those set forth in the following schedule:
1. An initial charge of two dollars ($2.00) for which one or two (2) passengers shall be entitled to transportation for a distance of one-twelfth (1/12) of a
mile or a waiting time not to exceed two (2) minutes. The initial charge (drop charge) may be increased by twenty cents ($0.20) per trip when the
average self-service pump price of leaded/unleaded gasoline exceeds one dollar ($1.00) per gallon in the City and increased by twenty cents ($0.20)
for every one dollar ($1.00) increase per gallon thereafter. That price shall be established as follows: The Oil Price Information Service (OPIS) price
plus current State and Federal Taxes plus ten cents ($0.10).
2. Subsequent to the initial charge, the rate of fare shall not exceed two dollars forty cents ($2.40) per mile, or fraction thereof, and forty cents ($0.40)
for each minute, or fraction thereof, waiting time.
3. The rates or fares provided in subsections A1 and A2 of this section are the totals to be charged for one or two (2) passengers. There shall be an
additional charge not to exceed one dollar ($1.00) for each additional passenger over two (2).
4. Whenever a taxicab is engaged or hired solely on an hourly basis for use within the corporate limits of the City, the fare shall not exceed the rate of
thirty dollars ($30.00) per hour, regardless of the number of passengers.
5. Whenever a taxicab is engaged or hired, each passenger shall be entitled to have conveyed, without charge, two (2) items of luggage, which may be
valises, suitcases, bags or similar items, and shall be entitled, if the size and capacity of the taxicab is sufficient, to have additional items of luggage
carried at a charge not to exceed fifty cents ($0.50) for each item of luggage in excess of two (2) per person. A mobility device used by a disabled
person shall not be considered a luggage item, and shall be conveyed without cost.
6. No charge for waiting time shall be assessed for time lost or used on account of inefficiency of the taxicab or taxicab driver, operation of the taxicab,
or the taxicab's premature arrival in response to a call for service.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 136/503
7. Charges for passengers other than those first employing the taxicab shall be as follows:
a. If the destination of the additional passenger is the same as the original passenger, one dollar ($1.00) for each additional passenger and fifty cents
($0.50) for each item of luggage.
b. If the destination of the additional passenger is beyond the destination of the original passenger, upon discharge of the original passenger, the
meter shall be reset and charges shall be assessed at the rates provided in this section.
c. If the destination of the additional passenger is before the destination of the original passenger, the additional passenger shall be charged the fare
on the meter at their destination. Upon discharge of the additional passenger, the meter shall be reset and the original passenger shall be charged
the rates provided in this section from that point to their destination.
8. As established by section 8-3B-7 of this Code, taxicabs operating at the Boise Airport shall be authorized to charge an additional one dollar fifty
cents ($1.50) from each person engaging or hiring the taxicab at the Boise Airport for transportation to a destination off Boise Airport grounds to
offset the fee for use of the taxicab loading area established in section 8-3B-5 of this Code.
B. Receipt: Whenever requested by a passenger or customer, a taxicab driver shall be able to provide a receipt that includes the following:
1. Each rate, fare and charge incurred by the taxicab customer; and
2. The name, address and telephone number of the taxicab company; and
3. The number of the taxicab vehicle license; and
4. The name of the taxicab driver; and
5. The date and time of the fare.
C. Review, Adjustment: There may be, at the discretion of the City Council, a review and adjustment of taxicab rates on or about June 30 of each year.
This review and adjustment shall be based on changes in the Producer Price Index for the following specified categories: insurance, mechanics,
automobile parts, tires, and dispatch or communication devices. The base index for this adjustment shall be March, 1993.
D. Assisting Disabled Persons: No taxicab driver shall charge any additional fare or fee for assisting a person with a disability with the stowing of a mobility
device or for conveying any mobility device used by a person with a disability.
E. Service Animals: No taxicab driver shall charge any additional fare or fee for conveying or transporting a service animal. (1952 Code § 5-24-12; amd.
Ord. 50-13, 1-7-2014; 2019 Code)
3-13A-15: DAILY RECORD:
A. Required: All taxicab drivers shall keep and maintain a written daily record of all calls made and passengers transported.
B. Information Included: Every daily record shall include, at a minimum:
1. The time and place at which the passenger was picked up.
2. The time and place at which the passenger was dropped off.
3. The number of passengers transported during each trip.
C. Time To Retain: Every daily record shall be kept and maintained by the driver of the taxicab for at least six (6) months.
D. Availability For Inspection: Every daily record shall be made immediately available for inspection at any time upon request of the Licensing Officer or
any law enforcement officer.
E. Penalty: A violation of any of the provisions of this section shall be an infraction, subject to penalty as provided in section 1-4-2 of this Code. (1952
Code § 5-24-14; amd. 2019 Code)
3-13A-16: TAXICAB STANDS:
A. Established: The Licensing Officer, with the consent of the City Parking Services Office, is hereby authorized and empowered to establish open stands
in such places upon the streets of the City as may be deemed necessary for the use of taxicabs and the convenience of the general public.
B. Responsibility Of Parking Services Office: The City Parking Services Office shall:
1. Work with the Licensing Officer to determine the number, location and hours of taxicab stands in the City.
2. Prescribe the dimensions of every taxicab stand.
3. Set the maximum number of taxicabs that may occupy each taxicab stand.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 137/503
C. Exceeding Number Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any taxicab driver to exceed the maximum number of taxicabs that may occupy a taxicab stand.
D. Use By Other Than Taxicab Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any person, vehicle, motorcycle or other means of conveyance other than a licensed
taxicab to use or occupy any taxicab stand.
E. Penalty: A violation of any of the provisions of this section shall be an infraction, subject to penalty as provided in section 1-4-2 of this Code. (1952
Code § 5-24-14; amd. 2019 Code)
3-13A-17: NO PICK UP/DROP OFF ZONES:
A. Designated: To ensure the public safety of pedestrians, taxicab customers, passengers and regular vehicular traffic, the following streets, roads and
areas are designated "no pick up/drop off zones" from nine o'clock (9:00) P.M. until five o'clock (5:00) A.M., seven (7) days per week:
1. On Main Street between Capitol Boulevard and 5th Street.
2. On 6th Street between Main Street and Grove Street.
B. No Drop Off/Pick Up Within Zone: Taxicabs shall not drop off or pick up any passenger(s) within a no pick up/drop off zone.
C. Occupancy Prohibited: Taxicabs shall not occupy, even temporarily, for any purpose, any designated on street parking space within a no pick up/drop
off zone.
D. Use Of Nearest Stand Outside Zone: Taxicabs shall utilize the nearest taxicab stand outside the no pick up/drop off zones to pick up or drop off
passengers.
E. Standing, Parking Prohibited; Exception: No taxicab shall stand or park at any place on any road, street or highway within a no pick up/drop off zone, or
in any alley accessible from within a no pick up/drop off zone, except as directed or required by an official traffic sign, official traffic signal or peace
officer. (1952 Code § 5-24-15; amd. 2019 Code)
3-13A-18: TAXICAB DRIVER DRESS CODE:
A. Conformance: Every taxicab driver shall conform to the dress code established by the Licensing Officer.
B. Minimum Dress Code: The dress code shall include, at a minimum:
1. Every taxicab driver shall wear a shirt with a collar, either long sleeved or short sleeved. Tank tops are not acceptable.
2. Every taxicab driver shall wear pants, shorts, a skirt or a dress. Cutoff shorts are not acceptable.
3. Every taxicab driver shall wear shoes. Sandals or "flip-flop" type footwear is not acceptable.
4. All clothing and shoes must be clean, without holes, with no visible rips or tears.
5. Hair, beards and moustaches shall be kept clean and neatly trimmed.
C. Penalty: A violation of any of the provisions of this section shall be an infraction, subject to penalty as provided in section 1-4-2 of this Code. (1952
Code § 5-24-16)
3-13A-19: ILLEGAL ACTS:
In addition to the unlawful practices and illegal acts and omissions proscribed throughout this article, each of the following acts or omissions shall be
unlawful:
A. Licenses Required:
1. Every person who drives, operates or is in actual physical control of a taxicab within the City shall be in actual possession of all required licenses, all
of which shall be posted, as required by this article.
2. No person shall drive or operate, or permit to be driven or operated, or participate in the driving or operation of a taxicab within the City, unless
pursuant to a valid taxicab business license.
3. No person shall drive or operate, or permit to be driven or operated, or participate in the driving or operation of a taxicab within the City, unless
pursuant to a valid and vehicle specific taxicab vehicle license.
4. No person shall drive, operate or be in actual physical control of a taxicab within the City unless that person is a licensee in possession of a valid
taxicab driver's license.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 138/503
5. No person owning, leasing, operating or otherwise in control of a taxicab business or vehicle shall employ or contract with a taxicab driver unless
such driver is licensed as required by this article.
B. Licenses; Generally:
1. All licenses issued pursuant to this article shall remain the property of the City, and shall be surrendered to the Licensing Officer within seventy two
(72) hours of suspension, revocation, or expiration thereof, or upon demand by the Licensing Officer.
2. No person shall have in their possession any license issued pursuant to this article that has been suspended, revoked or that has expired.
3. Every applicant and licensee shall notify the Licensing Officer in writing within two (2) business days upon the change of any of the information
provided by the applicant or licensee in the license application submitted to the Licensing Officer.
4. Every applicant and licensee shall notify the Licensing Officer in writing within two (2) business days in the event the applicant or licensee loses any
qualification, or gains any disqualification, for licensure pursuant to this article.
5. Every person driving, operating or in charge of a taxicab shall have all required licenses posted in the taxicab at all times the licensee is driving,
operating or in charge of the taxicab. All licenses shall be posted in full and clear view of any passenger in the rear seat of the taxicab.
6. Every licensee, upon request or demand of the Licensing Officer, a peace officer, or a passenger or potential passenger, shall immediately present
all required licenses for inspection.
7. No licensee shall permit or allow the use or possession of that person's license by any other person.
8. No licensee shall permit or allow any unlicensed person to operate or drive a taxicab.
9. No licensee whose license was issued with limitations, restrictions or conditions shall fail to obey and adhere to the prescribed limitations, restrictions
or conditions.
10. No person with any license issued pursuant to this article that has expired or has been suspended or revoked shall operate any taxicab. Any
operation of a taxicab during the period of suspension or following a license revocation or expiration shall be deemed a separate offense for each
day on which the taxicab is illegally operated.
C. Insurance Required:
1. A certificate or proof of liability insurance of the type and in the amount required by this article shall be tendered to the Licensing Officer prior to
operation of the covered taxicab.
2. The owner and the driver of a taxicab shall ensure that the proof of liability insurance of the type and in the amount required by this article is carried
in the taxicab covered by the insurance and shall be immediately provided for inspection upon request of the Licensing Officer.
3. No person shall fail to notify the Licensing Officer in writing within two (2) business days of any change to or cancellation of any policy of insurance
covering any taxicab under that person's ownership, care or control.
D. Inspection And Safety:
1. No person shall operate any vehicle as a taxicab unless and until said vehicle has passed all inspections required by this article and has valid
inspection decals affixed thereto as required by this article.
2. No person shall fail to present a taxicab under their ownership, care, control or operation for a scheduled inspection to be conducted by the City at
the time and place designated by the Licensing Officer.
3. Every taxicab owner or operator shall make any taxicab under their ownership, care, control or operation immediately available for inspection at any
time upon reasonable notice from the Licensing Officer.
4. No person shall substitute vehicle equipment or parts subsequent to inspection unless such substituted equipment or parts are in equal or better
condition than the equipment or parts being replaced.
5. No person shall operate any taxicab that does not have two (2) valid inspection decals affixed thereto.
6. No person, other than the Licensing Officer, shall affix, remove, destroy or deface any inspection decal.
7. Every taxicab owner or operator shall notify the Licensing Officer in writing within two (2) business days of the removal, destruction or defacement,
other than by the Licensing Officer, of any inspection decal affixed to a taxicab within his or her ownership, care or control.
8. No person shall operate any taxicab in excess of the vehicle age and use limits set forth in this article, unless pursuant to an exemption authorized
by this article and approved by the Licensing Officer.
9. Every taxicab owner, operator and licensee shall ensure that every taxicab under his/her ownership, care or control conforms with all safety and
inspection requirements set forth in this article at all times the taxicab is in operation.
10. Every person who operates a classic, vintage or antique vehicle as a taxicab shall comply with all conditions and restrictions placed on operation of
the vehicle by the Licensing Officer. A violation of this subsection is an infraction, subject to penalty as provided in section 1-4-2 of this Code.
E. Immediate Out-Of-Service:
1. Every vehicle designated "immediate out-of-service" shall be removed from operation or service at the time notice of the "immediate out-of-service"
designation is given, and shall not return to service or operation until inspected and cleared, in writing, by the Licensing Officer.
2. It shall be unlawful for any person to drive, operate or permit or allow the operation of any taxicab designated "immediate out-of-service".
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 139/503
3. No person, other than the Licensing Officer, shall affix, remove, destroy, or deface any "immediate out-of-service" decal.
F. Taximeter:
1. It shall be unlawful for any person to drive, operate or permit or allow the operation of a taxicab in the City unless such taxicab is equipped with a
taximeter that meets all requirements of this article.
2. It shall be unlawful for any person to tamper with or alter any gear, wheel or other part of a taxicab or taximeter that would alter, or cause the
alteration of, the rates set forth in this article.
3. It shall be unlawful to change any taximeter from one taxicab to another unless such taximeter is reinspected, tested and resealed, as required
herein.
4. No person shall drive, operate or permit the operation of any taxicab having an unsealed taximeter, or having a taximeter that does not have its
cover and all gears intact.
5. No person shall drive, operate or permit the operation of any taxicab with a taximeter having or containing an unauthorized rate or fare.
G. Rates And Fares:
1. Unlawful To Increase Charge: Except as otherwise provided in this article, it shall be unlawful for any person to charge, demand, collect or receive
any rate, fare or charge that is greater than one directly based on, measured and computed by, and displayed upon an inspected, approved and
sealed taximeter.
2. Not In Compliance With Rate/Fare Schedule: It shall be unlawful for any licensee to engage any rate or fare on a taximeter that is not in compliance
with the schedule set forth in this article.
3. Compliance With Rate Schedule: No taxicab rate, fare or other fee shall be charged by any person unless it complies with the schedule set forth in
this article.
4. Current Rates Posted: Every taxicab shall have posted, in a conspicuous place visible to all passengers, the current rate card or sticker furnished by
the Licensing Officer.
5. Taximeter Activated: The taximeter shall be activated and used in all cases where the taxicab is employed to carry or convey a passenger or
passengers.
6. Most Direct Route: Unless specifically directed by the passenger, it shall be unlawful for any taxicab driver or operator to fail to use the most direct
route possible to a stated destination.
a. For purposes of this subsection, "most direct route possible" shall mean the shortest geographical distance between the point at which the taxicab
was hired and the passenger's stated destination.
b. For example, any taxicab driver who conveys a passenger from the airport into downtown Boise via I-184 ("the connector"), unless specifically
directed by the passenger to do so, shall be in violation of this section.
7. Receipt Provided: Every driver of a taxicab shall provide a receipt that includes, at a minimum, the following information:
a. The rate, fare and charge incurred by the taxicab customer; and
b. The name, address and telephone number of the taxicab company; and
c. The correct date and time of the fare.
8. Exact Change Provided: Every taxicab driver shall provide exact change upon payment of a fare, unless directed otherwise by the customer.
9. Credit And Debit Cards:
a. Every taxicab and taxicab driver must have the ability to lawfully accept debit and credit cards at the time the taxi ride is complete and before the
customer exits the taxicab, and shall do so only with a verified merchant account that is unique to their taxicab business. No driver shall copy, write
down or record, outside of the lawful use of a credit card reader, a customer's credit card number, expiration date or security code.
b. Except as otherwise provided herein, upon a customer's presentation of a credit or debit card as their chosen method of payment, the taxicab
driver shall immediately process the transaction electronically in the presence of the customer.
c. A credit or debit card transaction may be processed manually (nonelectronically) during brief periods of time when the electronic credit and debit
card processing system is inoperable through no fault of the taxicab company or driver, if all of the following conditions are met:
(1) The taxicab driver shall notify the Licensing Officer within twenty four (24) hours of manually processing a credit or debit card transaction;
(2) The charge shall be submitted for payment within twenty four (24) hours of manually processing a credit or debit card transaction utilizing such
taxicab business's verified merchant account;
(3) Personal information safety control measures, protecting the customer's personal and financial information, are followed; and
(4) In the event a taxicab's electronic credit and debit card processing system is inoperable for longer than twenty four (24) consecutive hours, that
taxicab shall not be operated as a taxicab until the processing system is returned to full operation.
10. No Minimum Fare: No taxicab shall have a "minimum fare requirement" for payment by credit card.
11. Fare/Charge Paid When Hired: Every person who hires or employs a taxicab shall pay the fare or charge for the taxicab service provided.
H. Top Light:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 140/503
1. Every taxicab shall be equipped with a top light, which shall be connected to and activated by the taximeter to denote whether or not the taxicab is
available for hire.
2. Every top light shall meet all requirements and specifications contained in this article.
3. No taxicab driver, while carrying any passenger or while hired or under employment, shall illuminate a top light.
I. Color Scheme; Design:
1. No person shall operate a taxicab bearing an unapproved color scheme or a color scheme that does not comply with the requirements of this article.
2. Once a color scheme is approved, no person shall modify, alter or change any element of the approved color scheme without prior written approval
of the Licensing Officer.
3. No person shall drive or operate a taxicab unless the taxicab has, on both sides and on the rear of the vehicle, each of the following either painted
upon it or permanently affixed to it by means of a plate or other device approved by the Licensing Officer, with letters of at least two inches (2") in
height:
a. The trade name under which the taxicab is operated;
b. The taxicab vehicle license number of the taxicab; and
c. The telephone number by which the owner, lessee, driver or operator of the taxicab can be reached.
4. No person shall operate a taxicab bearing or having attached to it any unauthorized sticker, sign, banner or magnet.
5. No person shall operate a taxicab vehicle licensed pursuant to this article as anything other than a taxicab, unless the top light, all logos, and all
instances of the taxicab trade name on the vehicle are completely covered by approved means, as required by this article.
J. No Pick Up/Drop Off Zones:
1. Taxicabs shall not drop off or pick up any passengers within a designated no pick up/drop off zone.
2. Taxicabs shall not occupy, even temporarily or momentarily, for any purpose, any on street parking space within a designated no pick up/drop off
zone.
3. No taxicab shall stop, wait, stand or park at any place on a road, street, highway or alley within a designated no pick up/drop off zone, other than as
directed or required by a traffic sign, traffic signal or peace officer.
4. A violation of any of the provisions of this subsection J shall be an infraction, subject to penalty as provided in section 1-4-2 of this Code.
K. Ability To Contact:
1. Every applicant and licensee shall maintain a current, valid telephone number, which shall be answered by the licensee during the hours any taxicab
operated by the licensee or pursuant to the licensee's taxicab business license is in operation.
2. This telephone number shall be provided to the Licensing Officer, and shall be updated in writing by the applicant or licensee within two (2) days of
any change.
3. The telephone number may be answered by a voicemail system, answering service or competent person who takes a message; provided, that the
licensee shall return every message left by the Licensing Officer within twenty four (24) hours of the time such message is left.
L. Other Unlawful Practices:
1. No person shall ride on the fenders, hood or any place on the outside of a taxicab, or permit or allow any person to do so.
2. No taxicab driver shall carry or transport any person other than those who first hired or employed the taxicab unless the person or persons who first
hired or employed the taxicab expressly consent to the acceptance of additional passenger or passengers.
3. No taxicab driver shall carry more passengers in a taxicab than the rated seating capacity of the taxicab.
4. No taxicab driver shall refuse or neglect to convey, on public roads or private roads open to the public, any orderly person or persons, unless
previously hired or employed. Every driver shall have the right to demand payment of a fare in advance if he/she has reasonable grounds to believe
that the fare will not be paid at the completion of the trip.
5. No taxicab owner, driver or operator shall attempt to divert patronage from one business entity or person to another.
6. No taxicab owner, driver or operator shall violate any law, rule or airport management practice concerning the conduct of persons owning, operating
or having charge of taxicabs on or about airport premises.
7. No licensee shall solicit any person, or assist in the solicitation of any person, to participate in any illegal, illicit, immoral, fraudulent or unlawful act.
8. No licensee shall engage in any unfair or deceptive act or practice.
9. Every taxicab driver shall keep and maintain a daily record, as required by this article.
10. Every taxicab driver, upon request or demand of the Licensing Officer or a law enforcement officer, shall make the required daily record available
for inspection.
11. No person shall park a taxicab upon any street, alley or public place in the City where the time for parking is restricted, except in a designated stand
or during the time necessary for receiving and discharging passengers at the curb.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 141/503
12. No person or vehicle, other than a taxicab licensed pursuant to this article, shall occupy or use any taxicab stand.
13. Except as specifically authorized by this article, no person shall mark out, extend or designate any taxicab stand.
14. No taxicab driver shall exceed the maximum number of taxicabs allowed to occupy a taxicab stand.
15. No person shall operate or drive a taxicab while consuming, or affected in any way by, any alcoholic beverage, illegal drug, legally prescribed drug,
or "over the counter" drug that may impair or affect the ability to operate a motor vehicle in a safe manner. For the purposes of this subsection, any
drug for which a warning, precaution, adverse event or side effect indicating that the drug may impair alertness, motor coordination, mental or
physical alertness or abilities, light headedness, dizziness, sedation or similar effect is required by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) to be
printed on the label shall be considered "a drug that may impair or affect the ability to operate a motor vehicle in a safe manner".
16. Every taxicab driver shall retain all lost or unclaimed property for a minimum of thirty (30) days, and upon claim by a passenger, shall transfer such
property back to the rightful owner.
17. No person shall consume any beer, wine, alcohol beverage, liquor, tobacco or tobacco product, or illegal drug in a taxicab.
18. Taxicab drivers, while driving, operating or otherwise in actual physical control of a taxicab, are prohibited from having any beer, wine, alcohol
beverage or liquor in their possession, on their person or within their control.
19. No taxicab driver shall purchase and transport any beer, wine, alcohol beverage, liquor, or tobacco or tobacco product at the request or direction of
any other person for transport or delivery to that person or any other person.
20. No person shall aggressively solicit any other person to engage or hire a particular taxicab that is waiting in a taxicab stand or line.
21. No person shall fail to fully comply with every provision of this article.
22. No taxicab driver shall discriminate against a person with a disability. Discrimination may include, but is not limited to:
a. Refusing to provide taxicab service to a person with a disability; or
b. Refusing to assist with the stowing of any mobility device when the taxicab driver is physically able to assist; or
c. Refusing to transport a service animal; or
d. Charging a higher fare or an additional fee for providing taxicab service to a person with a disability. (1952 Code § 5-24-17; amd. Ord. 50-13, 1-7-
2014; 2019 Code)
3-13A-20: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
A. Violations: Unless otherwise specifically indicated herein, every violation of the provisions of this article shall be a misdemeanor.
B. Misdemeanor Penalty: Every misdemeanor violation of the provisions of this article shall be punishable as provided in section 1-4-1 of this Code.
C. Infraction Penalty: Every violation of this article specifically identified as an infraction shall be subject to penalty as provided in section 1-4-2 of this
Code, exclusive of court costs and fees. There shall be no right to a trial by jury of an infraction citation or complaint. Trials of infraction charges shall
be before the court without a jury. (1952 Code § 5-24-18; amd. 2019 Code)
ARTICLE B. COMMERCIAL TRANSPORTATION VEHICLES
3-13B-1: STATEMENT OF PURPOSE AND FINDINGS:
The Council finds that the public health, safety and welfare requires safe vehicles, trustworthy drivers and insurance on vehicles. The public is justifiably
concerned about, and requires protection from, pricing that is arbitrary, unfair or imposed under inequality of bargaining power or duress. The Council
further finds that opportunities for passenger transport within the City are increasing, and hereby declares that commercial ventures attempting to enter
this market should not be restrained or overregulated, except to afford basic protections to the public and ensure a level playing field with respect to
government regulation. (1952 Code § 5-03-01)
3-13B-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and derivations shall have the meanings given herein. When not inconsistent with the
context, words used in the present tense include the future tense, words in the plural number include the singular number, and words in the singular
number include the plural number. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory. Words used throughout this chapter, but not defined
herein or in chapter 1, article A of this title, shall have their plain, ordinary and common meaning. Words in any gender shall apply to the feminine,
masculine and neuter genders.
APPLICANT: A person making an application for a license, or the renewal thereof, to own, lease, use, operate, drive or maintain a commercial
transportation vehicle.
AUTO TRANSPORTATION SERVICE: Any business operating one or more commercial transportation vehicles for hire by prearranged appointment only,
at hourly, daily or weekly rates, or as agreed upon by the passenger and business, and which is conducted or maintained for the purpose of providing
transportation with services carrying passengers for hire, and which transports passengers between points and over such routes as may be directed by a
passenger, and not on a regular route.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 142/503
BUS: A motor vehicle used for the purpose of transporting people with a minimum capacity of sixteen (16) passengers which is hired to provide services
for a passenger or group of passengers traveling from one location to another for a common purpose, or which provides regular route service from one
location to another and which is subject to the Federal Motor Carrier Safety Regulations under the jurisdiction of the Idaho State Police and Idaho
Transportation Department.
COMMERCIAL TRANSPORTATION SERVICE BUSINESS LICENSE: A license to engage in a business operating one or more commercial transportation
vehicles for the purpose of an auto transportation service, limousine service, shuttle service, touring vehicle service, or any other service for the purpose of
transporting passengers between specified points on either a regular route or at the direction of the passenger at fares agreed upon by the passenger and
business. Such a service does not include taxicabs which are regulated separately under article A of this chapter. Such service does not include a "bus" or
"courtesy vehicle service", as defined in this section.
COMMERCIAL TRANSPORTATION SERVICE DRIVER'S LICENSE: A license to drive, operate or have charge of a commercial transportation vehicle
pursuant to, and in conjunction with, a valid commercial transportation service business license.
COMMERCIAL TRANSPORTATION VEHICLE: Any vehicle, powered by gasoline engine, electric motor, horse drawn, human powered, or by any other
means, used to transport passengers for hire or any other consideration. This definition includes vehicles used by an auto transportation service, limousine
service, touring vehicle service, shuttle service, pedicabs, rickshaw, and any other vehicle other than taxicabs, buses and those operated by a courtesy
vehicle service which transports passengers. This definition does not include the use of taxicabs operated pursuant to article A of this chapter, buses,
courtesy vehicle service vehicles, or vehicles operated as part of a governmentally sponsored program. A commercial transportation vehicle shall only be
operated by a driver possessing a commercial transportation service driver's license pursuant to a commercial transportation service business license.
COURTESY VEHICLE SERVICE: Any service operating one or more commercial transportation vehicles on behalf of a business, such as a hotel,
convention center or other business entity, for the purpose of transporting passengers who are patronizing that business, to or from the business. Such
vehicles are not for hire by the general public at any time, and shall be clearly marked with the business name or logo, owned by, leased by or contracted
for by the business, and exclusively dedicated to serve the business and patrons of the business, at no charge to the patron. Courtesy vehicles may not
provide transportation to any passenger for a charge. Tips or gratuities may be offered to the driver at the conclusion of the service, at the sole discretion
of the passenger, but may not be solicited or negotiated by the driver at any time.
DRIVER: Any person who drives or who is in actual physical control of any commercial transportation vehicle. "Actual physical control", as used in this
article, shall be defined as being in the driver's position of the commercial transportation vehicle with the motor running or, if no motor exists in the vehicle,
with the vehicle moving.
FARE: Money or other value given in exchange for transporting a person or passenger pursuant to a commercial transportation business license, based
upon agreement between the passenger and business.
LICENSING OFFICE: The City Clerk or his/her designee.
LIMOUSINE SERVICE: Any business operating one or more commercial transportation vehicles for hire by prearranged appointment only, at hourly, daily
or weekly rates as agreed upon between the passenger and business, which is conducted or maintained for the purpose of providing luxury transportation
with services carrying passengers for hire, and which transports passengers between points and over such routes as may be directed by a passenger, and
not on a fixed route. Such vehicles include, but are not limited to, limousines, luxury town cars, "party buses" and stretch sport utility vehicles.
PERSON: Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or any organization of any kind.
PREARRANGED APPOINTMENT: Transportation for a passenger or group of passengers that is arranged in advance, or pursuant to a regular route
between specified points, and is provided in a commercial transportation vehicle.
SHUTTLE SERVICE: Any business operating one or more commercial transportation vehicles for hire by prearranged appointment and not on a regular
route and charged on a per passenger basis, which may make multiple stops, picking up one or more fare paying passengers, on the way to one or more
destination.
TOURING VEHICLE SERVICE: Any business operating one or more commercial transportation vehicles, other than one rented without a driver, or a
taxicab, bus or limousine, or incident to a governmentally sponsored program, used for the transportation of more than four (4) passengers for hire for
sightseeing, educational tours or other such similar excursions, the charges for which are determined by the length of time for which the vehicle is
engaged, the distance traveled, a fixed fee, or any combination of such methods of determining such charges. (1952 Code § 5-03-01; amd. 2019 Code)
3-13B-3: BUSINESS LICENSE REQUIRED:
A. License Required: It shall be unlawful for any person to own, lease, conduct, operate or maintain, or permit to be conducted, operated or maintained, or
to participate in the conduct, operation or maintenance of, a commercial transportation vehicle within the City unless a valid business license pursuant
to this article has been issued. (1952 Code § 5-03-02)
B. Application Required; Background Check: Application for such license shall be made to the Office of the City Clerk in such form and manner as may be
prescribed, but the application shall include: the name and address of the applicant, and if a partnership, the names and addresses of each partner,
and if a corporation or association, the names and addresses of the principal stockholders or agent; the name of the operating manager; proof of a
valid driver's license; a statement of the number of vehicles to be operated and each vehicle identification number; a listed telephone number; and such
other information as may be required. (Ord. 38-15, 8-25-2015)
C. Investigation: Upon receipt of an application for a license, the Office of the City Clerk shall cause an investigation to be made to the extent necessary to
determine whether the applicant is qualified to hold a commercial transportation service business license and to own, lease, conduct, operate or
maintain, or permit to be conducted, operated or maintained, or to participate in the conduct, operation or maintenance of, a commercial transportation
vehicle.
D. Persons Prohibited: No person shall be issued a license to engage in the business of owning, leasing, conducting, operating or maintaining a
commercial transportation vehicle when that person:
1. Is under the age of eighteen (18) years;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 143/503
2. Is required to register as a sex offender, pursuant to the Sexual Offender Registration Notification and Community Right-to-Know Act, Idaho Code
section 18-8301, et seq., and the Juvenile Sex Offender Registration Notification and Community Right-to-Know Act, Idaho Code section 18-8401, et
seq.;
3. Has ever been convicted of, paid any fine, been placed on probation, received a deferred sentence, received a withheld judgment, sentenced to
confinement (including options in lieu of confinement), or suffered the forfeiture of a bond for any felony involving the use or threat of violence against
the person of another, or any felony involving the sexual enticement of minors;
4. Has been, within three (3) years prior to the date of making application for such license, convicted of, paid any fine, been placed on probation,
received a deferred sentence, received a withheld judgment, sentenced to confinement (including options in lieu of confinement), or suffered the
forfeiture of a bond for any felony not covered by subsection D3 of this section;
5. Has been, within three (3) years prior to the date of making application for such license, convicted of, paid any fine, been placed on probation,
received a deferred sentence, received a withheld judgment, or sentenced to confinement (including options in lieu of confinement) for any
misdemeanor involving:
a. The use of force against the person or property of another;
b. The threat of force against the person of another;
c. Stalking, telephone harassment or violations of protection orders or no contact orders;
d. Theft or larceny;
e. The use, possession or sale of illicit drugs;
f. Possession of a concealed weapon;
g. Illicit sexual activity; or
h. Driving under the influence of alcohol and/or drugs.
6. Has, at the time of such application, an outstanding warrant; or
7. Has had a similar license revoked by this City or any other city of this State, or of the United States, within the preceding three (3) years.
E. Drivers Required To Maintain Commercial Driver's License: In addition to obtaining a commercial transportation service business license, the licensee
shall ensure that all drivers of the business' commercial transportation vehicles continually maintain and conspicuously place within the commercial
transportation vehicle a commercial transportation service driver's license. The operation of a commercial transportation vehicle by a driver without a
valid commercial transportation service driver's license shall subject the commercial transportation service business license to suspension or
revocation.
F. Qualifications Of Partners, Members: The affirmative showing required with respect to the qualifications of an applicant shall also be required to be
made with respect to each partner of a partnership application and to each incumbent officer, director or member of the Governing Board of a
corporation or association application.
G. Qualifications Maintained: A commercial transportation service business license shall not be issued to a person who, at the time of application for
renewal of a license issued hereunder would not be eligible or qualified for such license upon a first application, and a licensee must continue to have
and maintain all the qualifications and none of the disqualifications provided herein throughout the license period. It shall be the duty of the licensee to
immediately notify the Licensing Office if any event, subsequent to the issuance of a commercial transportation service business license, renders the
licensee ineligible or unqualified for such a license. Failure to continually maintain said requirements throughout the duration of the license may result
in the suspension or revocation of the business license.
H. Telephone Number Required: The applicant must maintain a telephone number which is answered during the hours his commercial transportation
service is in operation, and such telephone number must be provided to the Office of the City Clerk. Such telephone number may be an answering
service.
I. Issuance Of License; Provisional License: If the applicant meets all of the qualifications and none of the disqualifications, the City Clerk shall issue, upon
application and payment, a commercial transportation service business license. A provisional license may be issued pending completion of the required
investigation.
J. Display Of License: A copy of the commercial transportation service business license must be conspicuously placed within each commercial
transportation vehicle. (1952 Code § 5-03-02)
3-13B-4: STATE DRIVER'S LICENSE, COMMERCIAL TRANSPORTATION SERVICE DRIVER'S LICENSE REQUIRED:
Every person desiring to drive, operate, or have charge of a commercial transportation vehicle within the City limits shall make application to the Office of
the City Clerk for a license to do so. Such application shall be made upon a form provided by the Office of the City Clerk and shall be filled out and signed
by the applicant in the applicant's handwriting.
A. Business License, Driver's License And Commercial Driver's License Required: It shall be unlawful for any person to drive, operate or have charge of a
vehicle operated as a commercial transportation vehicle unless pursuant to a valid commercial transportation business license and the driver
possesses a valid State of Idaho driver's license and a valid commercial transportation service driver's license as provided herein, all of which are in full
force and effect. (1952 Code § 5-03-03)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 144/503
B. Application For License; Background Check: Application for a commercial transportation service driver's license shall be made to the Office of the City
Clerk in such form and manner as may be prescribed, but the application shall include the name and address of the applicant, the length of time he has
resided in the City, the last place of employment with the name and address of the employer, whether the applicant has been previously licensed as a
driver, and such other information as may be required. (Ord. 38-15, 8-25-2015)
C. Investigation: Upon receipt of an application for a license, the Office of the City Clerk shall cause an investigation to be made to the extent necessary to
determine whether the applicant is qualified to hold a commercial transportation service driver's license and to drive, operate or have charge of a
commercial transportation vehicle.
D. Persons Prohibited: No person shall be issued a license to drive, operate or have charge of a commercial transportation vehicle when that person:
1. Is under the age of eighteen (18) years.
2. Is required to register as a sex offender, pursuant to the Sexual Offender Registration Notification and Community Right-to-Know Act, Idaho Code
section 18-8301, et seq., and the Juvenile Sex Offender Registration Notification and Community Right-to-Know Act, Idaho Code section 18-8401, et
seq.
3. Has ever been convicted of, paid any fine, been placed on probation, received a deferred sentence, received a withheld judgment, sentenced to
confinement (including options in lieu of confinement), or suffered the forfeiture of a bond for any felony involving the use or threat of violence against
the person of another, or any felony involving the sexual enticement of minors.
4. Has been, within three (3) years prior to the date of making application for such license, convicted of, paid any fine, been placed on probation,
received a deferred sentence, received a withheld judgment, sentenced to confinement (including options in lieu of confinement), or suffered the
forfeiture of a bond for any felony not covered by subsection D3 of this section.
5. Has been, within three (3) years prior to the date of making application for such license, convicted of, paid any fine, been placed on probation,
received a deferred sentence, received a withheld judgment, or sentenced to confinement (including options in lieu of confinement) for any
misdemeanor involving:
a. The use of force against the person or property of another;
b. The threat for force against the person of another;
c. Stalking, telephone harassment or violations of protection orders or no contact orders;
d. Theft or larceny;
e. The use, possession or sale of illicit drugs;
f. Possession of a concealed weapon;
g. Illicit sexual activity;
h. Contributing to the delinquency of a minor; or
i. Driving under the influence of alcohol and/or drugs.
6. Has at the time of such application, an outstanding warrant.
7. Has had a similar license revoked by this City or any other city of this State or of the United States within the preceding three (3) years.
E. Proof Of Violator: No license shall be granted to an applicant nor may a licensee maintain an existing license in good standing where satisfactory proof
is submitted that such applicant operates motor vehicles in an unskillful, dangerous or reckless manner, or habitually uses intoxicating liquor or drugs,
or who repeatedly violates the laws of the City relating to traffic or this article, or who violates the laws of the City while engaged in the business activity
regulated by this article.
F. Qualifications Maintained: A commercial transportation service driver's license shall not be issued to a person who, at the time of application for renewal
of a license issued hereunder would not be eligible or qualified for such license upon a first application, and a licensee must continue to have and
maintain all the qualifications and none of the disqualifications provided herein throughout the license period. It shall be the duty of the licensee to
immediately notify the Licensing Office if any event, subsequent to the issuance of a commercial transportation service driver's license, renders the
licensee ineligible or unqualified for such a license. Failure to continually maintain said requirements throughout the duration of the license may result
in revocation of the driver's license.
G. Issuance Of License; Provisional License: If the applicant meets all of the qualifications and none of the disqualifications, the City Clerk shall issue,
upon application and payment therefor, a commercial transportation services driver's license. A provisional license may be issued pending completion
of the required investigation.
H. Content Of License; Display; Exhibit Upon Request: Upon approval by the Office of the City Clerk, a license shall be issued to the applicant for a
commercial transportation services driver's license. Such license shall contain the applicant's full name, physical description and a photograph of the
applicant. Whenever the licensee is driving, operating or in charge of any commercial transportation vehicle, such license card must be so affixed to the
vehicle so as to be in full and clear view of any passenger in the rear seat of the vehicle, if the vehicle's construction allows. It shall be unlawful for a
licensee to fail or neglect to have his license card posted as required by this article at all times while driving, operating or having charge of a
commercial transportation vehicle within the City limits, or to permit the use or possession of the license by another, or to fail or refuse upon demand of
any City officer, police officer, peace officer, Sheriff, Deputy Sheriff or passenger to exhibit the license for inspection. (1952 Code § 5-03-03)
3-13B-5: FEES FOR LICENSES; TERM; RENEWAL:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 145/503
A. Business License: The application for a commercial transportation service business license enabling an applicant to own, lease, conduct, operate or
maintain, or permit to be conducted, operated or maintained, or to participate in the conduct, operation or maintenance of a commercial transportation
vehicle within the City shall be accompanied by an annual nonrefundable license fee in such amount as established by the City Council and listed on
the most current City Clerk license fee schedule. The commercial transportation service business license fees herein required shall be for one year
expiring on June 30 of each year. A renewal of such license shall be issued by the City Clerk upon payment of the license fee on or before June 30 of
the year for which such renewal is desired.
B. Driver's License: The application for each commercial transportation service driver's license enabling an applicant to drive, operate or have charge of a
commercial transportation vehicle within the City shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable license fee in such amount as established by the City
Council and listed on the most current City Clerk license fee schedule. The commercial transportation service driver's license herein required shall
expire at the end of one year from the date of issuance. (1952 Code § 5-03-04; amd. 2019 Code)
C. Fees Additional: License fees collected in accordance with this title and this article shall be in addition to any license and other fees collected in
accordance with commercial transportation vehicles or other vehicles operating at the Boise Airport. (1952 Code § 5-03-04)
3-13B-6: MEDICAL CERTIFICATE:
Every two (2) years, each applicant for a commercial transportation services driver's license shall submit with the application a medical certificate from a
licensed physician specifically stating that the applicant has sufficient hearing, vision and general health such that the applicant is physically and mentally
fit for the safe operation of a commercial transportation vehicle. (1952 Code § 5-03-05)
3-13B-7: INSURANCE REQUIREMENTS:
A. Vehicle Insurance: Each licensed commercial transportation vehicle operating within the City shall be insured under a motor vehicle liability policy of
insurance, issued by an insurance carrier duly authorized to do business in the State, which provides coverage in the amount of five hundred thousand
dollars ($500,000.00).
B. Businesses:
1. Every commercial transportation service business licensee shall tender to the City Clerk a certificate of insurance designating the vehicle or vehicles
covered and certifying that insurance in the amounts specified herein is in effect. Said certificate of insurance shall specify as the certificate holder
Boise City, P.O. Box 500, Boise, Idaho, 83701.
2. The failure of any licensee to tender such certificate shall be grounds for suspension or revocation of said license. Such insurance shall be
maintained throughout the licensing period.
C. Certificate: No commercial transportation services business license shall be issued or renewed and no quarterly inspection decal shall be issued until a
certificate of insurance certifying that the commercial transportation vehicle is insured as herein provided is tendered to the City Clerk.
D. Notification Of Cancellation: Every commercial transportation service business licensee shall immediately notify the City Clerk of the voluntary or
involuntary cancellation of any certificate of insurance on any licensed commercial transportation vehicle. In addition to other prescribed penalties for
violations of this article, failure to so notify the City Clerk shall be grounds for suspension or revocation of the commercial transportation service
business license. (1952 Code § 5-03-06)
3-13B-8: LIMITATIONS OR RESTRICTIONS MAY BE IMPOSED:
The Licensing Officer shall have the power to issue a license approved by this article with limitations or restrictions relative to the nature of the license
issued. (1952 Code § 5-03-07)
3-13B-9: TRANSFER OF LICENSE:
A. Permitted, Prohibited Transfers: A commercial transportation service business license may not be transferred or leased without the written approval,
upon application, of the City Clerk. A commercial transportation service driver's license may not be transferred. (1952 Code § 5-03-08)
B. Applicant Qualifications; Fee: An applicant for a transfer of a commercial transportation service business license within the City shall show the same
qualifications and none of the disqualifications for a license as in the initial application. A nonrefundable application fee in such amount as established
by the City Council and listed on the most current City Clerk license fee schedule shall accompany the application, for each such transfer requested,
unless such transfer occurs on or after January 1, in which case the nonrefundable fee for transfer from one person to another shall be in such amount
as established by the City Council and listed on the most current City Clerk license fee schedule.
C. Vehicle Transfers; Fee: Transfer of a commercial transportation service business license from one vehicle to another vehicle shall be accompanied by a
nonrefundable transfer fee in such amount as established by the City Council and listed on the most current City Clerk license fee schedule. Prior to
the issuance of a license, the new vehicle must be inspected as required by this article. A certificate of insurance and the transferred vehicle's license
must be submitted with the application. (1952 Code § 5-03-08; amd. 2019 Code)
3-13B-10: VEHICLE INSPECTIONS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 146/503
A. Motorized Commercial Transportation Vehicles: No motor vehicle shall be issued a license as a commercial transportation vehicle until that vehicle has
been inspected in accordance with the following requirements, and found to be in acceptable condition. The inspection of a commercial transportation
vehicle shall be made at a time and place to be designated by the City Clerk. It shall be unlawful to substitute equipment or parts subsequent to
inspection unless such substituted equipment or parts are in equal or better condition than the equipment or parts being substituted or replaced.
1. Mechanical:
a. Tires: Tires must not have cuts, breaks or show excessive uneven wear. Tire wear bars must not be showing. Tire tread depth shall not be less
than two thirty-seconds (2/32) of an inch of an original tire. The vehicle must have a spare tire, fully inflated and in the same condition as required
above. Tires must all be of the same type (either radial or bias).
b. Body Condition: The body must be in good condition, free of holes and torn metal. Both a front and a rear bumper must be firmly attached. No
extensive unrepaired body damage will be allowed. The vehicle shall be completely and properly painted.
c. Lights: Headlights shall be intact and operable on both high and low beam. Tail lights, parking lights, brake lights and signal lights shall be intact
and operable. An interior light capable of illuminating the interior shall be operable.
d. Wipers: Both windshield wipers shall be in good condition and operable.
e. Brakes: Both the parking brake and all four (4) wheel brakes must be in good condition and operable. Brake shoes or pads must have a safe
amount of wear left. Brake pedal travel shall be no more than two and one-half inches (21/2").
f. Steering: There shall not be more than three inches (3") of free play when turning the steering wheel from one side to the other.
g. Exhaust System: Mufflers shall not have any holes, and shall be firmly attached to the exhaust and tail pipes. Exhaust pipes shall be firmly
attached to the engine and free of leaks. Tail pipes shall extend beyond the passenger compartment, fully to the rear of the vehicle. All emission
control devices shall be attached and in proper working order.
h. Windows: The windshield shall be free of cracks or chips that interfere with the driver's vision. Door windows shall be free of cracks and operable
as they were intended by the manufacturer.
i. Door Handles: All door handles and latches shall be operable from both the inside and outside of the vehicle.
j. Seat Belts: The vehicle shall be equipped with sufficient seat belts to provide safety to each passenger, and be in accordance with State law.
k. Suspension: The suspension system shall be maintained so that there are no broken or weak springs, or weak or defective shock absorbers.
2. Appearance:
a. Engine Compartment: The engine compartment shall be kept reasonably clean and free of uncontained combustible material.
b. Exterior: The exterior shall be kept clean and well maintained.
c. Interior: The interior shall be kept clean and free of litter. The seats and upholstery shall be kept clean and free of holes and tears.
B. Nonmotorized Commercial Transportation Vehicles: No nonmotorized vehicle shall be issued a license as a commercial transportation vehicle until that
vehicle has been inspected in accordance with the following requirements, and found to be in acceptable condition. The inspection of a nonmotorized
commercial transportation vehicle shall be made at a time and place to be designated by the City Clerk. It shall be unlawful to substitute equipment or
parts subsequent to inspection unless such substituted equipment or parts are in equal or better condition than the equipment or parts being
substituted or replaced.
1. Mechanical:
a. Tires And Wheels: Tires must not have cuts, breaks or show excessive uneven wear. Tires must have adequate tread. Wheels must be true.
b. Body/Frame Condition: The body/frame must be in good condition, free of cracks, large dents, holes or torn metal. No extensive unrepaired body
damage will be allowed.
c. Lights: If operating at nighttime, nonmotorized commercial transportation vehicles shall be equipped with an operable headlamp, a flashing or
steady rear lamp, and reflectors on all wheels and on the front stem.
d. Brakes: Brakes must be in good condition and operable. Brake pads or disc brakes must have a safe amount of wear left and shall not be warped.
e. Steering: The steering apparatus shall be free of excessive or unsafe free play.
2. Appearance:
a. Exterior: The exterior shall be kept clean and well maintained.
b. Interior: The interior shall be kept clean and free of litter. The seats and upholstery shall be kept clean and free of holes and tears.
C. Inspection And Inspection Fees:
1. All motorized commercial transportation vehicles must be in compliance with any required motor vehicle emission regulations, and must have a valid
certificate of compliance, in addition to the inspection requirements listed above.
2. The inspection required by this section shall be performed prior to the issuance of a commercial transportation service business license, and each
calendar quarter thereafter for motorized commercial transportation vehicles, and each calendar year thereafter for nonmotorized commercial
transportation vehicles. Calendar quarters are the periods of January through March, April through June, July through September, and October
through December. The required quarterly inspection shall be completed prior to the beginning of the next following quarter. The requirements of this
section shall be maintained throughout the inspection quarter and year. (1952 Code § 5-03-09)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 147/503
3. For motorized commercial transportation vehicles, there shall be a fee for the initial vehicle inspection, for each quarterly inspection thereafter, and
pursuant to a license transfer. The fee shall be collected in advance of the inspection. If the inspection results in the need for a reinspection of the
vehicle, a reinspection fee shall be charged, except where such reinspection requires elevation of the vehicle, in which case, the reinspection fee
shall be an additional amount. The fees required in this subsection shall be in such amounts as established by the City Council and listed on the
most current City Clerk license fee schedule.
4. For nonmotorized commercial transportation vehicles, the fee for the initial vehicle inspection, for each yearly inspection thereafter, and pursuant to a
license transfer, shall be in such amount as established by the City Council and listed on the most current City Clerk license fee schedule. The fee
shall be collected in advance of the inspection. There shall be no additional charge for a reinspection if one is needed. (1952 Code § 5-03-09; amd.
2019 Code)
D. Temporary Permit: If the inspection reveals deficiencies that are not imminently hazardous, the inspector may issue a temporary permit, not to exceed
fifteen (15) days, to allow the deficiency to be corrected. No more than one temporary permit each calendar quarter may be issued to any one vehicle.
(1952 Code § 5-03-09)
3-13B-11: COMMERCIAL TRANSPORTATION VEHICLES LICENSED ELSEWHERE:
Commercial transportation vehicles licensed by an Idaho municipality other than the City may transport passengers from within the State, but outside of
the City to a destination within the City. It shall be unlawful for the owner or driver of any such commercial transportation vehicle to seek or accept
passengers within the City except such passengers whose destination is directly to a point in such other municipality; provided, however, that the provision
of this section shall only apply to vehicles licensed by a municipality which grants reciprocal rights to commercial transportation vehicles licensed by the
City. Nothing contained herein shall be construed to contradict or contravene Pub.L. 107-298, 49 USC section 14501, the Real Interstate Driver Equity Act
of 2002. (1952 Code § 5-03-10)
3-13B-12: FARES, RATES AND FEES:
A. Fares charged by a person receiving a commercial transportation services business license to operate an auto transportation service shall be no
greater than those agreed upon by the passenger and the business. Fares, rates and fees must be specified in sufficient detail to allow the passenger
to make an informed decision about the total fare, rate or fee to be paid prior to or following service. Any additional fares, rates or fees and the
circumstances under which such fees or fares may be assessed must be made known and made available to the passenger prior to service.
B. All drivers of commercial transportation vehicles employed to carry passengers to a definite point shall take the most direct route possible that will carry
the passenger safely and expeditiously to his destination, and no other method or means of measuring or computing distance or time shall be used or
employed except as in this article provided. (1952 Code § 5-03-11)
3-13B-13: UNLAWFUL PRACTICES:
It shall be unlawful for any person to:
A. Permit or allow any person, or for any person to ride on the fenders, hood or any place on the outside of a commercial transportation vehicle.
B. Permit more persons to be carried in a commercial transportation vehicle as passengers than the rated seated capacity of the commercial
transportation vehicle, except that a child in arms shall not be counted as a passenger.
C. Verbally attempt to divert patronage from one hotel, motel or business to another.
D. Violate any parking laws, rules, regulations or management practices authorized by law regulating parking within the City.
E. Permit any person other than a person licensed by this article, to operate or drive a commercial transportation vehicle while in service.
F. Solicit any person, or to assist in the solicitation of any person, to participate in any illicit, immoral or unlawful sex act.
G. Operate or drive a commercial transportation vehicle while consuming, or affected in any way by, any alcoholic beverage, illegal drug or legal drug
which impairs the ability to operate a motor vehicle, or to sell, provide or buy for, any alcoholic beverage or illegal drug to a passenger.
H. Fail or neglect to visually display in the vehicle his/her commercial transportation vehicle business license, commercial transportation vehicle driver's
license and Idaho driver's license card while driving, operating or having charge of a commercial transportation vehicle within the City limits, or to
permit the use or possession of his license by another or fail or refuse upon demand of any City officer, police officer, peace officer, Sheriff, Deputy
Sheriff or passenger to exhibit his license for inspection.
I. Solicit passengers or business for the limousine service, shuttle service, touring vehicle service or a particular commercial transportation vehicle, except
by lawful advertisement, handheld signs seeking to establish contact with a prearranged passenger or passengers, or some other lawful means.
J. Accept hails from prospective passengers upon or along the streets of the City.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 148/503
K. Loiter upon or about any premises within the City for the purpose of seeking or soliciting prospective passengers who have not engaged the commercial
transportation service by previous appointment.
L. Accept passengers other than by prearranged appointment initiated by a prospective passenger or such passenger's authorized agent or
representative.
M. Charge any passenger a fare, fee or rate in excess of the fare, fee or rates agreed upon between the passenger and business.
N. Violate any rule, regulation, ordinance or management practice regulating the stopping, standing, parking or operation on or about airport premises of
commercial transportation vehicles or regulating the conduct of persons operating or having charge of such commercial transportation vehicles or
revenue shuttles on or about airport premises, including occupation of any parking space at the airport other than those specifically designated by the
Airport Commission or Airport Director for use by the applicable commercial transportation vehicle or revenue shuttle.
O. Refuse to pay the regular fare, fee or charge for a commercial transportation vehicle after having hired or employed the same.
P. Misrepresent the nature or purpose of the service being provided. (1952 Code § 5-03-12)
3-13B-14: PENALTY:
The violation of any of the provisions of this article, or the failure or omission to perform any duty imposed by the provisions of this article, is hereby
declared unlawful and punishable as a general misdemeanor, subject to penalty as provided in section 1-4-1 of this Code. In addition to a criminal penalty,
the violation of any of the provisions of this article may result in either the suspension or revocation of the commercial transportation service business
and/or driver's license pursuant to chapter 1, article A of this title. (1952 Code § 5-03-13; amd. 2019 Code)
Chapter 14
STATIONLESS BICYCLE SHARE PROGRAMS
3-14-1: LEGAL AUTHORITY:
Idaho Code sections 50-301, 50-307, and 50-314 authorize the City of Boise City, State of Idaho (the "City") to regulate occupations and businesses and
to regulate and control traffic, encroachments, and obstructions on streets, public places, and sidewalks within the City. (Ord. 31-18, 8-21-2018)
3-14-2: PURPOSE:
The City finds that public health, safety, and welfare require that certain occupations and businesses operating in the City, including but not limited to,
emerging forms of alternative transportation like stationless bicycle share programs, be regulated without restraining, burdening, or over regulating the
businesses or occupations in order to afford basic protections to the public. (Ord. 31-18, 8-21-2018)
3-14-3: SCOPE:
This chapter sets forth policies, standards, requirements, and procedures applicable to stationless bicycle share programs licensed pursuant to this
chapter. (Ord. 31-18, 8-21-2018)
3-14-4: GENERAL LICENSING PROVISIONS INCORPORATED BY REFERENCE:
To the extent they are not inconsistent with this chapter, all the provisions, definitions, paragraphs, and sections set forth in chapter 1, article A of this title
are hereby adopted and incorporated by reference as if fully set forth in this chapter. (Ord. 31-18, 8-21-2018)
3-14-5: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and derivations have the meanings given herein. When not inconsistent with the
context, words used in the present tense include the future tense, words in the plural number include the singular number, and words in the singular
number include the plural number. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory. Words used throughout this chapter, but not defined
herein, shall have their plain, ordinary and common meaning. Words in any gender shall apply to the feminine, masculine and neuter genders.
BICYCLE: Every vehicle having two (2) tandem wheels, or two (2) parallel wheels and one forward wheel, any two (2) of which are not less than twelve
inches (12") in diameter, propelled exclusively by human power upon which any person may ride, except scooters and similar devices.
DESIGNATED AREA: Any part of the public right-of-way designated by the Clerk's Office for the parking of bicycles, E-bikes, E-scooters, or any part
thereof in a stationless bicycle share program.
DEVICE OR DEVICES: A bicycle, E-bike, or E-scooter, or any part or any combination thereof.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 149/503
ELECTRIC POWER-ASSISTED BICYCLE (E-BIKE): A vehicle having two (2) tandem wheels or two (2) parallel wheels and one forward wheel, any two
(2) of which are not less than twelve inches (12") in diameter, that is designed to be operated by human power with the assistance of an electric motor that
has a power output of not more than seven hundred fifty (750) watts that: a) is incapable of propelling the vehicle at a speed of more than twenty (20)
miles per hour; and b) disengages or ceases to function when the vehicle's brakes are applied. An E-bike is not a motor vehicle for purposes of this
chapter.
ELECTRIC POWER-ASSISTED SCOOTER (E-SCOOTER): A two (2) wheeled vehicle that has handlebars, a floorboard that is designed to be stood upon
when riding, and is powered by an electric motor that has a power output of not more than three hundred (300) watts that: a) is incapable of propelling the
device at a speed of more than fifteen (15) miles per hour; and b) disengages or ceases to function when the vehicle's brakes are applied. An E-scooter is
not a motor vehicle for purposes of this chapter.
GEO-FENCE OR GEO-FENCING: A virtual geographical boundary around an area defined by a global positioning system ("GPS") or radio frequency
identification ("RFID") technology, that enables software to trigger a response when a device enters or leaves the area.
PARK OR PARKING: The process or result of stopping, standing, or leaving unattended any vehicle or device.
RESTRICTED AREA: Any part of the public right-of-way restricted by the Clerk's Office for the parking of devices in a stationless bicycle share program.
STATIONLESS BICYCLE SHARE OPERATOR: A person who owns, manages, or operates a stationless bicycle share program.
STATIONLESS BICYCLE SHARE PROGRAM: A system of self-service bicycles, E-bikes, E-scooters, or any combination thereof, for hire, operated by a
stationless bicycle share operator, which does not require either a bicycle rack or bicycle sharing station, or other object. (Ord. 31-18, 8-21-2018)
3-14-6: SIZE OF FLEET, DISTRIBUTION, AND REBALANCING:
A. To be eligible for consideration as a licensee pursuant to this chapter and chapter 1, article A of this title, an applicant shall have a minimum fleet of fifty
(50) devices that may contain any combination of bicycles, E-bikes, or E-scooters. If an applicant is licensed pursuant to this chapter, the licensee's
maximum total number of devices, shall not exceed two hundred fifty (250).
B. Devices must show a minimum utilization rate of two (2) rides per day to remain in service. If a device fails to meet minimum utilization requirements,
the City Clerk's Office may require underutilized devices in a bicycle share program to be removed or relocated.
C. The total combined number of permitted devices, in all the stationless bicycle share programs licensed by the City pursuant to this chapter, shall not
exceed seven hundred fifty (750) total devices at any given time, regardless of the number of licensees, stationless bicycle share operators, or bicycle
share programs.
D. Licensees are responsible for monitoring the distribution of devices according to the terms and conditions of their respective permit. The City Clerk's
Office may require a reduction in a licensee's number of authorized devices based on the overall number of devices within a specific area of the City.
Licensees shall reduce the number of devices according to the following guidelines:
1. Within four (4) hours of receipt of notice on weekdays, six o'clock (6:00) A.M. to six o'clock (6:00) P.M., not including holidays.
2. At all other times, within ten (10) hours of receipt of notice.
E. A licensee shall provide the Director with direct contact information for a licensee's local staff who are responsible and capable of rebalancing and
removing devices. Licensees shall remove, relocate, or rebalance devices as follows:
1. Within four (4) hours of receipt of notice on weekdays, six o'clock (6:00) A.M. to six o'clock (6:00) P.M., not including holidays.
2. At all other times, within ten (10) hours of receipt of notice. (Ord. 31-18, 8-21-2018)
3-14-7: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE AND RENEWAL:
A. In addition to meeting all the minimum licensing requirements and qualifications set forth in chapter 1, article A of this title, applicants and licensees
must also comply with the following requirements and qualifications:
1. Maintain a local agent who is responsible for responding to permit issues in a timely manner.
2. Provide proof of insurance in the amounts specified by this chapter and in the terms and conditions of the permit.
3. Provide credible evidence to the satisfaction of the City Clerk's Office that all bicycles, E-bikes, and E-scooters in a licensee's stationless bicycle
share program:
a. Are each labeled with a unique identification number to identify each separate device and that such numbers are submitted to the City Clerk's
Office and regularly updated;
b. Are labeled with current contact information for the stationless bicycle share licensee, including the make, model, and unique identifying number of
each such device;
c. Are of high quality, sturdily built, with tamper-resistant hardware to accommodate a wide range of users;
d. Are able to stand upright when parked and capable of being locked to a bike rack and equipped with haptic technology that indicates to the user if
he has parked in a prohibited, restricted, or designated area;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 150/503
e. Comply with Idaho Code requirements, if any, and can withstand the rigors of outdoor storage and constant use for a period of at least five (5)
years;
f. Are equipped with an on-board GPS unit or equivalent that will provide real-time location data to the City Clerk's Office, including a continuous feed
of all required data as set forth in this chapter and the terms and conditions of the permit;
g. Are available to customers on an hourly basis, or in smaller intervals, and at rates that vary by duration of usage or by duration of usage and
distance but are clearly and understandably communicated to customers prior to use;
h. Have a maintenance, cleaning, and repair schedule and plan that is approved by the City Clerk's Office;
i. Are available for pick-up and drop-off by customers on a twenty four (24) hour, seven (7) days per week basis; and
j. Have a mechanism by which customers can notify the local agent of the licensee to report safety and maintenance issues with a device or the
service.
4. Maintain a multilingual website, mobile application, and call center in languages determined by the City Clerk's Office, and with customer interface
that is available twenty four (24) hours a day, seven (7) days a week. The website, mobile application, and call center shall also meet the
requirements of section 508 of the Rehabilitation Act and section 255 of the Communications Act that apply to information and communication
technology.
5. Maintain a privacy policy that meets industry standards to the satisfaction of the City Clerk's Office, that safeguards customers' personal, financial,
and travel information and usage, including but not limited to, trip origination and destination data.
6. Provide a plan to share with the City Clerk's Office aggregate, customer demographic data, that does not identify individual customers, payment
methods, or individual trip history, on a monthly basis in a mutually agreed upon form. Such customer demographic data shall include, but not be
limited to, the following:
a. The number of bikes, E-bikes, and E-scooters in circulation;
b. The number of daily, weekly and monthly active riders;
c. The aggregate breakdown of customers by gender and age;
d. Usage data, including the number and duration of rides per day per device;
e. A summary of device distribution and GPS based natural movement; specific and statistical data regarding device theft and vandalism and the
repair times;
f. Specific customer comments and complaints and the licensee's resolution thereof;
7. A map of the proposed service area;
8. An electronic payment system that is compliant with the payment card industry data security standards. Each transaction shall include the bicycle, Ebike,
or E-scooter's identification number that corresponds to the make and model of the device registered with the City Clerk's Office; and
9. A mechanism to inform customers on how to properly park a bicycle, E-bike, or E-scooter in a manner that is approved by the City.
B. A licensee must be capable of remotely disabling the use of any device should it be reported or be found to have a safety, maintenance, or other
hazardous condition.
C. Every person licensed under this chapter understands and agrees that the City is not responsible for educating customers and users on how to ride,
safely operate, or use safety equipment, such as helmets. Licensees agree to educate customers and users on the applicable rules of the road and to
instruct users to use helmets and otherwise comply with the applicable laws. (Ord. 31-18, 8-21-2018)
3-14-8: ACTION ON APPLICATION:
A. The Director shall determine all license terms, conditions, and any other standard or special requirements.
B. In considering an application for a license, the City Clerk's Office shall consider all the legal requirements, the availability of parking, and the anticipated
effects of the proposed stationless bicycle share program on public transit, pedestrian and vehicular traffic, and access to or from residences and
businesses.
C. Notwithstanding any other requirement, the City Clerk's Office may deny an application filed pursuant to this chapter on the basis that such license
issuance or renewal would:
1. Conflict with existing permits or contracts;
2. Lead to an over-concentration or over-saturation of stationless bicycle share program devices in the City;
3. Cause an imbalance in the geographical distribution of stationless bicycle share program devices; or
4. Otherwise adversely impact an existing or proposed stationless bicycle share program. (Ord. 31-18, 8-21-2018)
3-14-9: TERM OF LICENSE, AREA OF OPERATION, AND GEO-FENCING:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 151/503
A. A license issued by the City pursuant to this chapter is valid for one year from the date of issuance or renewal, unless sooner revoked, suspended, or
relinquished.
B. All licenses issued by the City pursuant to this chapter are non-transferrable.
C. A license issued pursuant to this chapter is only valid for operations within the designated public right-of-way within the City's jurisdiction. Additional
zones of operation, including, but not limited to, public park locations, publicly accessed plazas, on-street parking spaces, off-street parking lots and
garages, may be established or deleted by the City as it deems appropriate. The City reserves the right to create geo-fenced areas within the City.
(Ord. 31-18, 8-21-2018)
3-14-10: APPLICATION AND RENEWAL FEES, OTHER LICENSING FEES, AND SECURITY DEPOSIT:
A. Fees Required: Every application for a license shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable application fee, licensing fee, processing fee, and all other
required costs and fees in the amounts established by the Boise City Council and listed on the most current fee schedule.
B. Security Deposit: Every licensee shall pay to the City Clerk's Office a public property repair, maintenance, and security cash deposit ("security deposit")
as established by the Boise City Council and listed on the most current fee schedule. The deposit shall be assessed in an amount to ensure adequate
funds are available to reimburse the City for future public property repairs and maintenance costs that may be incurred, including but not limited to, any
costs of repairing or maintaining damaged public property by a licensee or his customers, removing and storing bicycles, E-bikes, or E-scooters
improperly parked or left unattended on public property, and addressing and abating any other violation. The security deposit will be held in trust by the
City for so long as the stationless bicycle share licensee is licensed by the City pursuant to this chapter.
1. A licensee's security deposit must not be depleted lower than the minimum amount as established by the City Council and listed on the most current
fee schedule. If a security deposit is depleted below the required minimum amount, a licensee shall replenish the security deposit to its full amount
within thirty (30) calendar days. Licensees shall also annually replenish the security deposit to its full amount upon application for a license renewal.
2. Failure to maintain minimum security deposit balance or failure to replenish the security deposit as required by this chapter is grounds for immediate
revocation of license. (Ord. 31-18, 8-21-2018)
3-14-11: INSURANCE AND INDEMNIFICATION:
A. Every stationless bicycle share program licensed pursuant to this chapter shall be continuously insured and shall carry the following types of insurance
issued by an insurance carrier duly authorized to do business in the State of Idaho:
1. Workers' compensation, in statutory amounts, with employers' liability limits not less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) per each accident,
injury, or illness;
2. Commercial general liability insurance with minimum limits not less than five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) per each occurrence and one
million dollars ($1,000,000.00) general aggregate for bodily injury and property damage, including contractual liability, personal injury, products and
completed operations;
3. Commercial automobile liability insurance with limits not less than five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) each occurrence, "combined single
limit" for bodily injury and property damage, including owned, non-owned, and hired auto coverage, as applicable;
4. Professional liability insurance, applicable to licensee's profession, with minimum limits not less than five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00)
per each claim with respect to negligent acts, errors, or omissions from any activity conducted pursuant to the license issued pursuant to this
chapter;
5. Cyber and privacy insurance with limits of not less than five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) per claim. Such insurance shall include
coverage for liability arising from theft, dissemination, or use of confidential information, including but not limited to, bank and credit card account
information or personal information, such as name, address, social security numbers, protected health information, or other personally identifying
information, stored or transmitted in electronic form.
B. Every stationless bicycle share program shall tender to the City Clerk's Office the certificates of insurance certifying that insurance of the types and in
the amounts required by this chapter are in full force and effect at all times. All insurers must have a rating comparable to A, VIII or higher and shall be
authorized to do business in the State of Idaho. The certificates shall list the City separately as an additional insured. Said certificates of insurance shall
specify as the certificate holder the City of Boise, P.O. Box 500, 150 N. Capitol Blvd., Boise, Idaho 83701-0500. The insurance policies required by this
chapter shall be the primary insurance to any other insurance available to the additional insureds, with respect to any claims arising out of a license
issued pursuant to this chapter, and that insurance applies separately to each insured against whom claim is made or suit is brought.
C. No stationless bicycle share program shall commence business, deploy devices, or provide services in the City prior to furnishing to the City all
certificates of insurance and additional insured policy endorsements to the City's satisfaction and in form evidencing all coverages set forth above.
Approval of the insurance policy by the City shall not relieve or decrease a licensee's liability hereunder. All workers' compensation policies shall be
endorsed with a waiver of subrogation in favor of the City for all work performed by the licensee, its employees, agents and subcontractors.
D. Every insurance policy required by this chapter shall be endorsed to provide thirty (30) calendar days' advance written notice to the City of cancellation
for any reason, intended non-renewal, or reduction in coverages. If any insurer desires to be released from any insurance policy required by this
chapter, the licensee must give written notice to the City Clerk's Office within two (2) business days of such desire, cancellation, or change. If any policy
of insurance required by this chapter is cancelled or expires and no new certificate of insurance is filed by the licensee with the City Clerk's Office
before the cancellation or expiration of the original insurance, such license shall automatically be suspended, and the licensee shall discontinue
operations within the City. If a proper replacement certificate of insurance is not provided to the City Clerk's Office on or before the tenth (10th)
business day after the date of termination or cancellation of the policy, the license shall be automatically revoked.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 152/503
E. Every stationless bicycle share program and operator licensed pursuant to this chapter, agrees to the maximum extent permitted by law to defend,
indemnify, and hold harmless the City, and all of its respective departments, commissions, boards, officers, employees, and agents from and against
any and all claims, demands, suits, damages, actions, or causes of action, costs and expenses to persons or property, whether public or private, that
may arise out of, or be occasioned by, the operation of a stationless bicycle share program on the public right-of-way or other property, or any act,
omission, or misconduct of the licensee, or his employees, agents, subcontractors, representatives arising, arisen, or to arise out of the licensee's
operations. (Ord. 31-18, 8-21-2018)
3-14-12: FARES, DIGITAL PLATFORMS, AND DATA SHARING:
A. Fares charged by a licensee shall be no greater than those agreed upon by the customer and the licensee. Fares, rates, and fees must be specified in
sufficient detail to allow customers to make an informed decision about the total fare, rate, or fee to be paid prior to service. Any additional fares, rates,
or fees and the circumstances under which such fees, fares, or rates may be assessed must be made known to and available to the customer prior to
service.
B. A licensee shall not require a user to grant location services to use the licensee's devices. All other private data belonging to the user, including but not
limited to, contacts, photos, and files, shall not be required to be shared in order to use the licensee's devices.
C. A licensee shall not require a user to share his private data with third parties in order to use the licensee's devices.
D. A licensee may allow a user to opt-in to providing access to his contacts, photos, files, other private data and third-party data only with clear notice to
the customer.
E. A licensee shall provide the City Clerk's Office with updates to the terms of service, including but not limited to, the privacy policy, terms and conditions
of use, and the end user license agreement published on the licensee's website and app, and agrees to provide all customers and the City Clerk's
Office of any changes to the terms of service immediately upon adoption.
F. Failure to submit complete or accurate data to the City Clerk's Office, will result in immediate revocation of a license issued pursuant to this chapter.
(Ord. 31-18, 8-21-2018)
3-14-13: PARKING, IMMEDIATE OUT-OF-SERVICE, AND NOTICE TO ABATE:
All devices in a stationless bicycle share program shall be parked upright on hard surfaces in the pedestrian zone of the sidewalk, or at a public bicycle
rack. In no case shall the placement of a device in a stationless bicycle share program reduce the width of pedestrian zone to less than six feet (6'). The
City Clerk's Office may further designate, restrict, or prohibit areas by geo-fencing, marked parking boxes, or other methods.
A. No bicycle, E-bike, or E-scooter in a stationless bicycle share program shall be parked or left unattended:
1. So as to obstruct or impede pedestrian or vehicular traffic;
2. On any City block without sidewalks;
3. On street furniture such as benches and pay stations;
4. In any vehicular travel lane or bike lane;
5. In any parklets or sidewalk dining areas;
6. In any area within or immediately adjacent to ADA accommodations, including but not limited to, curb ramps, railings, and signal bush buttons;
7. In transit zones, including bus stops, shelters, passenger waiting areas and bus layover and staging zones, except at existing bicycle racks;
8. In loading zones;
9. In on-street parking spaces, including accessible parking zones and associated loading zones;
10. On curb ramps, and other ingress and egress curb cuts;
11. In entryways and exits, including but not limited to, fire escapes, or any other building evacuation exit ways; or
12. On driveways.
B. The City reserves the right to determine certain areas where stationless bicycle share parking is designated, restricted, or prohibited.
C. Stationless bicycle share licensees shall inform customers on how to properly park bicycles, E-bikes, and E-scooters.
D. The City Clerk's Office may determine upon its own initiative or upon complaint of any person that a licensee's authorized service is being provided in
an unsafe or unreliable manner.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 153/503
E. Upon notification to a licensee by the City that a bicycle, E-bike, or E-scooter is improperly parked, the licensee shall remove, relocate, or abate the
device within two (2) hours of the City's notification during weekdays, six o'clock (6:00) A.M. to six o'clock (6:00) P.M., excluding holidays and within ten
(10) hours of receipt of notice at all other times. If a licensee fails to remove, relocate, or abate the device within the applicable time allowed, the City
may immediately remove and impound such device at the licensee's sole expense.
F. The City shall charge the licensee impound fees, as established by City Council and set forth on the current City fee schedule, for each abatement of a
licensee's devices that the City or its designee perform under the provisions of this chapter. In addition to impound fees for abatement of devices, the
City may charge licensees any additional costs incurred as a result of violations of this chapter, including, but not limited to, the repair and maintenance
of public property. The City shall invoice a licensee regularly for any impound fees or other costs and licensee shall reimburse the City within thirty (30)
business days from invoice of such fees and costs. If the licensee fails to reimburse the City within thirty (30) business days, the City is authorized to
deduct such costs from the applicable security deposit held in trust by the City Clerk's Office. (Ord. 31-18, 8-21-2018)
3-14-14: UNLAWFUL ACTS:
A. In addition to the unlawful acts set forth in chapter 1, article A of this title, it shall also be unlawful for any licensee to:
1. Charge any customer a fare, fee, or rate in excess of the fare, fee, or rates agreed upon between the customer and the licensee;
2. Wholly or in part, engage in or operate a regulated business without first obtaining a license issued by the City. Each day a person fails to obtain a
required license shall constitute a separate violation;
3. For any stationless bicycle share program permitted, licensed, or authorized by another jurisdiction to initiate for hire services within the City without
being issued a license pursuant to this chapter;
4. Refuse to provide services or to publicly disclose by any means, including but not limited to, an internet-enabled application or digital platform,
information or comments regarding a customer on the basis of the customer's race, color, ethnicity, religion, sex, national origin, age, familial status,
marital status, military status, sexual orientation, gender identity, pregnancy or disability; or
5. Violate any of the provisions of this chapter or the terms and conditions of the permit. (Ord. 31-18, 8-21-2018)
3-14-15: DENIAL, SUSPENSION, AND REVOCATION:
A. Every civil license penalty imposed by the Director shall be proportional to the type and severity of the violation.
B. The Director shall have the authority to issue any license required by this chapter with limitations or restrictions relative to the nature of the license
issued, to ensure protection of the public's health, safety, and welfare. In addition to the penalties prescribed for a violation of license limitations or
restrictions, every licensee who violates the license limitations or restrictions imposed upon them by the City Clerk's Office shall have their license
revoked, pursuant to the procedures for revocation in chapter 1, article A of this title.
C. In the event the Director determines that an applicant fails to qualify for a license or license renewal governed by this chapter, the Director may deny a
license to such applicant by following the procedures set forth in chapter 1, article A of this title.
D. Upon a finding that licensee committed any of the following violations or those set forth in chapter 1, article A of this title, the Director shall follow the
procedures set forth in chapter 1, article A of this title, as applicable, in suspending or revoking an affected license governed by this chapter.
1. If the Director determines that a licensee failed to continue to have and maintain all of the qualifications and none of the disqualifications provided in
this chapter throughout the license period, the City Clerk's Office may revoke the affected license. Such revocation shall prevent the licensee from
obtaining or reinstating any such license until the licensee qualifies for the license and applies anew for said license.
2. In the event the Director determines that a licensee has pled guilty to, has been found guilty of, or has received a withheld judgment for, or has been
sentenced for a violation of this chapter, in addition to the criminal penalties prescribed therefor, the licensee may have the affected license governed
by this chapter revoked, or be ineligible for reapplication, reinstatement, or issuance of any license governed by this chapter for a period of up to five
(5) years.
3. A third (3rd) license suspension within one license term shall be deemed a revocation.
4. A person whose license is revoked shall be required to re-apply for a new license, rather than apply for reinstatement of the revoked license.
5. The Director may address a rule violation or violation of the terms and conditions of a permit by amending, suspending, or completely revoking a
license issued pursuant to this chapter. The Director may require a licensee to reduce fleet size or to completely remove devices from the public
right-of-way for revocation or during a period of suspension. A licensee shall remove any and all devices from the public right-of-way within ten (10)
calendar days of receiving notice from the Director. (Ord. 31-18, 8-21-2018)
3-14-16: ENFORCEMENT:
The Director is authorized to carry out the policies and procedures herein described, and may enforce the provisions of this title and chapter by imposing
administrative license penalties, including suspension or revocation of the licenses, by initiating criminal charges by serving an Idaho Uniform Citation or
by referring a written report to the Boise City Attorney's Office for review and filing of a complaint and summons or warrant in the Magistrate's Division of
the District Court, or by both such administrative license penalties and criminal penalties. (Ord. 31-18, 8-21-2018)
3-14-17: PENALTIES:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 154/503
The violation of any of the provisions of this chapter is punishable as a general misdemeanor and upon conviction subject to the penalty as provided in
section 1-4-1 of this Code. In addition to a criminal penalty, the violation of any of the provisions of this chapter may result in either the suspension or
revocation of the stationless bicycle share program. (Ord. 31-18, 8-21-2018; amd. 2019 Code)
3-14-18: MANDATORY REVIEW:
The Director shall conduct a comprehensive review of stationless bicycle share programs and individual stationless bicycle share licensees within six (6)
months of the effective date of this chapter or within three (3) months of the deployment of any device by a bicycle share operator licensed pursuant to this
chapter, whichever occurs first. Thereafter, a comprehensive review by the Director shall be conducted every six (6) months, until directed otherwise by
City Council. Results of each comprehensive review shall be shared with Mayor and Council. (Ord. 31-18, 8-21-2018)
Chapter 15
VEHICLE IMMOBILIZATION ON PRIVATE PROPERTY
3-15-1: PURPOSE AND SCOPE:
A. Specified: The purpose of this chapter shall be the protection of the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the City and their vehicles by imposing
reasonable regulations on the use of vehicle immobilization operations within the City limits upon public and private parking facilities.
B. Exceptions: This chapter shall not apply to:
1. Any property owner who immobilizes unauthorized vehicles and does not require any remuneration, monetary or otherwise, for the removal of the
immobilization device;
2. The temporary and necessary actions that may be taken by the State, County or City authorities for the emergency needs of the community;
3. The removal of unlicensed or abandoned vehicles from a street, highway, public or private property in compliance with law; or
4. Any private property owner from having an unauthorized vehicle removed by a towing service in compliance with law. (1952 Code § 5-04-01)
3-15-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and derivations shall have the meanings given herein. When not inconsistent with the
context, words used in the present tense include the future tense, words in the plural number include the singular number, and words in the singular
number include the plural number. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory. Words used throughout this chapter, but not defined
herein or in chapter 1, article A of this title, shall have their plain, ordinary and common meaning. Words in any gender shall apply to the feminine,
masculine and neuter genders.
ENFORCEMENT AUTHORITY: Either the Boise City Clerk's Office or the Boise City Parking Services. The enforcement authority shall have the authority
to enforce all provisions of this chapter, including the issuance of uniform criminal citations for violations of any provision of this chapter. The enforcement
authority shall also have the ability to enforce this chapter by suspension or revocation as allowed by this Code.
LICENSING AUTHORITY: Either the Boise City Clerk's Office or the Boise City Parking Services. The licensing authority shall have the final approval over
all of the application requirements for the issuance of the license.
PARKING FACILITY: Either land, lot with designated parking spaces, structure or mechanism for the temporary use of vehicles with the consent of the
owner of the facility and the owner or agent of the owner of the vehicle, where the consent of the owner is manifested by conditions contained in the
signage required by this chapter and the consent of the owner or agent of the owner of the vehicle manifested by the presence of the vehicle in the facility.
PRIVATE PARKING FACILITY: A parking facility owned by a private party, entity or organization or managed by a party other than a city, county or agency
of the United States.
PUBLIC PARKING FACILITY: A parking facility owned and managed by employees or agents of a city, county or agency of the United States.
VEHICLE: Every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a highway, whether or not operational,
excepting devices used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks.
VEHICLE IMMOBILIZATION: The impounding, incapacitating or immobilizing of any vehicle, whether motorized or not, without the permission of the owner
or agent of the owner of the vehicle by the use of any device, wheel clamp, object, barrel, "car boot", mechanism or method either attached to the vehicle
or not, by the owner or agent of the property upon which the vehicle is parked, that does not allow the owner of the vehicle, or his or her authorized agent,
to freely move the vehicle from the place where it is immobilized. (1952 Code § 5-04-02; amd. 2019 Code)
3-15-3: LICENSE REQUIRED; PROHIBITED ACTS:
It shall be unlawful for any person, individual, corporation or agent, or employee of such, to:
A. Engage in vehicle immobilization at a private parking facility within the corporate limits of the City without having first obtained a vehicle immobilization
license or agent photo identification card;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 155/503
B. To immobilize a vehicle of another person for breach of condition not stated in the signage required by this chapter;
C. To charge a fee for release of an immobilized vehicle in excess of the fee stated in the signage required by this chapter;
D. To use any device, object, barrel, "car boot", mechanism or method that injures or damages the vehicle when installed, removed or while the owner or
agent of the owner of the vehicle does not move or attempt to move the vehicle;
E. To engage in vehicle immobilization at a parking facility that is not registered with the licensing authority; or
F. Violate any provision of this chapter. (1952 Code § 5-04-03)
3-15-4: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
All applicants for a vehicle immobilization license under this chapter must file with the City Clerk an application furnished by the City Clerk. The applicant
shall furnish, along with any other reasonable request of the Clerk, the following information:
A. Place Of Business Information: Name or trade name, address and telephone number of the licensee's permanent and fixed place of business. A
permanent or fixed place of business shall be a physical location, building, office or similar, and must have a street address and shall not be a post
office box or drop box.
B. Employee Information: Name, address and telephone number of all employees of the licensee's business.
C. Designated Agent: Name, address and telephone number of designated agent for service of process.
D. Access Number: Telephone number of twenty four (24) hour access number for complaints that must have a person respond to the phone
call/complaint within twelve (12) hours of receipt.
E. Uniform Description: Description of identifying uniform or insignia to be worn by all employees who engage in the booting of vehicles.
F. Insurance: Name, address and telephone number of insurance carrier for the business. Insurance shall be carried at all times during the licensing period
in the amount of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) per claim and the vehicle immobilization license shall be canceled upon notice of lapse in
insurance.
G. Fee Schedule: Current fee schedule charged for the release of all vehicles immobilized.
H. Notice: Copy of the notice that will be attached to vehicles pursuant to subsection 3-15-8C of this chapter.
I. Vehicle Description And Logos: Description of vehicles used to respond to calls for service and identifying logos on vehicle. All vehicles shall have
identifying logos and lettering that shall be visible on both sides of the vehicle of at least three inches (3") in height and be reflective for visibility at
night. The vehicle shall also have a lighted sign with the business name on it for use at night on the vehicle. Lettering shall be of a contrasting color to
the primary vehicle color to provide greater visibility. The licensing authority must approve the identification package for the vehicles used for this
service.
J. Parking Facilities Identification: Identification of all private parking facilities and their owners names and addresses serviced by applicant. Amendments
to this may be done during the licensing period with an additional administrative fee. Applicant shall provide proof or acknowledgment for the Planning
and Development Services Department that the property to be used for parking vehicles is in compliance with this Code for such use.
K. Site Plan Of Parking Facility: A site plan, approved by the licensing authority, of the parking facility, identifying the locations of all signage required by
this chapter. The licensing authority shall have the ability to require the applicant to provide additional signage at the City's sole discretion, to provide
adequate notice. At minimum, signs shall be placed at all entrances and exits, unless approved by the licensing authority for a different or additional
location.
L. Existing Licenses: Any license in existence at the time of the enactment of this chapter shall be canceled. A new application must be applied for
pursuant to the requirements of the most current ordinance. All fees paid by a former licensee will be credited towards the fee for the new license.
(1952 Code § 5-04-04)
3-15-5: FEE FOR LICENSE; GENERAL LICENSE PROVISIONS:
A. Agent Photo Identification; Fee: There shall be accompanied with a completed application for vehicle immobilization license an agent photo
identification card for each agent of the licensee that will be performing immobilization of vehicles and a nonrefundable administration fee in an amount
established by the City Council and listed on the most current City Clerk license fee schedule.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 156/503
B. Scope Of License: The license shall be for the business or individual that requests said license. The license allows the licensee and all of its actual
employees to engage in the business of vehicle immobilization.
C. Nontransferable: A vehicle immobilization license is not transferable or assignable.
D. Determination Of Qualifications: Upon the filing of an application of a vehicle immobilization license, and tendering the fee for the processing of an
application, the City Clerk shall cause to be determined if the applicant has satisfied all conditions and qualifications as hereinafter set out for the
issuance of said license.
E. Approval Or Denial; Time Limit: The City Clerk shall, within thirty (30) days of the application, approve or deny the application based on findings
concerning applicant's compliance with the conditions of this chapter.
F. Additional Information Required: The City Clerk may, at any time, require additional information of an applicant or licensee to clarify items on the
application. (1952 Code § 5-04-05)
3-15-6: TERM OF LICENSE; RENEWAL; LOST LICENSE:
Each license issued under this chapter shall be for one calendar year, expiring on December 31 of each year. Each renewal for license shall be considered
an application for a new license with satisfaction of all conditions and qualifications under this chapter. The fee for the issuance of a lost, destroyed or
mutilated license shall be as established by the City Council and listed on the most current City Clerk license fee schedule. (1952 Code § 5-04-07; amd.
2019 Code)
3-15-7: EXHIBITION OF LICENSE:
Each vehicle immobilization license or agent photo identification card shall be carried and visibly displayed by the licensee and their employees or agents
when engaged in vehicle immobilization at a private parking facility and shall be presented by the licensee, employee or agent upon contact with any
person. The license may not be covered or obscured by any article of clothing. (1952 Code § 5-04-08)
3-15-8: CONDITIONS:
Each licensee or employee or agent of the licensee under this chapter shall observe all the following:
A. Devices Used: Any devices used in the immobilization of any vehicle shall be in safe and proper working condition.
B. Emergency Vehicles Exempt: Emergency vehicles used in police, fire or medical emergencies shall not be immobilized for any reason. Upon proof that
an unmarked vehicle is used for the same purpose, the vehicle immobilization unit shall be removed immediately at no charge.
C. Removable Notice: An easily removed notice must be affixed to the driver's side window of each vehicle immobilized notifying the owner of the vehicle
of the reason for the immobilization as well as the requirements necessary for the release of vehicle. Upon payment of the release fee, the sticker shall
be removed. The notice shall contain the following information:
1. Name and telephone number of company or person to contact for the release of the vehicle.
2. Cost of release of the vehicle.
3. Acceptable forms of payment for the release of the vehicle.
4. Time and reason vehicle immobilized.
D. Twenty Four Hour Service: All vehicle immobilization licensees shall have twenty four (24) hour service and access. Licensees shall respond to all calls
for release of a vehicle within thirty (30) minutes of a request for response and must remain at the facility until the immobilization device is removed,
unless the payment of the fee is refused. The licensees, employees or agents of the licensee may exceed the thirty (30) minute response requirement
if they are actively engaged in the release of another vehicle. It shall be an affirmative defense for the licensees, employees or agents of the licensee to
prove that the delay was caused by the normal operation of the business and not dilatory actions of the licensee, employee or agent of the licensee.
E. Identification: All licensees, employees or agents of the licensee that immobilize vehicles or collect any money to remove the immobilization device shall
wear their photo identification card and display it immediately upon contact with the citizen. All vehicles used by licensee shall have reflective or lighted
signs as required by subsection 3-15-4I of this chapter.
F. Required Signs:
1. No vehicle shall be immobilized at a parking facility unless signs required by this chapter are posted at the designated locations on the site. All signs
shall be posted so that the bottom of the sign is at least thirty six inches (36"), but no more than seventy two inches (72") off of the ground. All signs
shall be of the dimension eighteen inches by twenty four inches (18" x 24") and be reflective. All signs as designated by the licensing authority shall
be lighted for nighttime visibility. The licensing authority may require additional lighted signs upon review of the site plan and visual inspection of the
lot. The signs shall be white with red lettering at least two inches (2") in height and shall contain the following language in the following format:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 157/503
PERMIT
PARKING
ONLY
or
NO
PARKING
ANYTIME
[Hours of Operation or 24 hours]
[BOOTING SYMBOL, as determined by the licensing authority]
VIOLATORS WILL BE BOOTED (FEE$$.$$)
OR TOWED AT THE OWNER'S EXPENSES
[Phone #] for Release - (LICENSEE'S NAME)
2. No additional language may appear on these required signs. The licensing authority must approve all signs.
3. All signs must be readable and unobstructed.
G. Vehicles Parked In Fire Lane: No vehicle parked in a fire lane may be immobilized. These vehicles must be towed in accordance with State law.
H. Attended Vehicles: No attended vehicle may be immobilized without first requesting the occupant remove the vehicle, if practical.
I. Parking Space Striping: All parking spaces shall be visibly striped. No striping is required if the property prohibits the parking of cars at any time.
J. Delivery Vehicles: No delivery vehicle, in service, may be immobilized.
K. Obstructing Vehicles: Vehicles that are obstructing the safe travel in a parking facility and not in a marked space may not be immobilized. These
vehicles must be towed in accordance with State law.
L. Other Signage: All other signs allowing alternate uses of the same parking facilities must be of different color, appearance and physically placed
separately and apart from the signage required by this chapter to avoid confusion.
M. Forms Of Payment: Various forms of payment must be allowed with at least two (2) methods being an alternative to cash, specifically, personal checks,
credit cards or debit cards. (1952 Code § 5-04-09)
3-15-9: SUSPENSION, REVOCATION OR REFUSAL TO ISSUE:
A. Conditions: The licensing authority shall refuse to approve issuance or revoke a vehicle immobilization license for failure to maintain any condition of
this chapter, a violation of chapter 1, article A of this title, or one or more of the following reasons:
1. The making of any false statement as to a material matter in an application for a license, or license renewal, or in a hearing concerning the license.
2. Violation by the licensee, applicant or an employee of licensee or applicant of any provision of this chapter.
3. Revocation of a vehicle immobilization license of the applicant or licensee within thirty six (36) months preceding the application.
4. Use by the licensee of a name or trade name for his vehicle immobilization company other than the one registered with the City Clerk.
5. Suspension of the vehicle immobilization license two (2) times within thirty six (36) months. (1952 Code § 5-04-06)
B. Review Upon Repeated Violations: The licensing or enforcement authority at any time may seek review by the City hearing examiner for suspension or
revocation of the license for repeated violations of this chapter. Revocation or suspension shall be conducted pursuant to chapter 1, article A of this
title. (1952 Code § 5-04-06; amd. 2019 Code)
3-15-10: PENALTY:
Any person, individual, corporation who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be
subject to penalty as provided in section 1-4-1 of this Code. Each incident of violation shall be a separate offense and punishable as hereinabove
described. (1952 Code § 5-04-10; amd. 2019 Code)
Chapter 16
NONCONSENT TOWING SERVICES
3-16-1: INTENT AND SCOPE:
A. It shall be the policy of the City to provide for the protection of the public interest as it relates to the towing of vehicles from public or private property
without the consent of the vehicle owner or operator. To that end, this chapter provides for regulations intended to safeguard the public health, safety
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 158/503
and welfare, and promote the best interests of the community, including regulations to prevent fees, rates and tow activities that are arbitrary, unfair,
discriminatory or unequally applied.
B. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to grant an applicant or licensee a property right or interest in conducting nonconsent tows. The person or
entity requesting a nonconsent tow retains full authority to select the licensee of their choice to perform this service. (1952 Code § 10-23)
3-16-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and derivations shall have the meanings given herein. When not inconsistent with the
context, words used in the present tense include the future tense, words in the plural number include the singular number, and words in the singular
number include the plural number. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory. Words used throughout this chapter, but not defined
herein or in chapter 1, article A of this title, shall have their plain, ordinary and common meaning. Words in any gender shall apply to the feminine,
masculine and neuter genders.
ABANDONED: A vehicle left on private property without permission of the persons with possessory interest, or on a highway or other property open to the
public for purposes of vehicular traffic or parking, or upon or within the right-of-way of any highway, for twenty four (24) hours or longer.
FIRE LANE: An area on public or private property reserved for providing Fire Department access to structures, firefighting fixtures or equipment, and
clearly marked with such designation.
GVWR: Gross vehicle weight rating or maximum allowable weight of the fully loaded vehicle, to include all fuel and other liquids, passengers, cargo and
the tongue of any towed vehicle.
JUNKED: Vehicles that are extensively damaged, to include, but not limited to, broken windows and/or windshield or missing parts integral to physical
operation of the vehicle, such as tires, motor or transmission; vehicles that pose a safety risk, such as those with leaking fluids; and vehicles that otherwise
cannot be legally driven on the roadway in the condition in which they are found.
LAW ENFORCEMENT PERSONNEL: Employees of a law enforcement agency, to include civilians as well as sworn officers.
NONCONSENT TOWING: Removal of a vehicle from public or private property by the use of a tow truck without the consent of the vehicle owner, driver or
agent of the vehicle owner.
OEM: Original equipment manufacturer.
VIN: Vehicle identification number, consisting of numbers and letters, placed on a vehicle by the manufacturer for the purpose of identifying the vehicle.
(1952 Code § 10-23-01; amd. 2019 Code)
3-16-3: LICENSING REGULATIONS:
All persons who tow or otherwise remove vehicles from public or private property without the consent of the vehicle owner or operator shall maintain a
valid City towing license. It shall be unlawful to conduct a nonconsent tow without a valid license issued under this chapter. (1952 Code § 10-23-02)
3-16-3-1: LICENSE APPLICATION PROCEDURE:
A. Information Required: Written application upon the form provided by the City Clerk's Office and signed by the applicant must be filed with the City Clerk
and accompanied by the required administrative fee. The following information must be contained in the application and must be verifiable at the time
of the application review:
1. The trade name, address and telephone number of the company requesting the license.
2. The number and types of tow trucks to be operated under the license.
3. The license number and VIN number of each tow truck to be utilized under the license.
4. The full name, address, telephone number and date of birth of the owners of the applicant company or the principal stockholders and operating
manager if the applicant is a corporation.
5. The full name, date of birth, date of hire and driver's license number for all persons who will be operating a tow truck pursuant to the requested
license.
6. A notarized signature of the applicant attesting that the applicant and all other listed operators meet all license qualifications outlined in this chapter.
B. Applicant Owner Or Representative: The applicant must be the company owner or authorized representative.
C. Fingerprinting; Background Check: All persons listed on the application shall submit to a background check as set forth in section 3-1A-6 of this title.
D. One License Per Individual: Only one license per individual, business or company will be permitted. An applicant for a license may not be named as an
owner or driver on any other license application under this chapter. A licensee under this chapter may not operate a tow truck under any nonconsent
tow license except for the license issued directly to that licensee.
E. Term Of License; Renewal: Licenses will expire on September 30 of each calendar year. The license must be renewed on an annual basis by
resubmitting the written application form with current information and the administrative fee, no later than thirty (30) days prior to the expiration date.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 159/503
F. Police Department Review: The City Clerk shall process the application and forward to the Police Department for review. Once the Police Department
has verified that the applicant and all others listed as operating under the license meet all applicable requirements, the City Clerk will be notified to
issue the license.
G. Fee: The nonrefundable annual fee to accompany a towing license application shall be in an amount established by the City Council and listed on the
most current City Clerk license fee schedule. A prorated annual fee will be assessed if the prior annual license was obtained within four (4) months of
the renewal date.
H. Certified Truck Inspections: The applicant/licensee shall be required to obtain certified inspections on an annual basis for all tow trucks covered by the
license and submit an inspection form for each truck, available from the City Clerk's Office, completed and signed by the certifying mechanic. The
completed inspection forms shall be submitted to the Police Department within ninety (90) days of the issuance of the license. The applicant/licensee
shall be responsible for all costs associated with such inspections. Failure to submit the inspection forms in a timely fashion or failure to pass the
inspection shall be grounds for suspension or revocation of the license.
I. Notification Of Changes: The licensee shall notify the City Clerk and the Police Department in writing within ten (10) days of any changes to the
information contained on the license application. Failure to make proper notifications under this section may result in the suspension or revocation of
the license. Additional named individuals shall be required to submit to fingerprinting and are subject to criminal background checks as described in
section 3-1A-6 of this title. (Ord. 38-15, 8-25-2015)
3-16-3-2: REQUIREMENTS AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF LICENSEE:
A. Availability; Base Station: Each licensee shall maintain a single, twenty four (24) hour towing service, available seven (7) days per week, with the
dispatch of such service to be from base stations or an answering service. Two (2) or more licensees may share a base station.
B. Display Of License; Place Of Business: Each license issued pursuant to this chapter must be posted and kept in a conspicuous place in the main place
of business of the licensed tow company. The main place of business shall be either the tow lot from which citizens will retrieve their vehicle or a
business office at which the licensee or representative can be reached twenty four (24) hours a day.
C. Maintenance Of Trucks And Equipment: All tow trucks used pursuant to a towing license, to include all required accompanying equipment, shall be
maintained in good working order and safety certified through inspection at all times.
D. Identification Of Trucks; License Sticker Displayed: All tow trucks used pursuant to a towing license shall be readily identifiable by conspicuous
permanent painting or lettering with the name of the tow company, and shall display a license sticker issued by the City Clerk on the inside lower right
hand corner of the windshield.
E. Phone Book Entry: Each licensee shall maintain an entry in a local phone book under the operating name of the tow company.
F. Operator's Certification Of Training Required: All operators of tow trucks covered by a towing license are required to receive a nationally recognized
operator's certification of training within one year of employment as a tow truck operator. Copies of the training certification shall be provided to the City
Clerk and the Police Department.
G. Licenses Required: All operators of tow trucks covered by a towing license must maintain a current and valid Idaho driver's license, and must carry said
license on their person, along with a copy of the towing license which covers the vehicle they are operating, at all times when operating the tow truck
on public roadways or while engaged in the act of towing or otherwise moving a vehicle.
H. Prohibited Persons: No person who has pled guilty to or been convicted of, regardless of the form of the judgment, any crime punishable by
incarceration in a State correctional facility or any crime of violence, harassment or theft, shall be eligible to receive a license under this chapter or
operate a tow truck covered by a license issued under this chapter until five (5) years has passed since the date of initial entry of judgment.
I. Changes To Business: The City Clerk and the Police Department shall be notified in writing within ten (10) days of any change, either wholly or in part, of
the ownership of the licensed entity or any change of address or business name of the licensed entity.
J. Impound Lot; Operational Requirements: Each licensee shall maintain its own separate locked, lighted and secured impound lot, bordered by a
chainlink, steel or concrete fence not less than six feet (6') in height and maintain insurance on said property to cover any fire, theft and vandalism of
vehicles stored upon the property. In addition, the licensee is required to maintain an agent on the premises at all times or, in the alternative, to post a
clearly legible and visible phone number on the premises which can be used to contact the licensee or an agent of the licensee at any time. The
licensee or agent must be immediately available to respond to the impound lot upon request and allow for retrieval of personal property or recovery of
towed vehicles at any time, day or night. The licensee or agent may deny immediate recovery of personal property or the towed vehicle if there is an
identifiable safety issue. An identifiable safety issue means obvious intoxication or aggressive behavior by the person wishing to retrieve the
possessions or the vehicle which can be documented by the licensee or agent. When such refusal of service occurs, the licensee shall send notification
in writing to the Police Department the next business day. Licensees may only charge for removal of personal property when it occurs after hours at the
request of the owner of the personal property as described in section 3-16-7 of this chapter.
K. Liability Insurance: Each licensee shall procure and maintain throughout the term of the license a commercial general liability insurance policy, naming
the City as an additional insured, in an amount not less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) and a current copy of such shall be filed with the City
Clerk and the Police Department. In addition, each tow truck operated under a towing license shall be insured pursuant to Idaho Code title 49, with
proof of such insurance to be located within each vehicle.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 160/503
L. Professional Conduct: All licensees and employees and other agents of licensees shall conduct themselves in a professional manner at all times when
dealing with members of the public. Documented verbal and/or physical abuse towards citizens will not be acceptable and may be grounds for
suspension or revocation of the related tow license or denial of a renewal of the license.
M. Acceptable Payment: Licensees shall accept major credit cards as well as cash for payment of any fee authorized by this chapter. A three percent (3%)
administrative fee may be charged when accepting payment by credit card. (1952 Code § 10-23-02.2)
3-16-3-3: EMPLOYEE OF LICENSEE TO PERFORM NONCONSENT TOWING:
Employees of licensees who are listed on the license application and who meet all qualifications pursuant to this chapter, may conduct nonconsent tows
without obtaining an individual towing license; provided, they shall be required upon request to verify they are covered employees. (1952 Code § 10-23-
02.3)
3-16-3-4: REQUIRED RECORDS:
A. Information Required: A licensee conducting a nonconsent tow must maintain a record of the tow to include the following information:
1. The person or business authorizing the tow;
2. The name of all persons present during the tow;
3. The location of the tow;
4. The date and time of the tow;
5. The color, make, model and year of the vehicle towed;
6. A description of any personal property located within the towed vehicle if known to the licensee;
7. An itemized statement of services provided and fees owed; and
8. The final disposition of the vehicle after the tow, to include whether it was claimed by the owner or agent of the owner, disposed as low value or
auctioned. If auctioned or disposed as low value, detailed statement of the revenue received for the vehicle, including any parts of the vehicle sold or
auctioned as separate parts.
B. Copy Available Upon Request: Upon request of the Police Department, the registered owner of a towed vehicle or the owner's lawful representative, the
licensee responsible for the tow shall provide a copy of the record of the tow, as defined in subsection A of this section, at no cost. (1952 Code § 10-23-
02.4)
3-16-3-5: DENIAL, SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
A. Denial; Conditions: The Police Department may deny a request for license under this chapter, or suspend or revoke a previously issued license upon
notice of a failure to meet, maintain or follow all qualifications, regulations and requirements of this chapter and, in addition, for the following reasons:
1. Making of any false statement in the application for license or license renewal, or in a hearing regarding the license.
2. Allowing anyone to conduct nonconsent tows pursuant to the license who does not qualify under this chapter, or who violates any provisions of this
chapter while operating pursuant to the license.
3. Use of the license in a manner contrary to the terms of this chapter or in violation of any City ordinance, State law, regulation or statute.
4. Three (3) or more previous violations of the provisions of this chapter.
B. Request For Hearing: Upon notice of a denial, suspension or revocation of a license under this chapter, the licensee or applicant may request a hearing.
Such request must be in writing and mailed to the Police Department Impound Unit no later than ten (10) days from receipt of the notice of denial,
suspension or revocation.
C. Hearing Examiner: Upon receipt of the request for hearing, the Police Department shall appoint a hearing examiner to take testimony and other
evidence, and issue a finding as to whether there is good cause for the denial, suspension or revocation of the license. Such finding shall be in writing
and submitted to the Deputy Chief of the Operations Support Bureau of the Police Department.
D. Appeal To City Council: If the denial, suspension or revocation is upheld by the hearing examiner, the applicant/licensee may appeal the decision to the
City Council by sending written notice to the Police Department Impound Unit within ten (10) days of receipt of the findings of the hearing examiner.
E. City Council Hearing: The Police Department shall be responsible for noticing a hearing before the Council by which objection to the hearing examiner's
findings can be made. The Council may hear argument but shall not take additional evidence. The Council may adopt the findings of the hearing
examiner or may issue an amended finding.
F. Appeal To District Court: The decision of the Council shall be final and conclusive. Appeal of the decision of the Council may be made by filing a
complaint with the District Court for Ada County within ten (10) days of the Council decision. (1952 Code § 10-23-02.5)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 161/503
3-16-4: TOWING REGULATIONS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to tow a vehicle or otherwise act in contravention of the following regulations. (1952 Code § 10-23-03)
3-16-4-1: RESPONSE TO SCENE OF COLLISION:
A. Prohibited When Reported To Law Enforcement: No person may drive a tow truck, regardless of whether the tow truck is licensed or not under this
chapter, to the scene of a collision which is required to be reported to law enforcement under any of the provisions of Idaho Code title 49, unless
expressly summoned by law enforcement personnel.
B. Exception: If a tow truck operator responds pursuant to a private request and is unaware that a reportable collision has occurred, the operator will not
be deemed to have violated this section; provided, that the tow truck operator shall immediately notify law enforcement once the operator is made
aware of the reportable collision. (1952 Code § 10-23-03.1)
3-16-4-2: USE OF EMERGENCY LIGHTS:
Tow trucks must utilize their overhead emergency lights, required to be on all tow trucks licensed by this chapter, while standing on a roadway for the
purpose of conducting a tow, and while actively engaged in the preparation for towing and transportation of a towed vehicle. These lights must be amber in
color unless the truck is actively engaged in the recovery of a motor vehicle and is blocking one or more lanes of travel, at which time red lights are
authorized. (1952 Code § 10-23-03.2)
3-16-4-3: CLEAN UP OF DEBRIS AT SCENE OF COLLISION:
Tow truck operators are required to remove all collision debris from the roadway when towing a vehicle away from the scene of a collision. Tow truck
operators must also clean up roadway debris caused by the removal of an abandoned vehicle. (1952 Code § 10-23-03.3)
3-16-4-4: SOLICITING BUSINESS:
No person may solicit, either directly or indirectly, the business of towing, removing, repairing, wrecking, storing, trading or purchasing motor vehicles while
at the scene of a law enforcement authorized tow. (1952 Code § 10-23-03.4)
3-16-4-5: SPECIFIC REQUEST FOR TOW:
It shall be unlawful to conduct a nonconsent tow except under the specific request of law enforcement personnel, other government officials, or the owner
or authorized representative of the private property from which a tow will be made. General authorization for nonconsent tows from private property is not
permitted. Specific requests for nonconsent tows from private property, other than requests from law enforcement or other government officials, must
include written authorization from the owner of the property or the authorized representative, who shall be present at the time of the removal of the vehicle.
Such presence will not be required when the vehicle to be removed is parked in a manner which interferes with entrance to or exit from the private
property. (1952 Code § 10-23-03.5)
3-16-4-6: REQUIRED NOTIFICATION OF PRIVATE PROPERTY TOWS:
It shall be unlawful to tow a vehicle from private property unless it is clearly posted in a conspicuous area near the location of the tow the name and phone
number of the licensee conducting the tow, or unless the tow is directed by law enforcement personnel or other government officials. It shall be unlawful to
post private property pursuant to Idaho Code section 49-1806 with any sign indicating vehicles may be towed by a company not licensed to perform
nonconsent tows. Tow companies are expressly prohibited from posting signs indicating they will perform nonconsent tows if they are not licensed under
this chapter. Licensees shall notify the Police Department by the next business day after any private property tow, the make, model and license number of
the vehicle removed, as well as the location from which it was towed and the person authorizing the tow. (1952 Code § 10-23-03.6)
3-16-4-7: UNLAWFUL REQUEST FOR TOW:
It shall be unlawful to knowingly request a tow of a vehicle or to conduct a tow of a vehicle that is lawfully parked or otherwise lawfully upon private
property, unless at the direction of law enforcement personnel or other government officials. It is unlawful to authorize a nonconsent tow by any company
or individual not licensed under this chapter. It is unlawful to receive any payment, including tow fees, storage fees or any other fee listed in this chapter for
a tow initiated in violation of this chapter. (1952 Code § 10-23-03.7)
3-16-4-8: PLACEMENT OF TOWED VEHICLE:
All vehicles towed without the consent of the owner or operator shall be delivered in a safe manner to an impound lot, located within the City limits or area
of impact, or the City limits of Meridian or Garden City, that is locked, lighted and secure. If the tow was directed by law enforcement personnel, that
person may also direct the location of the vehicle storage. (1952 Code § 10-23-03.8)
3-16-4-9: RELEASE OF VEHICLE:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 162/503
A tow truck operator shall release a vehicle upon request of the owner or driver if the vehicle has not yet been removed from the tow location and the
owner or driver can lawfully remove the vehicle from the location at that time. The tow truck operator shall not be permitted to require payment of the tow
fee unless the vehicle has been attached to the tow truck and is in a position ready to be towed prior to the request for release. If the vehicle is not
attached to the tow truck at the time of request for release, the tow truck operator may require a payment not to exceed fifty dollars ($50.00), plus mileage
one way from the storage lot prior to releasing the vehicle; however, the tow truck operator shall allow for reasonable accommodations for the owner or
driver to obtain the required fee before removing the vehicle from the location. (1952 Code § 10-23-03.9)
3-16-5: REMOVAL OF VEHICLES FROM PUBLIC STREETS AND PROPERTY:
3-16-5-1: UNLAWFUL STANDING OR PARKING OF VEHICLES:
Any police officer shall be authorized to direct the removal of a vehicle stopped or parked upon a street, roadway or public place in violation of any of the
provisions of title 6 of this Code, or Idaho Code title 49. (1952 Code § 10-23-04.1)
3-16-5-2: VEHICLE OPERATOR ARRESTED:
Any police officer shall be authorized to direct the removal of a vehicle from which the operator has been arrested or otherwise taken into lawful custody.
Exceptions to this authorization are vehicles parked on private property with the express permission of the property owner or owner representative and
vehicles which are owned by a person other than the arrested operator and the owner is available to remove the vehicle upon direction by a police officer
in a reasonable and timely manner. Removal of vehicles under this section shall be considered lawful law enforcement impounds. (1952 Code § 10-23-
04.2)
3-16-5-3: OTHER LAW ENFORCEMENT TOWS:
Any law enforcement personnel shall be authorized to direct the removal of vehicles that are abandoned, unlicensed, wrecked, junked or hazardously
parked at or upon any street, roadway or public place. In addition, any police officer shall be authorized to direct the removal of vehicles from any place,
public or private, which is parked in a designated fire lane or for which there is probable cause to believe it is stolen, constitutes evidence of a crime or
contains evidence of a crime. (1952 Code § 10-23-04.3)
3-16-6: TOW TRUCK SPECIFICATIONS:
All tow trucks operating under a City towing license shall comply with all safety provisions, rules and regulations required to be observed by motor carriers
by Federal and State law and, in addition thereto, shall comply with the requirements of this chapter. (1952 Code § 10-23-05)
3-16-6-1: CLASSES OF TOW TRUCKS:
A. Class A: Class A tow truck shall be capable of towing and recovery of passenger cars, pickup trucks, small trailers or equivalent vehicles, and shall
have:
1. A minimum manufacturer's gross vehicle weight rating (GVWR) of not less than thirteen thousand five hundred (13,500) pounds, with dual rear tires;
and
2. A wheel lift with a minimum manufacturer's rating of three thousand (3,000) pound lift rating retracted; and
3. A boom with a minimum manufacturer's rating of four (4) ton capacity with single or dual winches; and
4. Winches with a minimum manufacturer's rating of eight thousand (8,000) pounds; and
5. Wire rope (winch line) which shall be a minimum three-eighths inch (3/8") diameter (6 x 19) or OEM specification, and not less than one hundred feet
(100') continuous length.
B. Class B: Class B tow truck shall be capable of towing and recovery of medium size trucks, trailers, motor homes or equivalent vehicles, and shall have:
1. A minimum manufacturer's GVWR of not less than twenty five thousand (25,000) pounds with dual rear tires; and
2. A wheel lift/under lift with a minimum manufacturer's rating of five thousand (5,000) pound lift rating retracted; and
3. A boom with a minimum manufacturer's rating of twelve (12) ton capacity, with single or dual winches; and
4. Winches with a minimum manufacturer's rating of ten thousand (10,000) pounds; and
5. Wire rope (winch line) which shall be a minimum seven-sixteenth inch (7/16") diameter (6 x 19) or OEM specification, and not less than one hundred
fifty feet (150') continuous length.
C. Class C: Class C tow truck shall be capable of towing and recovery of large trucks, trailers, buses, motor homes or similar vehicles, and shall have:
1. A minimum manufacturer's GVWR of not less than forty thousand (40,000) pounds with tandem drive axles; and
2. An under lift with a minimum manufacturer's rating of twenty five thousand (25,000) pounds retracted; and
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 163/503
3. A boom with a minimum manufacturer's rating of twenty (20) ton capacity with single or dual winches; and
4. Winches with a minimum manufacturer's rating of twenty thousand (20,000) pounds; and
5. Air brakes with air hookup package capable of supplying air to disabled vehicles; and
6. Wire rope (winch line) which shall be a minimum five-eighths inch (5/8") diameter (6 x 19) or OEM specification, and not less than two hundred feet
(200') continuous length; and
7. Tow bar or tow sling (if equipped) with a minimum twelve thousand (12,000) pound rating.
D. Class D: Class D tow truck shall be designed and intended to transport other vehicles by loading the vehicle entirely onto the truck; may be flatbed, roll
bed or rail type design, and shall have:
1. Light duty; one vehicle:
a. A minimum manufacturer's GVWR not less than thirteen thousand (13,000) pounds with dual rear tires; and
b. Winch with a minimum manufacturer's rating not less than eight thousand (8,000) pounds; and
c. Wire rope (winch line) with a minimum three-eighths inch (3/8") diameter (6 x 19) or OEM specifications, and not less than forty feet (40')
continuous length.
2. Light duty; two (2) vehicle:
a. A roll bed equipped with wheel lifts or tow bar; and
b. A minimum manufacturer's GVWR of more than sixteen thousand (16,000) pounds with dual rear tires; and
c. Winch with a minimum manufacturer's rating not less than eight thousand (8,000) pounds; and
d. Wire rope (winch line) with a minimum three-eighths inch (3/8") diameter (6 x 19) or OEM specifications, and not less than forty feet (40')
continuous length; and
e. Wheel lift/tow bar with a minimum manufacturer's rating of three thousand (3,000) pound lift rating retracted.
3. Medium duty:
a. A minimum manufacturer's GVWR not less than twenty five thousand (25,000) pounds with dual rear tires; and
b. Winch with a minimum manufacturer's rating not less than eight thousand (8,000) pounds; and
c. Wire rope (winch line) with a minimum three-eighths inch (3/8") diameter (6 x 19) or OEM specifications, and not less than forty feet (40')
continuous length; and
d. Wheel lift/tow bar with a minimum manufacturer's rating of three thousand (3,000) pound lift rating retracted. (1952 Code § 10-23-05.1)
3-16-6-2: TOW TRUCK REQUIREMENTS:
A. Required Equipment: All tow trucks regardless of class shall be equipped with the following:
1. Operating parking brake independent of hydraulic brake system; and
2. Heavy duty transmission; and
3. Dual rear wheels; and
4. Power assisted brakes constructed so as to lock and hold drive wheels, unless ABS equipped; and
5. Revolving or strobe overhead amber emergency lights with three hundred sixty degree (360°) visibility; and
6. Spotlight(s) mounted behind cab capable of lighting scene of disablement; and
7. At least two (2) safety securing devices, which may be chain, nylon strap or steel strap, with a minimum breaking strength of fifteen thousand
(15,000) pounds or OEM specification (winches are not classified as securing devices); and
8. One fire extinguisher having a minimum capacity of five (5) pounds ABC dry chemical; and
9. A minimum of six (6) traffic cones or triangles with a height of not less than eighteen inches (18"); and
10. Magnetic or plastic base portable tail, stop and turn signal lights for the vehicle being towed (except single vehicle roll beds); and
11. Permanent lettering in a size to be easily visible to passing motorists with the company name and phone number.
B. Non-OEM Winches: Tow trucks equipped with non-OEM winches and booms shall be required to provide proof upon request of law enforcement
personnel that the equipment capacity rating is not less than that nationally accepted for the class of tow truck upon which the equipment will be used.
C. Wire Rope: Wire rope (winch line) on all tow trucks shall conform to the following:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 164/503
1. Shall be capable of being fully extended from and fully wound onto the winch drum; and
2. Shall be in good working order with no more than six (6) randomly distributed broken wires in one rope lay or no more than three (3) broken wires in
one strand on one rope lay; and
3. Shall contain no evidence of heat damage from any cause; and
4. Shall contain no evidence of being pinched or crushed; and
5. Shall have no end attachments that are cracked, deformed, worn or loosened; and
6. Wire rope end connections shall be wedged using a thimble. Wire rope end connections may be clamped as a temporary field repair, but shall be
wedged at the earliest opportunity. When clamped, there shall be a minimum of three (3) clamps spaced a minimum of six (6) rope diameters apart
and attached with the base or saddle of the clamp against the longer or live end of the wire rope. The "U" bolt must be placed over the short or dead
end of the rope and must be the proper size for the wire rope being clamped.
D. Trucks Responding To Accidents; Additional Equipment: A tow truck which responds to accident scenes shall carry the following equipment, in addition
to the standard equipment required for all tow trucks:
1. Towing dollies with OEM specifications, except roll bed trucks; and
2. Two (2) 4-gallon or larger trash cans; and
3. A minimum four foot (4') wrecking bar, three-fourths inch (3/4") in diameter; and
4. A broom of a minimum twelve inch (12") width; and
5. A flat tip shovel; and
6. A minimum of six (6) flares, fuses or other alternate lighting devices with a minimum twenty (20) minute capacity; and
7. Jumper cables; and
8. A minimum of four (4) gallons of sand or absorbent material; and
9. A minimum four (4) ton OEM rating snatch block; and
10. A two-way radio or the ability to immediately communicate with the tow office or answering service (not including CB radios); and
11. A minimum of two (2) wheel chocks or scotch blocks capable of securely holding the tow truck while the truck is recovering a disabled or wrecked
vehicle, except tow trucks equipped with locking systems capable of locking the tow truck brake system; and
12. A reflective vest, with a minimum ANSI Class 2 visibility. (1952 Code § 10-23-05.2)
3-16-7: TOWING AND STORAGE RATES:
The rates and fees outlined in this chapter are the maximum amounts that may be collected from an owner, or owner representative, of a vehicle towed
without consent of the owner for the release of the vehicle. It shall be unlawful for anyone to collect a fee or fee amount for a nonconsent tow unless such
fee and fee amount is specifically enumerated in this chapter. All licensees under this chapter must accept major credit cards as well as cash for any
payment authorized under this chapter, provided a three percent (3%) administrative fee may be charged when accepting payment by credit card. (1952
Code § 10-23-06)
3-16-7-1: TOW FEE RATES:
Light duty vehicles (3/4 ton or less cars and trucks) $125.00
Medium duty vehicles (1 ton chassis or larger) 175.00
Heavy duty vehicles (semitractor trailers, buses, etc.) 225.00
(1952 Code § 10-23-06.1)
3-16-7-2: DAILY STORAGE RATES:
Storage fees may not accrue past the date upon which the registered owner has mailed notice of intent to relinquish title to the appropriate government
agency or for more than sixty (60) days.
Release of vehicle within 24 hours of the wrecker arriving at the scene of the tow Included in tow fee of section 3-16-7-1 of this chapter
Subsequent calendar days or portions thereof:
Light duty and medium duty vehicles $25.00
Heavy duty vehicles 50.00
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 165/503
(1952 Code § 10-23-06.2)
3-16-7-3: ADDITIONAL ALLOWED FEES:
The following are fees that are authorized in addition to the tow fee and storage fee otherwise applicable:
After hours gate fee may be collected when a vehicle or personal property from a vehicle is retrieved between the hours of 5:00 P.M. and
8:00 A.M., Monday-Friday, and any time on Saturday, Sunday or a City holiday
$ 50.00
Special equipment fee may be collected when special equipment (defined as equipment not generally needed to accomplish a tow) is
required to accomplish the tow, but tower has the burden of proving the necessity for use of the special equipment
25.00
per item
Clean up fee may be collected when clean up of debris is required by this chapter 25.00
Mileage fee may be collected when a vehicle is released at the scene pursuant to section 3-16-4-9 of this chapter and from the location
of a nonconsent tow to the tower's nearest impound lot
4.00 per
mile
Labor fee: The first hour is included in the tow fee; each subsequent hour or portion thereof:
Light duty and medium duty vehicles 75.00
per hour
Heavy duty vehicles 100.00
per hour
(1952 Code § 10-23-06.3)
3-16-8: ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT:
3-16-8-1: AUTHORIZED FEE FOR VIN INSPECTION:
The police are authorized to collect a fee in such amount as established by the City Council per VIN inspection from the party requesting the inspection to
cover administrative expenses. (1952 Code § 10-23-07.1; amd. 2019 Code)
3-16-8-2: COMPLIANCE CHECKS:
Law enforcement personnel are authorized to conduct compliance checks of any and all requirements contained in this chapter. Failure to allow law
enforcement personnel to verify compliance may result in suspension, denial or revocation of the tow license issued pursuant to this chapter. (1952 Code
§ 10-23-07.2)
3-16-8-3: PENALTY:
A. Misdemeanor: Any person violating the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be subject to
penalty as provided in section 1-4-1 of this Code. Each day such violation is committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense and
be punishable as such hereunder. (1952 Code § 10-23-07.3; amd. 2019 Code)
B. Criminal Penalty Additional: Criminal penalties shall be in addition to, and not considered in lieu of, any action taken to deny, suspend or revoke a
license held under this chapter. (1952 Code § 10-23-07.3)
Chapter 17
SPECIAL EVENTS
3-17-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and derivations shall have the meanings given herein. When not inconsistent with the
context, words used in the present tense include the future tense, words in the plural number include the singular number, and words in the singular
number include the plural number. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory. Words used throughout this chapter, but not defined
herein or in chapter 1, article A of this title, shall have their plain, ordinary and common meaning. Words in any gender shall apply to the feminine,
masculine and neuter genders.
APPLICANT: The person making application for a permit to conduct a special event within Boise City. As used herein, the terms "applicant", "presenter",
"promoter" and "sponsor" may be used interchangeably.
CHIEF: The Chief of the Boise City Police Department, or his/her designee, or the Chief of the Boise City Fire Department, or his/her designee, as
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 166/503
applicable or indicated.
COMMUNICATION PLAN: The applicant's proposed strategy to communicate with residents, businesses and neighborhood association representatives in
areas that may be affected by vehicle or pedestrian traffic, loud or continuous noise, or other effects that may be caused by, or incidental to, a planned
special event.
EXTRAORDINARY RESOURCES: Government public health and/or safety personnel, equipment or other resources for traffic control, emergency medical
services, fire suppression, erection of barriers and essential maintenance of public facilities which would not, in the absence of the special event, be
deployed, scheduled, used, made available or staged. The resources in question are those over and above what would be required on a regular basis but
for the planned special event with one thousand (1,000) or more participants.
INCIDENT ACTION PLAN: The applicant's proposed strategies for managing and responding to unplanned incidents that occur during the planned special
event and to reduce the loss of life and property should an unplanned incident occur. An incident action plan may be developed in cooperation with the
Boise City Police Department, the Boise City Fire Department and other public safety agencies, and may include an overall incident strategy, a plan for
tactical action and a communication element.
PARK: Any and all lands, buildings, reserves, sports complexes, swimming pools, golf courses, trails and other special places, including the Boise River
Greenbelt, which are owned, operated or maintained by Boise City. Parks are delineated generally in the publication known as the Department of Parks
and Recreation Map and/or specifically in the inventory of park properties at the Office of the Director of the Department of Parks and Recreation.
PARK EVENT: Any special event that occurs in whole or in part within a Boise City park or parks. All park events are subject to the rules and regulations of
the Department of Parks and Recreation and applicable City ordinances. Examples of park events may include sports tournaments, Art in the Park or any
other special event or gathering within a park or a portion of a park.
PERMIT: A written document authorizing a particular use of, or on, public property or on private property as provided in this chapter. As the term is used in
this chapter, a permit is obtained from the City Clerk, the Director of the Department of Parks and Recreation, the Police Chief, another Boise City
department, or another designated governmental authority with permit jurisdiction.
PERSON: Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or any organization of any kind.
PLANNED SPECIAL EVENT: Any single gathering, special event or series of gatherings or special events for which planning reasonably could have
occurred within the time frames required by this chapter. Examples of a planned special event include, but are not limited to, an outdoor concert, a parade,
the Hyde Park Street Fair, Art in the Park, a festival (such as Jaialdi), a block party, any of a number of sporting events (such as a marathon, bike race or
running event), or other organized activity conducted for a common or collective use or purpose. A planned special event does not include a spontaneous
special event, as that phrase is defined in this section.
PLAZA: Includes the Boise City Hall Plaza on Capitol Boulevard, the Grove Plaza and any other public property on which people traditionally or historically
gather. Plazas are included in the definition of "sidewalk", as defined in this section.
PROJECTED ATTENDANCE: The estimated number of persons who will, are reasonably likely to, or are expected to attend, participate in, observe or
spectate at a special event.
PUBLIC PROPERTY: Property owned by, operated by, leased to, or managed or maintained by Boise City, the Capital City Development Corporation
(CCDC), the Ada County Highway District (ACHD) or the Idaho Transportation Department (ITD).
SECURITY PLAN: An applicant's written proposal for maintaining public safety at a planned special event.
SIDEWALK: Any publicly owned area or way, whether or not it is paved or improved, set aside for, or open to, the general public for purposes of pedestrian
or bicycle traffic, or for public gatherings, and not intended for motor vehicle use. This definition of "sidewalk" shall include plazas, as defined in this
section.
SPECIAL EVENT PERMIT: A permit issued by the SET to conduct a special event upon public or private property within Boise City.
SPECIAL EVENT PERMITTEE OR PERMITTEE: A person in possession of a valid Boise City permit issued pursuant to this chapter.
SPECIAL EVENTS TEAM OR SET: The committee delegated responsibility to review each application for a special events permit. The SET consists of a
Boise City employee appointed by the Mayor as the SET Chair and at least one representative from each of the following departments, divisions or
agencies: Parks and Recreation, Public Works, City Clerk's Office, Police, Fire, All Hazards Incident Management Team, Planning and Development
Services, Arts and History, Parking Services, Risk Management, Central District Health Department, Ada County Highway District, Capital City
Development Corporation, Downtown Boise Association, Ada County Emergency Medical Services, Boise State University, Ada County Sheriff's Office
and other advisory members appointed by the Mayor.
SPONTANEOUS SPECIAL EVENT: An unplanned special event that occurs at the spur of the moment, or that occurs in reaction to an international,
national, state, regional or local issue. A spontaneous special event is one that, even with the exercise of due diligence, cannot reasonably be planned or
anticipated in compliance with the deadlines of this chapter.
STREET: Any place or way set aside or open to the public for purposes of motor vehicle traffic, including any berm or shoulder, right-of-way or median
strip, but excluding those areas that fall within the definition of a sidewalk, as defined in this section.
STREET EVENT: Any planned special event, whether moving or stationary, upon a street, which will impede vehicular traffic. The streets impacted by a
street event will likely be subject to closure, traffic interruption or other traffic related restrictions to ensure public safety and the safety of the participants of
the street event. Examples of a street event include a block party, a street dance, any races involving walking, running or bicycling, a march, a parade or
procession, or any other similar special event occurring on a street.
TRANSPORTATION PLAN: The applicant's proposed strategy to accommodate the movement of people to, from, within and around a planned special
event with as little impact on other vehicle and pedestrian traffic as possible.
TRASH AND RECYCLING PLAN: The applicant's proposed strategy for the collection of trash and recyclable materials during a planned special event for
the purposes of maximizing recycling, reducing trash and protecting public property and resources. (Ord. 10-14, 3-25-2014; amd. 2019 Code)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 167/503
3-17-2: PLANNED SPECIAL EVENT PERMIT REQUIRED:
A. When Permit Required: No person shall conduct a planned special event on public property that is reasonably expected, based upon a good faith
estimate of the projected attendance of more than one thousand (1,000) people, to require extraordinary resources without first obtaining a planned
special event permit.
B. Extraordinary Resources: For the purposes of this chapter, every planned special event on public property that has a projected attendance of more than
one thousand (1,000) people is expected to require extraordinary resources.
C. Exceptions: Special events not required to obtain a planned special event permit are:
1. A planned special event occurring entirely on private property, regardless of projected attendance;
2. A planned special event occurring on public property with a projected attendance of less than one thousand (1,000) people that is not reasonably
expected to require extraordinary resources;
3. Spontaneous special events for the purpose of expressive or associative activity.
D. Use Of Special Events Planning Process: Any person conducting a planned special event on public or private property in which the number of
reasonably projected attendees, participants, observers or spectators is less than one thousand (1,000) persons and which will not require
extraordinary resources may use the special events planning process. Any person promoting, sponsoring or presenting a planned special event on
private property in which the number of reasonably projected attendees, participants, observers or spectators is greater than one thousand (1,000)
persons and which will require extraordinary resources is encouraged to use the special events planning process.
E. Expressive Or Associative Conduct: For any person promoting, sponsoring or presenting a planned special event, with a projected attendance of one
thousand (1,000) or more persons, for the principle purpose of expressive or associative conduct as protected by the First and Fourteenth
Amendments to the United States Constitution, or article I, sections 4, 9 and 10 of the Idaho Constitution, the application shall be processed promptly
with no conditions that infringe constitutional freedoms, and in a manner that respects the liberties of the applicants and the public.
F. Waivers:
1. Upon request, the City Clerk or designee shall waive the requirement of paying the permit fee for expressive or associative activity upon a finding
that the cost of the permit would pose a substantial burden on the promotion, sponsorship or presentation of the planned special event. In the event
the City Clerk denies the fee waiver request, a written decision shall be provided setting forth the reasons for denial.
2. In order to accommodate other concurrent events, the rights of abutting owners and the needs of the public to use the streets, sidewalks or parks,
content neutral permit conditions may include reasonable adjustments in the date, time, route or location of the proposed event; accommodations of
pedestrian or vehicular traffic using the street; and limitations on the duration of the event. No conditions shall be imposed that serve to
unnecessarily infringe upon constitutional freedoms.
G. Other Permits And Licenses: A planned special event, regardless of whether a planned special event permit is required and obtained, may not be
exempt from other permit and license requirements, such as issuance of a park permit, a citizen use permit, an amplified sound permit, permits for the
sale or dispensing of alcohol, and any other permits required by Federal, State or local law. Vendors participating as part of a permitted special event
are not required to obtain a separate license as otherwise required by chapter 2 of this title.
H. Reimbursement For Extraordinary Expenses: Every person conducting a planned special event shall reimburse the City for the extraordinary resources
actually used as a result of the special event. Reimbursement shall not include the cost of extraordinary resources necessary for ancillary purposes,
such as policing a crowd exhibiting a negative response to a planned special event. Payment for extraordinary resources shall be made to the City
within thirty (30) days of invoicing. Failure to pay within thirty (30) days may result in denial of future special event permits.
I. Optional Use Of SET Permitting Process:
1. Any person conducting a planned special event or an expressive or associative event for which a planned special event permit is not required may
use the SET process for the convenience of seeking approvals, licenses or permits from the several departments and agencies comprising the SET.
2. By submitting to the SET process, an applicant agrees to comply with all laws and regulations applicable to a planned special event and to submit to
the application process required to obtain a planned special event permit. (Ord. 10-14, 3-25-2014)
3-17-3: APPLICATION FOR PERMIT:
A. Application; Documentation; Fee: To obtain a planned special event permit, whether the permit is required or optional, a completed application shall be
submitted to the City Clerk, together with all required documentation and payment of the nonrefundable fee indicated on the City Clerk licensing fee
schedule, unless the fee has been waived by the City Clerk pursuant to subsection 3-17-2F1 of this chapter, prior to the relevant application deadline
specified herein.
B. Application Deadlines:
1. Application for a planned special event permit shall be made to the City Clerk at least forty five (45) days, but not more than three hundred sixty five
(365) days prior to commencement of set up activities for the planned special event or events.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 168/503
2. Upon a showing of good cause by an applicant, and if SET members are available to meet to consider the application, a late application may be
submitted no later than fifteen (15) days prior to commencement of set up activities for the planned special event. Good cause shall be determined
by the SET Chair, and shall be based upon factors furthering public service, health, safety or economic welfare.
3. Applications submitted later than fifteen (15) days prior to commencement of set up activities for the planned special event shall not be considered.
C. Application Content:
1. Requirement: Every person making application for a planned special event permit shall complete the application with all information and
documentation required by the City Clerk on the application.
2. Plans May Be Required: The SET is authorized to require a communication plan, an incident action plan, a security plan, a transportation plan and/or
a trash and recycling plan as a part of any application. An applicant's failure to include any plan required by the SET shall be grounds for denial of a
planned special event permit application.
3. Required Insurance And Indemnification:
a. Every application for a planned special event permit shall include documentary proof that the applicant obtained a comprehensive general liability
insurance policy with a limit not less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) per occurrence, or such higher amount or additional insurance
coverage as required by Risk Management.
b. The required insurance policy shall:
(1) Name the City as an additional insured; and
(2) Be the primary policy, not contributing with or in excess of any coverage the City may carry; and
(3) Be written by a company authorized to write insurance policies, of the type and in the amount required herein, within the State.
c. The insurance shall cover the entire period of the planned special event, including set up and take down.
d. The insurance requirements of this section may be waived by the City Clerk upon submission of proof that:
(1) The applicant is unable to procure insurance at a price that is reasonable as demonstrated by the filing of a minimum of two (2) price quotes for
insurance and an "affidavit of indigency form" with the City Clerk; and
(2) The insurance requirement would effectively preclude lawful, protected and timely expression; and
(3) The applicant lacks alternative means for the same expression.
e. The City Clerk, in consultation with the Risk Manager and City Attorney, shall issue a written decision if the request for waiver of the insurance
requirement is denied.
f. Every applicant shall indemnify the City for, and shall defend and hold the City harmless from, any liability, damage or loss occurring during the
course of the special event, including set up and take down, caused by the negligent or intentional act or omission of any applicant or any officer,
employee, agent or contractor of the applicant.
4. Projected Attendance: Every application for a planned special event permit shall include a good faith estimate of the projected attendance for the
planned special event. The estimate shall include a statement from the applicant describing known factors that may affect attendance, including:
a. Historical attendance at the same (or similar) events in the past;
b. The extent and type of advertising and promotion for the special event;
c. Any other factor or circumstance that may affect attendance at the planned special event.
D. Additional Information: The SET is authorized to request additional content neutral information, documentation or clarification from an applicant when
applications are incomplete or lack sufficient logistical detail for the SET to consider the event. Failure by the applicant to timely fulfill such request to
the satisfaction of the SET shall be grounds for denial of a planned special event permit. (Ord. 10-14, 3-25-2014)
3-17-4: APPLICATION REVIEW; PERMIT ISSUANCE:
A. City Clerk Review For Completeness: Upon submission of a planned special event permit application, the City Clerk shall review the application for
completeness and, if found to be complete, forward it to the SET for consideration. Completed applications are those that are timely submitted with all
required information, documentation and fees.
B. SET Review: The SET Chair may call a meeting of the SET when the review and coordination of a specific planned special event application is deemed
necessary. The applicant shall, when notified by the City Clerk, attend the SET meeting and participate in the SET's review of the permit application. At
the discretion of the SET Chair, the applicant's attendance may be by telephone, video conference or other approved electronic means.
C. Issuance Of Permit: Upon a determination by the City Clerk and the SET that an application is complete and that an applicant meets all requirements,
possesses all qualifications, lacks any disqualifications, and that the applicant paid the required nonrefundable fee listed on the City Clerk license fee
schedule, or that the fee was waived, a planned special event permit shall be issued.
D. Authority To Condition Issuance Of Permit:
1. The SET shall have authority to condition the issuance and continued validity of a planned special event permit in compliance with:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 169/503
a. Content neutral, necessary and reasonable conditions relating to the time, place and manner of the event; and
b. Content neutral restrictions and conditions necessary to protect the safety and rights of persons and property upon which or adjacent to the
location of the planned special event; and
c. Content neutral conditions and guidelines necessary for the control of traffic and safety of the traveling public; and
d. Compliance with the security plan, the transportation plan, the communication plan and the incident action plan; and
e. The use of traffic cones or barricades arranged as required by the SET, ACHD or City Police to ensure the safety of vehicular and/or pedestrian
traffic; and
f. The availability of first aid or other medical care or treatment; and (Ord. 10-14, 3-25-2014)
g. Compliance with any restrictions placed by the SET on the number of people in the event area based upon the International Fire Code and/or
lawful maximum capacity of the facility; and (Ord. 10-14, 3-25-2014; amd. 2019 Code)
h. Compliance with restrictions placed by the SET on the number or type of vehicles, animals, structures or equipment for the protection of the public
facilities, attendees and the general public; and
i. Standards for the number, type and size of garbage and/or recycling containers for the preservation and protection of public facilities; and
j. Restrictions on the use of amplified sound equipment and compliance with noise ordinances, regulations and laws; and
k. A condition that the applicant shall provide notice to residents and/or businesses regarding any activity that may require street or public parking
garage closure, or other circumstance or condition that may affect residents or businesses; and
l. Restrictions on the sale and/or consumption of alcohol or alcoholic beverages; and
m. Guidelines regarding the use of City personnel or equipment; and
n. Conditions to address fire or safety concerns; and
o. Conditions to repair damage or disruption to public property, including but not limited to, landscaping, turf and painted surfaces.
2. The following standard conditions shall apply to all planned special event permits issued pursuant to this chapter:
a. The actual time, place and manner of the special event shall not vary from the time, place and manner stated on the permit application.
b. Unless other arrangements are agreed to in advance by the SET or City Clerk, the facility and/or area in which the event is held shall be returned
to pre-event condition within twenty four (24) hours of the end of the event, unless the SET establishes permit specific timelines. The tasks
involved in returning the facility and/or area to pre-event condition shall include, but shall not be limited to:
(1) Removal and appropriate disposal of trash and recyclables; and
(2) Removal of vehicles, structures, portable toilets and all other equipment; and
(3) Removal of traffic facilities, cones, barricades and markings within and alongside all streets and sidewalks. (Ord. 10-14, 3-25-2014)
3-17-5: DENIAL OF PLANNED SPECIAL EVENT PERMIT APPLICATION:
A. Existing Circumstances: An application for a planned special event permit shall be denied if the City Clerk, in consultation with the SET, determines any
one of the following circumstances exists:
1. The applicant made any material false statement or misrepresentation in the application.
2. The applicant fails to provide any content neutral items or logistical information required on the application or subsequently requested by the SET.
3. The applicant fails to obtain any other required license, permit or authorization from the Police Department, the Fire Department, the Parks and
Recreation Department, the Central District Health Department, the Ada County Highway District, the City Clerk's Office, Planning and Development
Services, Risk Management or the Public Works Department.
4. The applicant, or any other person representing the planned special event, failed to timely pay reimbursement costs associated with a previous
special event, or failed to pay costs associated to another park event.
5. The applicant is not in good standing with the City. For purposes of this section, "not in good standing" means the applicant:
a. Pleaded guilty to, or was found guilty of, a misdemeanor or felony violation of Federal, State or local law occurring during the course of a prior
special event; or
b. Within the previous five (5) years, had a planned special event permit revoked or suspended for a violation of any provision of this chapter.
6. The planned special event will:
a. Interrupt aerial or marine navigation; or
b. So substantially impair or impede public transportation that it cannot be managed through permit conditions; or
c. Cause such significant vehicle or pedestrian traffic congestion that it cannot be managed through permit conditions; or
d. Unduly disrupt construction, maintenance or repair occurring in any public right-of-way, park or other area;
e. Exceed the lawful capacity of the facility, venue or area in which the planned special event will be held; or
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 170/503
f. Have inadequate parking facilities; or
g. Be inconsistent with the International Fire Code.
B. Interference Or Conflict: An application for a planned special event permit may be denied if the City Clerk, in consultation with the SET, determines the
planned special event will substantially interfere or conflict with:
1. Any other planned special event for which a permit has already been issued; or
2. Any other event or activity already approved within a park; or
3. The availability or provision of public safety or other necessary public services.
C. Notice Of Denial: Notice of a denial shall be deemed properly served if sent by United States Postal Service regular mail to the address on file in the
City Clerk's Office that was provided by the applicant, or if notice is hand served upon the applicant. An applicant's failure to accept, acknowledge or
receive notification of a denial shall not invalidate the denial, provided notice was properly served.
D. Included Provisions In Notice: Notice of a denial shall include the grounds upon which the denial is based, and shall include a statement that informs
the applicant of their right to appeal the denial. (Ord. 10-14, 3-25-2014)
3-17-6: SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF PERMIT:
A. Violations: The City Clerk may suspend or revoke any permit issued pursuant to this chapter for a violation by the applicant or permittee, or by any
officer, employee, agent or contractor of the applicant or permittee, or by any person who is under the applicant's or permittee's legal control, of any:
1. Provision of this chapter; or
2. Condition of the permit; or
3. Federal, State or local law or ordinance.
B. Material False Representation: The City Clerk may revoke any permit issued pursuant to this chapter upon determining that the applicant made a
material false representation in an application submitted pursuant to this chapter.
C. Consultation With SET: In determining whether or not to suspend or revoke a permit, the City Clerk may consult with members of the SET.
D. Notice: Notice of suspension or revocation shall be deemed properly served if sent by United States Postal Service regular mail to the address provided
by the applicant, or if hand served upon the applicant. An applicant's failure to accept, acknowledge or receive notification shall not invalidate the
suspension or revocation, provided notice was properly served.
E. Included Provisions In Notice: Notice of suspension or revocation shall include the grounds upon which the suspension or revocation is based, and shall
include a statement that informs the applicant of the right of appeal. (Ord. 10-14, 3-25-2014)
3-17-7: RIGHT OF APPEAL:
A. Scope: An applicant or permittee shall have the right to appeal the denial, revocation or suspension of a planned special event permit, the imposition of
conditions, denial of fee or insurance waiver or other action by the City Clerk, SET or other department.
B. Notice Of Appeal: To appeal, the applicant or permittee shall file a notice of appeal within five (5) business days after receiving notice of conditional
issuance, denial, revocation or suspension of a planned special event permit.
C. Fees Associated With Appeal: Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, all appeals shall be governed by the provisions of chapter 1, article A of this
title. Fees associated with the appeal process may be waived upon request of the applicant or permittee by filing an "affidavit of indigency". The City
Clerk shall consider such waiver request and issue a written decision. (Ord. 10-14, 3-25-2014)
3-17-8: CITIZEN USE PERMIT REQUIRED:
A. Permit Required: No person shall conduct any street event or planned special event, upon any street and in any manner impeding vehicle traffic,
without first obtaining a citizen use permit.
B. Exceptions:
1. No citizen use permit shall be required for picketing within the area of a sidewalk that does not impede or obstruct vehicle or pedestrian traffic in
violation of section 6-12-1 and subsection 5-3-2E of this Code.
2. Applicants for special events with an anticipated attendance of less than one thousand (1,000) people are encouraged to file an application for a
citizen use permit sufficiently in advance to allow the Police Chief to determine the need for police and/or fire resources in addition to those
resources regularly scheduled for the day and time of the event.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 171/503
3. Any person conducting a spontaneous special event that is a street event is encouraged to provide notice to the Police Chief in order to ensure
appropriate police and fire resources are assigned but is not required to obtain a citizen use permit.
C. Application For Citizen Use Permit:
1. Application for a citizen use permit shall be made to the City Clerk, if made during regular business hours, and the City Clerk shall immediately
forward completed applications to the Police Chief for review. If the event is a spontaneous special event and it is impractical during regular business
hours, permit applications may be submitted to the Police Department.
2. Every application for a citizen use permit shall be complete and shall include all content neutral logistical information and documentation required by
the City Clerk, the Police Chief, the Ada County Highway District and the SET.
3. Any street event with an anticipated attendance of less than one thousand (1,000) people which is expected to result in closure of a street shall apply
for a citizen use permit at least five (5) business days before the planned event. Applicants are advised to contact ACHD as soon as possible for
CUP approval as their approval may require more time than the five (5) business days established by this subsection.
4. Any street event which will include the serving or selling of alcohol shall apply for a citizen use permit at least forty five (45) days before the planned
event.
D. Application Review; Permit Disqualifications:
1. Upon receipt of a completed application for a citizen use permit, the Police Chief shall immediately notify the body with ownership or maintenance
authority over the streets for which the permit was requested.
2. No citizen use permit shall be issued if the City Clerk or the Police Chief determines any of the following circumstances or factors exist:
a. The application was not timely filed. Timely filed for planned special events with an anticipated attendance of one thousand (1,000) or more people
is forty five (45) days in advance of the event, or fifteen (15) days if granted a reduced timeline upon a showing of good cause pursuant to
subsection 3-17-3B2 of this chapter; or
b. Considering the date of the planned event, time of day, duration, intended route, length of procession, the number of participants and vehicles,
whether the proposed street event will interrupt the safe and orderly movement of other pedestrian or vehicular traffic that cannot be managed
through additional police officers, fire personnel and equipment as required by subsection F of this section; or
c. The concentration of pedestrians, animals and/or vehicles at the street event will interfere with established levels of fire, police and ambulance
service that cannot be managed through additional police officers, fire personnel and equipment as required by subsection F of this section; or
d. The applicant does not agree to comply with the reasonable traffic control and security procedures established by the Police Department; or
e. The proposed street event conflicts with previously scheduled activities or with a previously issued citizen use permit or special event permit; or
f. The proposed event would conflict with scheduled maintenance or repair of the streets or public rights-of-way.
3. Each of the grounds for denial of a permit application set forth above are found to be reasonably necessary to preserve the public health, safety and
welfare.
4. The City Clerk and Police Chief shall act upon a completed application for a permit timely filed with the City Clerk in a content neutral and
expeditious manner. If, for any reason, a longer period of time is required, the reason for delay shall be provided in writing to the applicant.
E. Issuance Or Denial Of Citizen Use Permit:
1. If, after review by the City Clerk, the Police Chief and/or the SET, a completed and submitted application meets all standards set forth in this section,
with none of the disqualifying factors, the applicant shall be issued a permit.
2. If an application is untimely, incomplete, includes untruthful or misleading statements, or includes any disqualifying factors, it shall be denied.
3. Every notice of denial of a citizen use permit application shall:
a. Be in writing; and
b. Inform the applicant of the reasons for denial; and
c. Advise the applicant of the right to appeal the denial.
4. An applicant may appeal the denial of a permit. The appeal process shall be the same as set forth in this chapter for the denial of a planned special
event permit.
F. Peace Officer Escort And Traffic Control Cost Recovery; Exemption:
1. Every street event involving a vehicle procession shall include one on duty peace officer at the head of the procession and one peace officer at the
end of the procession.
a. No charge shall be levied or charged for the two (2) required peace officers.
b. The Chief is authorized to determine if additional peace officers or any fire personnel are reasonably necessary in the area of the planned
procession. In making this determination, the Chief shall consider the time of day the planned event is scheduled for, date, duration, intended
route, the number of participants, vehicles and size of vehicles. The Chief's determination shall be in writing.
c. If the Chief determines more than two (2) officers or any fire personnel are necessary for the safety of pedestrians, the traveling public and/or
those attending or participating in the street event, due exclusively to the planned street event, written notice of the number and cost of the
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 172/503
additional personnel, and of their required equipment, shall be provided to the applicant.
2. For a stationary street use, such as a block party, the Chief may require the applicant to ensure that one or more peace officers are present to
establish and/or maintain the road closure. If the Chief determines more than one peace officer or any fire personnel are necessary, written notice of
the number and cost of the additional personnel, and of their required equipment, shall be provided to the applicant.
3. Every applicant and permittee shall ensure the required number of peace officers or fire personnel are present prior to commencing or continuing
any street event.
4. The cost for each additional peace officer and the cost of fire personnel shall be the current standard hourly special duty rate. Equipment costs shall
include vehicles, if any are necessary due to the planned street use.
5. Every person who conducts a street event shall reimburse the City for the cost to have more than one police officer (and equipment) present during
a street event, and the cost of all fire personnel (and equipment) actually used during the course of the street event. Reimbursement shall not include
the cost of extraordinary resources for ancillary purposes, such as policing a crowd exhibiting a negative response to a planned special event.
6. The written decision of the Chief regarding additional police and fire personnel as well as equipment may be appealed pursuant to section 3-17-7 of
this chapter and chapter 1, article A of this title.
7. Every person who conducts a street event shall have the right to apply to the Chief for a waiver of costs associated with police and fire personnel
and equipment. Request for waiver is made by filing an affidavit of indigence with the City Clerk. The Chief shall issue a written decision. A denial of
the request for a fee waiver may be appealed pursuant to section 3-17-7 of this chapter and chapter 1, article A of this title.
8. All costs required to be paid to the City, pursuant to this section, shall be paid within thirty (30) days of invoicing.
9. A bona fide spontaneous special event that is a street event is exempt from the requirement to pay costs to the City. (Ord. 10-14, 3-25-2014)
3-17-9: ILLEGAL ACTS:
In addition to the unlawful practices and illegal acts and omissions proscribed throughout this chapter, each of the following acts or omissions shall be
unlawful:
A. To knowingly conduct a planned special event for which a permit was required without a permit.
B. For an applicant to knowingly make any material false statement or misrepresentation on an application for a permit required by this chapter.
C. No applicant for a planned special event permit shall provide an estimate of projected attendance he or she knows, or should know, to be inaccurate.
D. For any applicant or permittee to fail to maintain insurance, of the type and in the amount required, for the entire period of the planned special event,
including set up and take down, unless waived by the City Clerk.
E. To knowingly fail to comply with conditions pursuant to which a planned special event permit was issued.
F. No person shall conduct any street event or planned special event upon any street, in a manner which impedes vehicle traffic, without first obtaining a
citizen use permit.
G. No person shall commence or continue a street event without first ensuring the required number of peace officers or fire personnel are present.
H. To fail to timely pay the City for all expenses required to be reimbursed pursuant to this chapter unless otherwise waived by the Chief or designee. (Ord.
10-14, 3-25-2014)
3-17-10: VIOLATION AND PENALTY:
A violation of this chapter shall be an infraction for a first offense and be punishable by a fine as provided in section 1-4-2 of this Code, exclusive of court
costs. A second or subsequent violation of this chapter shall be a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine as provided in section 1-4-1 of this Code. (Ord. 10-
14, 3-25-2014; amd. 2019 Code)
Title 4
HEALTH AND SANITATION
Chapter 1
NUISANCES
4-1-1: NUISANCE DEFINED:
For the purpose of this chapter, the term "nuisance" is defined to mean any condition or use of property which is detrimental to the health or safety of
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 173/503
persons or the property of others, or which is declared to be a nuisance by this chapter, or by any other State or Federal law. Nuisances shall specifically
include, but are not limited to, the following:
A. Maintaining upon property junk, trash, garbage, refuse or other similar matter as defined by this chapter;
B. Keeping unsanitary matter on premises. It shall be unlawful for any person to keep, or permit another to keep, upon any premises deleterious or septic
material, including, but not limited to, animal feces, unless such material is retained in containers or vessels which deny access to humans, flies,
insects, rodents or other animals;
C. Permitting any premises to become unsanitary or a fire menace by allowing any unsafe matter to grow, accumulate or otherwise occupy and remain on
such premises;
D. Permitting pools of water to accumulate and remain upon any premises, thereby becoming stagnant and foul;
E. Any other use of property which is specifically declared by resolution of the Council to be a nuisance, after compliance with the notice and hearing
requirements of this chapter. (1952 Code § 8-08-01)
4-1-2: EXPECTORATING; SPITTING:
To promote and protect the public health of the inhabitants of the City, it shall be a misdemeanor, subject to penalty as provided in section 1-4-1 of this
Code, for any person to expectorate or spit in any public water fountain; or on the floor, wall, ceiling, furniture, fixtures or equipment in any building open to
and used by the public, save and except in toilet facilities used as receptacles for human waste, cuspidors, spittoons or in any other receptacle located
within said building specifically designed or utilized as a depository for expectorate or spit. (1952 Code § 8-08-04; amd. 2019 Code)
4-1-3: STABLES; PIG PENS:
A. Proper Maintenance Required:
1. Every owner of any stable, pen, building or place in which any horse, cattle, swine or any other animal shall be kept, or any place in which manure or
any liquid discharge of such animal shall accumulate, shall cause such manure or liquid discharge to be placed and kept in a suitable receptacle
completely enclosed and covered from flies, mosquitos or other insects; and such receptacle shall be kept in a suitable place on the premises and
the contents thereof removed therefrom to some proper place at such intervals as shall be necessary and proper under the circumstances in each
particular case.
2. Every owner shall, at all times keep or cause to be kept said places and the drain yards and appurtenances thereof in a neat, clean and wholesome
condition, and it shall be kept in such condition. (1952 Code § 8-08-05)
B. Penalty: Any person who shall fail to comply with the provisions of this section and who shall neglect or refuse to remove such manure, liquid discharge
or offal for a period of one day after being notified to do so by the Chief of Police or Health Officer shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, subject to
penalty as provided in section 1-4-1 of this Code. (1952 Code § 8-08-05; amd. 2019 Code)
4-1-4: ABATEMENT OF NUISANCE:
A. Notice: Whenever a written statement that a "nuisance", as defined in this chapter, exists or is being maintained within the jurisdictional limits provided
by Idaho Code, is received by the City Attorney or designee stating that the same is a menace to the public health or dangerous to the health or safety
of the inhabitants of the City, the City Attorney or designee shall issue a notice requiring the owner or agent of the owner of the premises to remove and
abate the nuisance from said premises within a time, not exceeding ten (10) days, to be specified in the notice. Said notice shall be served by a Code
Enforcement Officer or a police officer, by delivering a copy thereof to the owner, agent or occupant of the said property; or if the same is unoccupied
and the owner is a nonresident, then by mailing the notice to the owner's last known address by certified mail.
B. Failure To Comply; Action By City: If the owner, agent or occupant of the property shall fail to comply with the requirements of the notice within the
period specified therein, the City shall proceed to have the things described in the notice removed and abated from the property and the costs of
abatement assessed in the manner provided for in Idaho Code. (1952 Code § 8-08-02)
4-1-5: NOTICE OF HEARING FOR UNSPECIFIED NUISANCE:
A. Hearing Required: In the event that the activity or use of the property is not a specified nuisance as declared in section 4-1-1 of this chapter, the City
Attorney or designee shall set the matter for a hearing before the City Council and shall notify the owner or agent of the owner or occupant of the
property by personal service, certified mail or substituted service, of the grounds for declaring the use of the property a nuisance and the date of the
hearing before the City Council, which date shall in no event be less than ten (10) days from the receipt of notice of intent to seek a declaration of
nuisance. Failure to receive a notice sent or served shall not invalidate the nuisance declaration resolution.
B. Conduct Of Hearing: At the hearing before the City Council the property owner, or agent of the owner or occupant of the property may present evidence,
call witnesses and be represented by counsel.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 174/503
C. Order Of Abatement; Failure To Comply: In the event the City Council resolves that the specific use of property is a nuisance, the City Council shall, by
resolution, order the abatement or removal of the nuisance within a time period specified in the resolution. Should the owner, agent or occupant of the
property fail to abate or remove the nuisance within the time period set by the City Council, the City shall proceed to abate the same and cause the
costs of abatement to be assessed to the property in the manner prescribed by Idaho Code. (1952 Code § 8-08-03)
4-1-6: PENALTY:
Any person failing to remove or abate any nuisance as described in this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, subject to penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this Code. (1952 Code § 8-08-07; amd. 2019 Code)
Chapter 2
NUISANCE PROPERTY ABATEMENT
4-2-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and phrases used in this chapter shall have the following meanings unless a different meaning clearly appears from the context:
CHIEF OF POLICE: The Chief of the Boise City Police Department or his/her designee.
CITY ATTORNEY: The Boise City Attorney or his/her designee.
NUISANCE ACTIVITIES: Any of the following activities, behaviors or conduct:
A. The illegal manufacturing, producing, preparing, packaging, buying or selling of amphetamine, methamphetamine, heroin or cocaine in any form.
B. The illegal possession of materials or equipment used, or with the intent to be used, in the manufacture, production, preparation or packaging of
amphetamine and methamphetamine, heroin or cocaine.
C. Improper storage or disposal of hazardous materials, as defined in the International Fire Code, as adopted by section 5-12-2 of this Code, which are
used in the activities described in subsections A and B of this definition.
D. Violation of Idaho Code section 18-2604 by intimidation of a witness who has reported nuisance activities, by a person residing on, or the owner of,
property under investigation for nuisance activities.
NUISANCE PROPERTY: Real property, commonly used for human habitation, including all buildings and structures located upon said real property on
which two (2) or more nuisance activities have occurred during any one hundred eighty (180) day period. Real property containing multiple dwelling units
shall only be declared a "nuisance property" as it relates to the individual unit involved in the nuisance activity. However, should the same individual be
involved in multiple instances of nuisance activities on the same real property, but in different units, each incident shall be counted toward a finding of a
nuisance property. If the property owner/manager provides substantiated information that the individual is in the process of being evicted, subsequent
activities performed by the individual to be evicted shall not be counted toward a finding of nuisance property. Further, if the property owner/manager is the
reporting party leading to the discovery of the nuisance activities being conducted on the property, there shall be no finding of nuisance property based
upon the reported incident.
PLAN OF ACTION: A detailed written response from the property owner describing the manner in which the property owner will, within their legal authority,
make a good faith effort to prevent nuisance activities from continuing. The plan of action shall be filed with the Chief of Police within fifteen (15) working
days from the date of the notice in subsection 4-2-2B1 of this chapter. Instructions and educational materials regarding the preparation of the plan of action
will be available at the Office of the Chief of Police.
POLICE REPORT: Information received by the Boise City Police Department which has been substantiated after an investigation.
SECURE TASK FORCE: A committee of individuals, including City staff members, appointed by, and serving at the pleasure of, the Mayor of Boise City.
The SECURE Task Force shall also consist of at least two (2) individuals from a professional association or group, including, but not limited to: IREM,
Idaho Manufactured Housing Association, Idaho Rental Owners and Managers Association, National Association of Residential Property Managers, Ada
County Association of Realtors, as well as a citizen from the private sector knowledgeable in hazardous materials and a citizen knowledgeable in
landlord/tenant law. (1952 Code § 8-18-01; amd. 2019 Code)
4-2-2: PROCEDURE FOR FORMAL PROCEEDINGS:
A. Notice Of Nuisance Property: Upon the receipt of a police report describing activities that are nuisance activities on a property, the Chief of Police may
begin formal proceedings. If formal proceedings are deemed appropriate, the proceedings shall be begun by:
1. Notifying the property owner and the property manager, if known, that the property is in danger of being declared a nuisance property. The notice
shall contain the following information:
a. The street address or physical description sufficient to describe the property location.
b. A statement that a nuisance activity has taken place on the property with a description of the events that have occurred on the property. The
notification shall include educational material and referral information to assist in the abatement of the nuisance activity.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 175/503
B. Second Report: Upon the receipt of a second police report describing activities that are nuisance activities on the same property within a one hundred
eighty (180) day period, the Chief of Police will continue formal proceedings by:
1. Notifying the property owner and the property manager, if known; and if known from official public records, the holder of any mortgage or deed of
trust or other lien or encumbrance of record; the owner or holder of any lease of record; and the holder of any other estate or legal interest of record
in or to the building or the land on which it is located, that the property is in danger of being declared a nuisance property. Service of the notice upon
the owner shall be by delivering a copy of the notice to the individual personally or by leaving a copy thereof at the individual's dwelling house or
usual place of abode with some person over the age of eighteen (18) years then residing therein or by delivering a copy of the notice to an agent
authorized by appointment or by law to receive service of process. Where reasonable efforts to effect personal service have been unsuccessful,
service shall be by registered or certified mail to the last known address of the person to be notified and if no returned receipt, by publication once a
week for three (3) successive weeks in a newspaper or newspapers most likely to give notice to the person to be served. The notice shall contain the
following information:
a. The street address or physical description sufficient to describe the property location.
b. A statement that the property is being considered for declaration as nuisance property with a description of the events that have occurred on the
property.
c. A requirement that the property owner provide a plan of action, approved by the Chief of Police, to abate the nuisance activities.
C. Abatement Upon Failure To Comply; Appeal: The Chief of Police shall begin abatement proceedings if no written response is received from the property
owner within fifteen (15) working days from the date of service or receipt of the notice, or the plan of action agreed upon between the property owner
and the Chief of Police has not been completed within a thirty (30) working day period following the agreement and any applicable extensions.
1. If the Chief of Police and the property owner, or property manager, are unable to reach an agreement on an appropriate plan of action, the Chief of
Police shall mail, by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the property owner and property manager, if any, the requirements which must be
satisfied to prevent the property from being declared nuisance property. Any property owner, or property manager, aggrieved by any decision
rendered by the Chief of Police pursuant to this chapter may appeal such decision to the City Council. Such appeal shall be in writing, describing the
decision and the grounds for the appeal, and shall be filed with the City Clerk within ten (10) days after the receipt of the requirements from the Chief
of Police. The matter shall be heard before the City Council within thirty (30) days of the filing of the appeal. No fee shall be assessed for the filing of
this appeal. The City Council shall have the power to approve, revise or amend the decision of the Chief of Police and the decision of the City
Council shall be final.
2. The Chief of Police shall refer the matter to the SECURE Task Force. The SECURE Task Force shall not refer the matter to the City Attorney if the
owner is cooperating with the Chief of Police and the SECURE Task Force. If the SECURE Task Force agrees that forced abatement is appropriate,
it shall refer the matter to the City Attorney for consideration of proceeding with the abatement of the nuisance property.
D. Notification Procedure: Unless otherwise specified, all notifications shall be made by certified mail return receipt requested at the last known address as
listed on the tax rolls of Ada County, or for corporate entities, the registered agent as listed with the Secretary of State.
E. Statements Not Admission: Statements made by the owner in providing a plan of action to abate the nuisance activities shall not constitute an
admission that any nuisance activities have occurred or are occurring. This subsection does not require the exclusion of any other evidence which may
otherwise be admissible or offered for any other purpose. (1952 Code § 8-18-02)
4-2-3: SUMMARY PROCEEDINGS:
If evidence exists to substantiate the belief that nuisance activities exist or have occurred on the property such that emergency action is necessary to avoid
an immediate threat to public welfare and safety, the Chief of Police may immediately notify the City Attorney and request that summary proceedings begin
to secure immediately a closure of the premises. Summary proceedings to obtain an immediate closure of the property shall be pursuant to rule 65(b) of
the Rules of Civil Procedure for the issuance of a temporary restraining order. The use of summary proceedings does not preclude the exercise of other
emergency procedures. (1952 Code § 8-18-03)
4-2-4: REMEDIES:
A. Legal Proceedings: The SECURE Task Force may request the City Attorney to commence legal proceedings in the District Court to abate the nuisance
activity and/or to seek closure of the property, the imposition of civil penalties against the property owner, and any other remedies allowed by law,
including costs and attorney fees.
B. Order Of Court: If the court finds by a preponderance of the evidence that the property is nuisance property, the court may order the property to be
closed and secured against all unauthorized access, use and occupancy for a period of time which the court deems appropriate in its discretion. The
order shall be part of the final judgment with the court retaining jurisdiction over the matter during the period of closure.
C. Civil Penalty For Abatement Costs: If the court finds by a preponderance of the evidence that the property is nuisance property, the court may order a
civil penalty of the costs incurred by the City to abate the nuisance activities. The civil penalty shall be assessed against the property owner and shall
be included in the civil judgment entered against the property owner.
D. Property Owner Unaware Of Nuisance: If the court finds that the property owner could not at all material times have determined that the property had
become nuisance property after exercising reasonable care and diligence, the court shall not award civil penalties against the property owner, nor order
closure of the property. (1952 Code § 8-18-04)
4-2-5: ENFORCEMENT:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 176/503
In the event the property owner fails to physically secure the property against all unauthorized access, the court may authorize the City to physically
secure the property. In the event that the City is authorized to secure the property, the City shall recover from the property owner all costs reasonably
incurred by the City to physically secure and maintain the security of the property. (1952 Code § 8-18-05)
Chapter 3
RESTAURANTS
4-3-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and the enforcement of this chapter:
HEALTH OFFICER: The duly appointed Health Officer or his deputy or a member or employee of the Central District Health Department.
LICENSE: A license issued by Boise City, which has not been suspended, or is not expired and which has been issued pursuant to the applicant having
met, and continuing to meet, all of the requirements of this chapter.
LICENSING OFFICER: The City Clerk or designated appointee.
PERMIT: The duly issued permit, issued by the Central District Health Department, based on a inspection by a Health Officer of that department.
PERSON: Any individual, firm, corporation, partnership or association.
RESTAURANT: Any fixed or mobile restaurant, coffee shop, cafeteria, short order cafe, luncheonette, tavern, sandwich stand, soda fountain, ice cream
stands, grill, tea room, bar, cocktail lounge, night club, roadside stand, industrial feeding establishment, public or nonprofit organization or institution
routinely serving food, catering kitchen, commissary or similar place in which food or drink is prepared for sale or for service on the premises or elsewhere,
and any other eating or drinking establishment or operation where food is served or provided for the public with or without charge; provided, there shall not
be included private clubs, fraternal and church organizations which do not serve or prepare meals more than once a week.
UTENSILS: Any kitchenware, tableware, glassware, cutlery, utensils, containers or other equipment with which food or drink comes in contact during
storage, preparation or serving to the public. (1952 Code § 8-05-01; amd. 2019 Code)
4-3-2: LICENSE, FEE REQUIRED; TRANSFERABILITY:
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a restaurant in the City who does not possess an unrevoked, unsuspended or unexpired license from the City
Clerk's Office and in whose place of business such license is not posted in a conspicuous place. Each license shall be issued by the City Clerk as of
January 1 of the year in which issued, and shall remain in force for one year and no license shall be transferable. The annual nonrefundable fee for such
license shall be in an amount established by the City Council and listed on the most current City Clerk license fee schedule. Only persons who comply with
the requirements of this chapter shall be entitled to receive and retain such license. A license shall be suspended or revoked by the City Clerk upon
receiving written confirmation from the Central District Health Department that the health permit has been suspended or revoked. (1952 Code § 8-05-02;
amd. 2019 Code)
4-3-3: HEALTH PERMIT REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful to operate any restaurant, when not in possession of a valid health permit as provided by the laws of the State and this chapter, and
every person so operating a "restaurant", as defined in section 4-3-1 of this chapter, shall have the health permit available to show the Health Officer,
Licensing Officer or inspector of the State Department at any time when called for. A permit may be suspended by the Health Officer, or revoked after an
opportunity for a hearing by the Health Officer, upon the violation by the holder of any of the terms of this chapter. (1952 Code § 8-05-06)
4-3-4: GRADING OF RESTAURANTS:
A. Standards For Grading: The grading of all restaurants shall be based upon the following standards:
1. Grades A And B: All grade A restaurants shall comply with all of the following items of sanitation:
Item 1: The floors of all rooms in which food or drink is stored, served or prepared, or in which utensils are washed, shall be of such construction as
to be easily cleaned, shall be smooth, and shall be kept clean and in good repair.
Item 2: Walls and ceilings of all rooms shall be kept clean and in good repair. All walls and ceilings of rooms in which food or drink is prepared shall
be finished in light color. The walls of all rooms in which food or drink is prepared or utensils are washed shall have a smooth washable surface up to
the level reached by splash or spray.
Item 3: When flies are prevalent, all openings into the outer air shall be effectively screened and doors shall be outward opening and self-closing,
unless other effective means are provided to prevent entrance of flies.
Item 4: All rooms in which food or drink is prepared or in which utensils are washed shall be well lighted.
Item 5: All rooms in which food or drink is stored, prepared or served, or in which utensils are washed, shall be well ventilated.
Item 6: Every restaurant shall be provided with adequate and conveniently located toilet facilities for its employees, conforming with the regulations of
the City and the laws of the State. Toilet rooms shall not open directly into any room in which food or drink or utensils are handled or stored. The
doors of all toilet rooms shall be self-closing. Toilet rooms shall be kept in a clean condition, in good repair, and well lighted and ventilated. Signs
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 177/503
directing the washing of hands shall be posted in each toilet room used by employees. In case privies or earth closets are permitted and used, they
shall be separate from the restaurant building, and shall be of a sanitary type constructed and operated in conformity with the standards of the State
Health Department.
Item 7: The water supply shall be easily accessible to all rooms in which food is prepared or utensils are washed, and shall be adequate and of a
safe, sanitary quality.
Item 8: Adequate and convenient hand washing facilities shall be provided, including warm water, soap and approved sanitary towels. The use of a
common towel is prohibited. No employee shall resume work after using the toilet room without first washing his hands.
Item 9: All multi-use utensils and all display cases or windows, counters, shelves, tables, refrigerating equipment, sinks and other equipment or
utensils used in connection with the operation of a restaurant shall be so constructed as to be easily cleaned and shall be kept in good repair.
Item 10: All equipment, including display windows or cases, counters, shelves, tables, refrigerators, stoves, hoods and sinks, shall be kept clean and
free from dust, dirt, insects and other contaminating material. All cloths used by waiters, chefs and other employees shall be clean. Single service
containers shall be used only once. All multi-use eating and drinking utensils shall be thoroughly cleaned with an approved detergent and effectively
subjected to an approved bactericidal process after one usage. All multi-use utensils used in the preparation or serving of food and drink shall be
thoroughly cleaned and effectively subjected to an approved bactericidal process immediately following the day's operation. Drying cloths, if used,
shall be clean and shall be used for no other purpose.
Item 11: After bactericidal treatment, no utensil shall be stored except in a clean, dry place protected from flies, dust or other contamination, and no
utensils shall be handled except in such a manner as to prevent contamination as far as practicable. Single service utensils shall be purchased only
in sanitary containers, shall be stored therein in a clean, dry place until used and shall be handled in a sanitary manner.
Item 12: All wastes shall be properly disposed of, and all garbage and trash shall be kept in suitable receptacles as provided by this Code in such
manner as not to become a nuisance.
Item 13: All readily perishable food or drink shall be kept at or below fifty degrees Fahrenheit (50°F), except when being prepared or served.
Wastewater from refrigeration equipment shall be disposed of.
Item 14: All food and drink shall be wholesome and free from spoilage. All milk, fluid milk products, ice cream and other frozen desserts served shall
be from sources approved by the Health Officer. Milk and fluid milk products shall be grade A. Milk and fluid milk products shall be served in the
original containers in which they were received from the distributor; provided, that this requirement shall not apply to cream, which may be served
from the original or from a dispenser approved for such service. All oysters, clams and mussels shall be from approved sources.
Item 15: All food and drink shall be so stored and displayed as to be protected from dust, flies, vermin, unnecessary handling, droplet infection,
overhead leakage and other contamination. No live animals or fowl shall be kept or allowed in any room in which food or drink is prepared or stored.
All means necessary for the elimination for flies shall be used.
Item 16: All employees shall wear clean outer garments and shall keep their hands clean at all times while engaged in handling food, drink, utensils
or equipment.
Item 17: The premises of all restaurants shall be kept clean and free of litter or rubbish. None of the operations connected with a restaurant shall be
conducted in any room used as living or sleeping quarters. Adequate lockers or dressing rooms shall be provided for employees' clothing and shall
be kept clean. Soiled linens, coats and aprons shall be kept in containers provided for that purpose.
Item 18: Grade B restaurants are those which fail to comply with item 1, 2, 4, 5 or 17 of this subsection, but which conform with all other items of
sanitation required for grade A restaurants.
2. Grade C: Grade C restaurants are those which fail to comply with either the grade A or grade B requirements. (1952 Code § 8-05-07)
B. Grade A Or B Required; Temporary For Grade C; Revocation: No restaurant shall be operated within the City, unless it conforms with the grade A or
grade B; provided, that when any restaurant fails to qualify for any of these grades, the Health Officer is authorized to revoke the permit or in lieu
thereof, the Health Officer may degrade the restaurant to a grade C restaurant and permit its operation during a temporary period of and not exceeding
thirty (30) days. (1952 Code § 8-05-08)
C. Regrading: Any restaurant, the grade of which has been lowered and grade displays changed accordingly, or the permit of which has been suspended,
may at any time make application for regrading or reinstatement of the permit. Within one week after the receipt of a satisfactory application,
accompanied by a statement signed by the applicant to the effect that the violated item or items of the qualifications or specifications have been
conformed with, the Health Officer shall make a reinspection, and thereafter as many additional reinspections as he may deem necessary to assure
himself that the applicant is again complying with the higher grade requirements, and, in case the findings indicate compliance, shall award the higher
grade and/or reinstate the permit. (1952 Code § 8-05-09)
D. Display Of Grade Required: Every restaurant shall display at all times in a conspicuous public place designated by the Health Officer, a notice approved
by the Health Officer, stating the grade of the establishment. (1952 Code § 8-05-03)
4-3-5: INSPECTIONS:
A. Authority Of Health Officer; Samples: The Health Officer shall have access, ingress and egress to all "restaurants", as defined in section 4-3-1 of this
chapter, for the purpose of the inspection of any or all food and drink, and for that purpose may obtain and take samples for analysis. No person shall
knowingly offer for sale any unwholesome, impure, adulterated or misbranded food or drink. (1952 Code § 8-05-04; amd. 2019 Code)
B. Inspection Periods:
1. At least once every six (6) months, the Health Officer shall inspect every restaurant located within the City. In case the Health Officer discovers the
violation of any item of sanitation required for the grade then held, he shall make a second inspection after the lapse of such time as he deems
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 178/503
necessary for the defect to be remedied, and the second inspection shall be used in determining compliance with the grade requirements of this
chapter.
2. One copy of the last inspection report shall be posted by the Health Officer upon an inside wall of the restaurant, and said inspection report shall not
be defaced or removed by any person except the Health Officer. Another copy of the inspection report shall be filed with the records of the Health
Department. (1952 Code § 8-05-05)
4-3-6: CLEANING MATERIALS:
No article, polish or other substance containing any cyanide preparation or other poisonous material shall be used for the cleansing or polishing of utensils.
(1952 Code § 8-05-10)
4-3-7: COMMUNICABLE DISEASE:
A. Notice To Health Officer: Notice shall be sent to the Health Officer immediately by the restaurant manager, or by the employee concerned, if any person
employed in such restaurant contracts any infections, contagious or communicable disease, or has a fever, a skin eruption, or a cough lasting more
than three (3) weeks. Any employee may be ordered by the Health Officer, at any time, to report to the City physician for a health examination and
upon failure to report to the physician, the health card of such employee shall be revoked. A placard containing this section shall be posted in all toilet
rooms. (1952 Code § 8-05-11)
B. Measures For Protection: When any person working in a restaurant contracts any infectious, contagious or communicable disease, the Health Officer is
authorized to require any or all of the following measures:
1. The immediate exclusion of the employee from all restaurants.
2. The immediate closing of the restaurant concerned until no further danger of disease outbreak exists, in the opinion of the Health Officer.
3. Adequate medical examinations of the employee and his associates, with such laboratory examinations as may be indicated. (1952 Code § 8-05-12)
4-3-8: PENALTY:
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of an infraction, subject to penalty as provided in section 1-4-2 of this Code,
excluding court costs and fees. An infraction is a civil public offense, not constituting a crime, which is punishable only by a penalty not exceeding one
hundred dollars ($100.00) and for which no period of incarceration may be imposed. There is no right to a trial by jury of a citation or complaint for an
infraction and such trials shall be held before the court without a jury. A second and any subsequent conviction for a violation of the provisions of this
chapter within five (5) years shall be a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be subject to penalty as provided in section 1-4-1 of this Code.
Each day such violation is committed or permitted to continue and each and every violation of the provisions of this chapter shall constitute a separate
offense. (1952 Code § 8-05-13; amd. 2019 Code)
Chapter 4
MOTOR VEHICLE EMISSIONS CONTROL
4-4-1: SHORT TITLE:
This chapter may be cited as the 1999 MOTOR VEHICLE EMISSIONS CONTROL ORDINANCE. (1952 Code § 8-13-01)
4-4-2: LEGISLATIVE FINDINGS AND PURPOSE:
A. It is found and declared that exhaust emissions from motor vehicles are a major source of air pollution throughout Ada County and such air pollution is a
health hazard to all residents of the County and its incorporated cities;
B. It is further found and declared that an effective system of periodic motor vehicle inspection and maintenance will reduce the level of vehicular based air
pollution;
C. It is further found and declared that the Federal government has mandated to the several states and local entities the ultimate responsibility for periodic
motor vehicle inspection and maintenance;
D. It is further found and declared that Ada County has been designated as a nonattainment area for both carbon monoxide and small particulate matter
(PM10) and, as such, is mandated under the Federal Clean Air Act to reduce emissions so that the National Ambient Air Quality Standards will be
attained and maintained;
E. It is further found and declared that Ada County and its incorporated cities will be monitored for PM2.5 and ozone in the immediate future, and that the
primary source of both of these pollutants in Ada County is exhaust emissions from motor vehicles;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 179/503
F. It is further found and declared that fuel economy is a legitimate legislative purpose and that an efficient emissions control program will result in motor
vehicle fuel savings for the residents of Ada County and its incorporated cities;
G. It is further found and declared that Ada County and its incorporated cities are duly authorized to enact and enforce this chapter under Idaho Code
sections 31-714 and 50-302, respectively;
H. The purposes of this chapter, therefore, are to protect the health and welfare of the citizens of Ada County and its incorporated cities, to provide for the
continued control and management of exhaust emissions above certain levels as determined by the Federal Clean Air Act, as amended, as well as
Rules for the Control of Air Pollution in the State of Idaho (IDAPA 16.01.01 et seq.), and to empower the Air Quality Board to design and implement
required periodic inspection of certain motor vehicles in order to comply with the Federal Clean Air Act, as amended. (1952 Code § 8-13-02)
4-4-3: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and phrases used in this chapter shall have the following meanings unless a different meaning clearly appears from the context:
AUTOMOTIVE INSPECTION PROGRAM: That program established by the board in accordance with this chapter and whose purpose is to implement the
requirements of this chapter.
AUTOMOTIVE INSPECTION STATION: A facility licensed in accordance with board specifications or operating under a contract with the board for the
purpose of performing exhaust emissions inspections.
BOARD: The Air Quality Board, chartered under the Automotive Inspection and Readjustment Program Joint Powers Agreement and this chapter.
CARBON MONOXIDE (CO): An inorganic chemical compound containing one atom of carbon and one atom of oxygen.
CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE: A board approved certificate verifying that the motor vehicle described thereon is in compliance with the requirements
of this chapter and the Rules and Regulations adopted pursuant to this chapter.
EMISSIONS INSPECTION MECHANIC: An individual who performs exhaust emissions inspections on behalf of the board in compliance with a formal
written agreement with the board.
EMISSIONS REPAIR MECHANIC: An individual who performs exhaust emissions repairs to motor vehicles on behalf of the board in compliance with a
formal written agreement with the board.
EXHAUST ANALYZER: A device for calculating the proportion of various gases, vapors and particles present in the exhaust emissions of a motor vehicle,
specifically including carbon monoxide, hydrocarbon, oxides of nitrogen, sulfur dioxide, volatile organic compounds and any other gases, vapors and
particles as required by the board.
EXHAUST EMISSIONS: Substances emitted into the atmosphere from any opening downstream of the exhaust port of any motor vehicle engine.
EXHAUST EMISSIONS CONTROL DEVICE: Equipment designed by the manufacturer for installation on a motor vehicle for the purpose of reducing
pollutants emitted from the motor vehicle, or a system or engine modification of a vehicle which causes a reduction of pollutants emitted from the motor
vehicle, as required by Federal law.
EXHAUST EMISSIONS INSPECTION AND EXHAUST EMISSIONS REINSPECTION: That test, performed at an automotive inspection station or a repair
and reinspection station by an emissions inspection mechanic, which determines whether a motor vehicle's exhaust emissions meet or do not meet
applicable pass-adjust criteria.
FINE PARTICULATE MATTER (PM2.5): All particulate matter, including condensable particulates, with an aerodynamic diameter of less than or equal to a
nominal two and one-half (2.5) micrometers.
GROSS VEHICLE WEIGHT: The weight in pounds of a fully fueled empty motor vehicle, plus any additional carrying capacity specified by the vehicle
manufacturer.
HYDROCARBON (HC): An organic compound consisting exclusively of the elements carbon and hydrogen.
INSPECTION PERIOD: That period, determined according to applicable Rules and Regulations, during which a nonexempt motor vehicle is scheduled to
be presented for an exhaust emissions inspection.
JOINT POWERS AGREEMENT: That agreement entered into pursuant to the joint powers provisions of Idaho Code title 67, chapter 23, among and
between the incorporated cities of Ada County, the County of Ada, and the Ada County Highway District, which creates the board.
MODEL YEAR: The year of origin of a motor vehicle so designated by that vehicle's Certificate of Registration filed with the Idaho Department of
Transportation.
MOTOR VEHICLE: Any self-propelled motor vehicle with four (4) or more wheels in contact with the ground.
MOTOR VEHICLE OWNER: An individual, partnership, firm, public, private or municipal corporation, association, trust, estate, agency, lessee, political
subdivision of the State of Idaho or the government of the United States or any other legal entity or their legal representatives, agents or assigns whose
name appears as owner of a motor vehicle on its Certificate of Registration.
NATIONAL AMBIENT AIR QUALITY STANDARDS (NAAQS): Standards developed by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency in accordance with its
responsibilities under the Federal Clean Air Act, as amended, and its implementing regulations.
NONEXEMPT MOTOR VEHICLE: A motor vehicle which is subject to the Automotive Inspection Program and its exhaust emissions inspections.
OXIDES OF NITROGEN (NOx): A group of chemical compounds formed by the combination of oxygen and nitrogen.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 180/503
OZONE (O3): A molecule composed of three (3) atoms of oxygen.
PARTICULATE MATTER (PM10): All particulate matter, including condensable particulates, with an aerodynamic diameter of less than or equal to a
nominal ten (10) micrometers.
PASS-ADJUST CRITERIA: Those standards set forth in the Rules and Regulations adopted by the board pursuant to this chapter which specify the
maximum allowable components which may exist in exhaust emissions of a nonexempt motor vehicle.
PUBLIC NOTICE: A statement of the board's intent to modify the Rules and Regulations, including a summary of the proposed modifications, published in
at least one newspaper of general circulation within Ada County, posted at the offices of the Air Quality Board, and mailed to all participants in the Joint
Powers Agreement and all automotive inspection stations.
REPAIR AND REINSPECTION STATION: A facility licensed in accordance with board specifications or operating under a contract with the board for the
purpose of repairing nonexempt motor vehicles which have failed an exhaust emissions inspection and to perform a reinspection of exhaust emissions in a
manner specified by the board.
RULES AND REGULATIONS: Specific written provisions governing the Automotive Inspection Program, as adopted and amended by the board from time
to time.
SULFUR DIOXIDE (SO2): A chemical compound consisting exclusively of the elements sulfur and oxygen.
TAMPERING: Removal of or rendering wholly or partially inoperative an exhaust emissions control device, including, but not limited to, the catalytic
converter, air injection system, fuel inlet restrictor or other subsequent systems and devices designed and installed to reduce exhaust emissions.
VOLATILE ORGANIC COMPOUND (VOC): Any organic compound which readily evaporates in the atmosphere and, through its participation in
atmospheric photochemical reactions, contributes to the formation of ozone. (1952 Code § 8-13-03)
4-4-4: INSPECTION MAINTENANCE PROGRAM CREATED:
A. Board Created: An Air Quality Board is hereby created pursuant to the joint powers provisions of Idaho Code title 67, chapter 23 in a Joint Powers
Agreement executed by the participating public agencies. The composition and organization of the board shall be as set forth in the Joint Powers
Agreement.
B. Program Designed: The board shall design and implement an Automotive Inspection Program for the mandatory exhaust emissions analysis,
inspection, maintenance and repair of nonexempt motor vehicles to ensure continued compliance with National Ambient Air Quality Standards and in
accordance with applicable Rules and Regulations of the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, the State Division of Environmental Quality and the
Ada Planning Association Board.
C. Inspections Required: The exhaust emissions of each nonexempt motor vehicle will be measured and evaluated periodically and the owner of any such
vehicle is required to present the vehicle at an automotive inspection station for an exhaust emissions inspection unless specifically exempted from this
requirement by the board or by this chapter. Failure to do so within the inspection period constitutes prima facie evidence of a violation of this chapter.
The frequency and timing of the inspection period will be determined by the board.
D. Certificate Of Compliance: The owner of a nonexempt motor vehicle which passes an exhaust emissions inspection as provided herein shall be
presented with a Certificate of Compliance. The owner shall maintain the certificate in a place and manner specified by the board in the Rules and
Regulations and present it to the board or other authority upon demand. Failure to do so constitutes prima facie evidence of a violation of this chapter.
E. Nonexempt Motor Vehicles: A motor vehicle is classified as a nonexempt motor vehicle if all of the following are true:
1. The Certificate of Registration has "ADA COUNTY" entered upon it as the County of residence or would be required to have "ADA COUNTY"
entered upon it as the County of residence pursuant to Idaho Code section 49-401B;
2. The gross vehicle weight equals or exceeds one thousand five hundred (1,500) pounds; and
3. The model year is 1965 or newer.
F. Exemptions: The following are hereby specifically exempted from compliance with the Automotive Inspection Program, subject to verification in a
manner specified by the board and included in the Rules and Regulations:
1. Motorcycles, as defined in Idaho Code section 49-114;
2. Idaho old timers, as defined in Idaho Code section 49-406;
3. Farm tractors, as defined in Idaho Code section 49-107;
4. Motor vehicles registered under the prorated registration provisions of Idaho Code section 49-437 for a period of less than six (6) months;
5. Idaho classic vehicles, as defined in Idaho Code section 49-406A;
6. Motor vehicles for which an alternate fuel type has been established according to rules and regulations adopted by the board; and
7. Such other motor vehicles as may be exempted by Rules and Regulations adopted by the board.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 181/503
G. Performance Requirements Of Exhaust Emissions Inspection: An exhaust emissions inspection may only be performed by and in a manner consistent
with Rules and Regulations adopted by the board. An exhaust emissions inspection shall include all of the following:
1. A measurement of exhaust emissions using an approved exhaust analyzer or other procedure or device approved by the board to sample the motor
vehicle's exhaust emissions, specifically including the carbon monoxide and hydrocarbon content of the exhaust emissions and any other gases,
vapors and particles as adopted by the board to comply with the purposes of this chapter, as expressed in section 4-4-2 of this chapter; and
2. A determination as to whether exhaust emissions meet the pass-adjust criteria; and
3. A visual inspection, for model years 1984 and newer, to verify presence of the catalytic converter, air injection system, size of the fuel restrictor and
any other visual inspection components specified by the board in the Rules and Regulations; and
4. Any other inspection adopted by the board in the Rules and Regulations.
H. Failure To Meet Criteria: Where exhaust emissions do not meet the pass-adjust criteria, an indication to a motor vehicle owner of the repair and
reinspection provisions of the Automotive Inspection Program.
I. Time Limit For Compliance; Reinspection: It is the responsibility of the owner of a nonexempt motor vehicle which was found not to comply with the
pass-adjust criteria to have the motor vehicle brought into compliance at the owner's expense and to have it reinspected within ten (10) calendar days
of the failed exhaust emissions inspection according to procedures and criteria established by the board and included in the Rules and Regulations.
J. Payment Of Fee: Each nonexempt motor vehicle shall bear a share of the cost of the Automotive Inspection Program regardless of whether the board
elects to waive one or more exhaust emissions inspections for that vehicle. The motor vehicle owner for each nonexempt motor vehicle is required to
submit payment to the board or other authorized representative under terms and conditions specified in the Rules and Regulations.
K. Certificate Of Compliance; Expiration: An emissions inspection mechanic who performs an exhaust emissions inspection on a motor vehicle shall, when
the motor vehicle is found to comply with the pass-adjust criteria, immediately issue a Certificate of Compliance in accordance with procedures adopted
by the board in the Rules and Regulations. The Certificate of Compliance will expire on the last day of the next inspection period for that motor vehicle.
(1952 Code § 8-13-04)
4-4-5: POWERS AND DUTIES OF AIR QUALITY BOARD:
A. Meetings: The board shall conduct regular monthly meetings at such time as the board shall determine. Meetings are open to the public.
B. Adopt Rules And Regulations: The board, in accordance with the criteria expressed herein, shall adopt Rules and Regulations for the implementation
and operation of the Automotive Inspection Program and amend those Rules and Regulations from time to time as it deems necessary. Rules and
Regulations and amendments to the same may only be adopted at an Air Quality Board meeting with a minimum of fourteen (14) days' public notice of
the board's intent to amend the Rules and Regulations.
C. Included Rules And Regulations: Rules and Regulations shall include, but not be limited to, the following:
1. Procedures for determining the exempt or nonexempt status of any motor vehicle and releasing exempt motor vehicles from further compliance with
the Automotive Inspection Program;
2. Procedures for establishing the inspection period for a nonexempt motor vehicle;
3. Structure of the Automotive Inspection Program, specifically including whether repairs and adjustments to motor vehicles failing to comply with the
pass-adjust criteria may or may not be made by emissions inspection mechanics who perform the original exhaust emissions inspection;
4. Procedures for licensing or contracting for automotive inspection stations, repair and reinspection stations, emissions inspection mechanics and
emissions repair mechanics, and for the potential termination thereof;
5. Pass-adjust criteria for all nonexempt motor vehicles;
6. Nature and display of Certificates of Compliance on nonexempt motor vehicles which successfully comply with the pass-adjust criteria;
7. Specifications for approved exhaust analyzers or other emissions measurement devices or systems;
8. Procedures by which the fee to be charged each motor vehicle owner for each nonexempt motor vehicle is determined, or, alternatively, the fee itself;
9. Circumstances under which a waiver may be granted to exempt a nonexempt motor vehicle from the provisions of this chapter, either temporarily or
permanently;
10. Minimum effort which will be required of the owner of a nonexempt motor vehicle which fails to comply with the pass-adjust criteria in order to bring
the failing vehicle into compliance with the pass-adjust criteria, as well as procedures by which such minimum effort provisions may be amended
from time to time. This effort shall generally be the minimum necessary to accommodate typical repair and reinspection needs and may be different
for different model years;
11. Cost of a Certificate of Compliance. This shall be the minimum necessary to provide for the ongoing operation, administration, maintenance and
enforcement of the Automotive Inspection Program and shall not exceed four dollars ($4.00) without concurrence of all parties to the Joint Powers
Agreement;
12. The processing fee which may be assessed upon owners of nonexempt motor vehicles who fail to present their nonexempt motor vehicle for
inspection within the inspection period and the procedure by which this fee is established. This fee shall be sufficient to recover costs of processing
notices of violation for all nonexempt motor vehicles which do not comply with the provisions of this chapter within the inspection period;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 182/503
13. Procedures governing the contracting for or licensing of automotive inspection stations, repair and reinspection stations and emissions inspection
mechanics and the suspension, revocation or termination of those contracts or licenses when appropriate;
14. Schedules and deadlines for the flow of data, paperwork and information pertaining to exhaust emissions inspections among automotive inspection
stations, repair and reinspection stations, exhaust emissions mechanics and the Automotive Inspection Program staff; and
15. Any other matters deemed to be within the authority of the board.
D. Code Compliance: The board may, at is discretion, employ the full power and authority of law to ensure that motor vehicle owners comply fully and
completely with Idaho Code section 49-401B, specifically including correct designation of the County of residence as provided therein.
E. Quality Assurance: The board shall conduct an ongoing quality assurance program to determine that all automotive inspection stations, repair and
reinspection stations and exhaust emission mechanics perform Automotive Inspection Program tasks in conformance with the adopted Rules and
Regulations.
F. Suspension, Revocation, Surrender Of License: The board or its authorized representative, upon written notice and an opportunity for a hearing, may
suspend, revoke and/or require the surrender and forfeiture of any license granted by the board which is not utilized in accordance with this chapter or
the Rules and Regulations. The procedure and grounds for suspension or revocation shall be set forth in the Rules and Regulations and shall comply
with current State law.
G. Additional Authority Of Board: The board shall have the authority to undertake any additional actions reasonably necessary to the operation of the
Automotive Inspection Program, including, but not limited to:
1. Employing necessary staff;
2. Executing necessary contracts and documents;
3. Authorizing deposits into and expenditures from the Motor Vehicle Emissions Inspection Fund;
4. Acquiring and disposing of personal property;
5. Establishing an annual budget for the Air Inspection Program;
6. Operating the Automotive Inspection Program in accordance with standard fiscal practice; and
7. Providing for an annual audit of both financial and management practices of the Automotive Inspection Program.
H. Evaluation Of Program: The board shall conduct ongoing evaluations of the Automotive Inspection Program sufficient to satisfy requirements of the U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency, the Ada Planning Association Board and other applicable rules and statutes. (1952 Code § 8-13-05)
4-4-6: FINANCING:
A. Inspection Fund: There is hereby established a Motor Vehicle Emissions Inspection Fund, which shall consist of the following:
1. Money appropriated thereto by the board or any local entity;
2. Money remitted by automotive inspection stations and repair and reinspection stations which is collected as fees;
3. Money received by the board from private grants or donations;
4. Money received by the board from processing fees assessed to owners of nonexempt motor vehicles who do not present their vehicle for an exhaust
emissions inspection during the inspection period;
5. Federal or State funds received by the board for the Automotive Inspection Program; and
6. Any other funds received by the board from any source.
B. Use Of Funds: Monies in the Motor Vehicle Emissions Inspection Fund may be used to pay all costs incurred by the board in administering any aspect
of the Automotive Inspection Program.
C. Appropriation And Budget: The board shall appropriate and budget on a fiscal year basis, indicating expenditures to be made in implementing and
administering the Automotive Inspection Program and sources of income to be used for such expenditures. (1952 Code § 8-13-06)
4-4-7: INSPECTION CRITERIA AND COSTS:
A. Approved Criteria: A nonexempt motor vehicle's exhaust emissions must be less than or equal to the approved pass-adjust criteria in order for a
Certificate of Compliance to be issued without further repair, adjustment or testing.
B. Requirements For Model 1984 And Newer: Nonexempt motor vehicles of the model year 1984 and newer must have a fully operational catalytic
converter, air injection system, fuel restrictor and any other components, devices or systems specified by the board in the Rules and Regulations. The
owner of a nonexempt motor vehicle is required to see that these systems are fully operational. An exhaust emissions inspection will not be performed
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 183/503
on any vehicle on which one or more of these components have been subject to tampering. The owner of any nonexempt motor vehicle which has
been subject to tampering must bring all components into compliance and have the vehicle inspected within the inspection period.
C. Certificate Of Compliance: Certificate of Compliance may be issued by an emissions inspection mechanic who personally has performed an exhaust
emissions inspection and found the nonexempt motor vehicle to be in full compliance with the Automotive Inspection Program or by an emissions
repair mechanic who has personally performed repairs and adjustments to a motor vehicle which bring such vehicle into full compliance with the
Automotive Inspection Program or the board.
D. Mechanic License Or Contract Required: No person shall represent himself or herself as an emissions inspection mechanic unless he or she has a
current license issued by the board or is operating under a current contract with the board.
E. Collection Of Fee: No person shall demand or collect a fee for the exhaust emissions inspection of a nonexempt motor vehicle unless authorized by this
chapter. (1952 Code § 8-13-07)
4-4-8: ACQUISITION OF PROPERTY; CERTIFICATES PROPERTY OF BOARD:
A. Acquisition Permitted: The board may acquire by purchase, donation, dedication or other lawful means any special equipment, tools, materials or
facilities needed to adequately administer, investigate or enforce the provisions of this chapter, or the Rules and Regulations adopted pursuant hereto
provided, however, any acquisition made by the board shall comply with all statutory requirements imposed upon the City for the purpose of receipt of
property.
B. Certificates Property Of Board: All Certificates of Compliance are the property of the board until such time as they are issued to properly inspected
motor vehicles. (1952 Code § 8-13-08)
4-4-9: FALSIFICATION OF CERTIFICATES:
A. Prohibited: No person shall wilfully make, issue, display, sell or possess any imitation, counterfeit or alteration of a Certificate of Compliance. Such
activities so constitute prima facie evidence of a violation of this chapter.
B. Display Unlawful: No person shall display upon any nonexempt motor vehicle a Certificate of Compliance knowing it to be issued without compliance
with this chapter. Such activities so constitute prima facie evidence of a violation of this chapter. (1952 Code § 8-13-09)
4-4-10: ENFORCEMENT:
Any owner who fails to present a nonexempt motor vehicle for an exhaust emissions inspection during the inspection period is in violation of this chapter
and will be subject to a board processing fee and any and all other enforcement mechanisms available through Idaho Code, this chapter and other
applicable Municipal or County ordinances. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prevent the board from requesting or utilizing any and all
enforcement mechanisms granted by law. (1952 Code § 8-13-10)
4-4-11: PENALTY:
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of an infraction and, upon judgment thereof, shall be subject to the penalties
set forth in Idaho Infraction Rule 9(b) (other infractions). Failure to satisfy judgment as ordered by the court pursuant to this chapter shall be deemed
contempt of court, punishable as a misdemeanor pursuant to Idaho Code section 18-1801. (1952 Code § 8-13-11)
Title 5
PUBLIC SAFETY
Chapter 1
ANIMAL CONTROL
5-1-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, each of the terms defined shall have the meanings given in this section, unless a different meaning is clearly required by the
context. The word "shall" is mandatory, not directory.
ABUSE: Any case in which an animal has been the victim of intentional or negligent conduct resulting in the animal's bruising, bleeding, malnutrition,
dehydration, burns, fractures or breaks of any bones, subdural hematoma, soft tissue swelling or death.
ANIMAL: Any organism other than human beings needing food to maintain and sustain its life, which generally has mobility and a developed central
nervous system.
ANIMAL CONTROL CONTRACTOR: The organization contracting with the City to provide animal control enforcement services and/or humane shelter
services.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 184/503
ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER: The City may authorize the animal control contractor to employ or appoint animal control officers. Animal control officers
shall not be deemed to be City employees. An animal control officer shall be and is hereby authorized to seize, keep and remove any animal in violation of
and in enforcing the provisions of this chapter, subject to and under the supervision and direction of the animal control contractor of Boise City.
AT LARGE: Off the premises of the owner, and not under the control of the owner or a member of his immediate family, either by leash, cord, chain or
otherwise provided for in this chapter.
BOARDING KENNEL, COMMERCIAL: Any lot or premises or portion thereof, on which five (5) or more dogs, cats and other household domestic animals
are maintained, harbored, possessed, boarded, bred or cared for in return for compensation, or are offered for sale.
BOARDING KENNEL, NONCOMMERCIAL: Any lot or premises or portion thereof on which more than four (4) dogs or cats, or a combination of such
animals, are maintained, harbored, possessed, bred or cared for, without compensation and are not for sale. A noncommercial kennel license for such
activity is required from the City Clerk.
BUILDING: Any structure with substantial walls and roof securely affixed to the land and entirely separated on all sides from any other structure by space,
or any walls in which there are no communicating doors, windows or openings, which is designed or intended for the shelter, enclosure or protection of
persons, animals, chattels or property of any kind.
CITY: Boise City, Idaho.
CITY CLERK: The City Clerk of the City and designee.
DOG: Both male and female, whether neutered or spayed.
ENCLOSURE: A fence or structure of at least six feet (6') in height, forming or causing containment suitable to prevent the entry of young children, and
suitable to confine an animal in conjunction with other measures which may be taken by the owner, such as tethering of the animal. Such enclosure shall
be securely enclosed and locked and designed with secure sides, top and bottom and shall be designed to prevent the animal from escaping from the
enclosure.
HUMANE SHELTER: Established for the impounding and care of animals seized, kept or removed in conformity with the provisions of this chapter, which
humane shelter shall be under the jurisdiction of the City. The Idaho Humane Society, Incorporated, is hereby designated, subject to its acceptance in
writing filed with the Clerk, as the agent of the City for the purpose of maintaining and operating the humane shelter and for the purpose of impounding,
keeping and disposing of any animal impounded according to the provisions of this chapter; provided, that neither the society nor any employee employed
at the humane shelter shall be deemed to be City employees.
IMPOUNDED: Taken into the custody of the humane shelter.
MISUSE: The intentional causing of an animal to perform a noncustomary task which could be dangerous or harmful to the animal.
OWNER: Any person or persons keeping, harboring, possessing, caring for or having any custodial duties over any animal.
PERSON: All natural persons, firms, companies, corporations or associations.
SENIOR CITIZENS: Any head of household who has attained the age of sixty five (65) or older.
SIGN: Any structure which shall be used to attract attention to any object, place, activity, person, animal or business, which shall display or include any
letter, word, insignia, device or representation used as, or which is in the nature of an announcement, direction or advertisement. For the purposes of
subsection 5-1-7B3 of this chapter, the sign shall be constructed of wood, metal or other similar weatherproof material, at least twenty four inches by
twenty four inches (24" x 24") in size, with letters in indelible or fluorescent ink with the words in clear, capital letters as follows: "VICIOUS ANIMAL ON
PREMISES", "VICIOUS DOG ON PROPERTY", or words of similar meaning; and shall be posted at all visible entryways onto the owner's property.
VICIOUS ANIMAL: A. Includes:
1. Any animal which, when unprovoked in a vicious or terrorizing manner, approaches any person in apparent attitude of attack upon the streets,
sidewalks, any public grounds or places, or private property not owned or possessed by the owner of the animal; or
2. Any animal with a known propensity, tendency or disposition to attack unprovoked, to cause injury or to otherwise endanger the safety of human
beings or domestic animals; or
3. Any animal which bites, inflicts injury, assaults or otherwise attacks a human being or domestic animal without provocation; or
4. Any animal owned or harbored primarily or in part for the purpose of fighting or any animal trained for fighting.
B. Exceptions:
1. Notwithstanding this definition of a vicious animal, no animal may be declared vicious if an injury or damage is sustained by a person who, at the
time such injury or damage was sustained, was committing a wilful trespass or other tort upon the premises occupied by the owner of the animal,
or was teasing, tormenting, abusing or assaulting the dog or was committing or attempting to commit a crime.
2. No animals may be declared vicious if the injury or damage was sustained as a result of teasing, tormenting, abusing or assaulting the animal. No
animal may be declared vicious if the animal was protecting or defending a human being within the immediate vicinity of the animal from an
unjustified attack or assault. (1952 Code § 6-07-01; amd. Ord. 24-16, 8-9-2016; 2019 Code)
5-1-2: ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS FOR HUMANE SHELTER:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 185/503
A. Fees And Compensation For Services: The humane shelter shall be entitled to and shall receive the following fees and compensation for the services
herein provided for:
1. All monies received for keeping and adopting any animal, including dogs.
2. All monies received by way of reimbursement for actual veterinary and hospital expenses. (1952 Code § 6-07-30)
B. Collection Of Fees; Payment To City: The humane shelter may collect the license fees prescribed by this chapter for animals within the City limits. All
monies received by the humane shelter, or any amount thereof, belonging or to be paid to the City shall, within seven (7) days after receipt of the same,
be paid to the City Clerk. (1952 Code § 6-07-31)
C. Employment Of Persons: The humane shelter shall employ, and shall pay at its own expense, suitable and necessary persons to perform the duties
herein prescribed. (1952 Code § 6-07-32)
D. Revocation Of Rights By City: All privileges conferred upon the humane shelter, under the provisions of this chapter, are subject to cancellation and
revocation by the City Council at any time upon its own motion and without cause shown, which revocation and cancellation shall be declared by the
passage of an ordinance repealing this chapter; and all rights and privileges conferred hereunder shall cease and terminate sixty (60) days after the
passage of such repealing ordinance. (1952 Code § 6-07-34)
5-1-3: AMENDMENTS REQUIRE PUBLIC MEETING:
Prior to the submission of any proposed changes to this chapter by the humane shelter, the shelter shall be required to hold a meeting which provides the
public an opportunity to review the proposed ordinance changes. All City residents shall be allowed to attend the meeting. Failure to hold a public meeting
shall make any proposed changes to this chapter by the humane shelter voidable.
A. Notice: The humane shelter shall give notice of this meeting to City residents by publication once in the Idaho Statesman newspaper not less than
seven (7) calendar days prior to the meeting. The advertisement shall state that the humane shelter will hold a meeting on a certain day, time and place
fixed for the purpose of hearing public comments regarding any proposed changes to this chapter by the humane shelter, and to explain the reasons
for such action.
B. Location And Time: The location of the meeting shall be within the City limits. The meeting shall be held Monday through Thursday, excluding legal
holidays, and start between six o'clock (6:00) P.M. and eight o'clock (8:00) P.M. The meeting shall be held not more than six (6) months nor less than
five (5) calendar days prior to submittal of the proposed changes to the City Council. (1952 Code § 6-07-05)
5-1-4: DOG LICENSING AND REGULATIONS:
A. Licenses; Application; Fees:
1. License Required; Exception: It shall be unlawful for any person to own, harbor, keep or possess a dog over the age of sixteen (16) weeks within the
City without first procuring a license therefor as provided by this chapter; provided, however, that the provisions of this chapter shall not apply to any
person visiting in the City for a period not exceeding thirty (30) days, and owning or possessing a dog currently licensed, and bearing the license
issued by another municipality or other licensing authority.
2. Application: The owner or person having charge of any dog over the age of sixteen (16) weeks within the City shall make application to the City
Clerk, the Humane Shelter Director or other designated agent in the amount established by the City Council and listed on the most current City Clerk
license fee schedule.
3. Proof Of Spay Or Neuter: No dog will be licensed as spayed or neutered without proof that such surgery was performed.
4. Waiver Of Fees: License fees shall be waived for any guide dog that has been properly trained for use by a legally blind person and for any guide
dog puppy in training authorized by a certified guide dog school. License fees shall also be waived for any hearing ear dog that has been properly
trained for use by a person with impaired hearing or any other severely disabled person who requires an assistance dog.
5. Prepayment Of Licenses: Dog owners may choose to prepay licenses for one, two (2) or three (3) years. (1952 Code § 6-07-17)
6. Issuance Of License; Tag; Duplicate Tag: Upon receipt of such application and payment of fees, the person issuing the license shall issue a receipt
designating the owner's name and the number of the license, the sex (or status of spayed or neutered) of the dog and the amount paid by him,
together with a metal tag bearing the number corresponding to that upon receipt. If a license is lost, the Clerk or Director of the humane shelter or
other designated agent shall, upon application and payment of a fee in such amount as established by the City Council, issue a duplicate tag.
Licenses for the following year may be purchased within ninety (90) days prior to the expiration date. Upon renewal, a new tag shall not be issued
unless requested. If a dog is licensed as nonspayed or nonneutered, and is spayed or neutered within the licensed period, the Clerk shall, upon
presentation of a veterinarian's statement of spaying or neutering, refund the difference in the license fee. (1952 Code § 6-07-17; amd. 2019 Code)
7. Term: All dog licenses are valid for twelve (12) months and shall expire one year from date of sale.
B. Imitation License Tags: It shall be unlawful for any person to allow any dog owned, kept or harbored by him to wear a license tag received on account of
a former licensee or to wear any imitation of the license tag issued by the City for that year.
C. Training And Exercise Grounds: The Board of Park Commissioners or the Council may designate such areas of the public park or other public grounds
of the City which may be used, subject to the rules and regulations as may be prescribed, for the training or exercise of dogs. Dogs within such area so
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 186/503
designated need not be controlled by leash, but shall be under the control of a responsible person and controlled by whistle, voice or other effective
command.
D. Collar; Tag: Every dog shall at all times wear a substantial, durable collar, to which shall be securely attached the required license tag.
E. Running At Large Prohibited: Except as provided by subsection C of this section, any person who owns, harbors or has in his or her control an animal,
whether the animal is licensed or not, which animal is found at large upon the streets or alleys of the City, or in any public place in the City, or upon any
other premises without the consent of the person in possession of such premises, is responsible for such animal being at large and is in violation of this
chapter, except:
1. When such animal is controlled by a leash.
2. When such animal is confined in a motor vehicle.
F. Responsibility To Clean Up After Dog; Exception:
1. No person having the care, custody, possession or control of a dog shall fail to remove fecal matter deposited by his/her dog on any street, sidewalk,
pedestrian walkway or other pedestrian right-of-way, or bicycle path in the City before the owner/handler of the dog leaves the immediate area where
the fecal matter was deposited.
2. A violation of this subsection F shall be an infraction, the penalty for which shall be twenty five dollars ($25.00), excluding court costs and fees. An
infraction is a civil public offense, not constituting a crime, which is punishable only by a penalty not exceeding one hundred dollars ($100.00) and for
which no period of incarceration may be imposed. There is no right to trial by jury of a citation or complaint for an infraction and such trials shall be
held before the court without a jury.
3. The requirements of this subsection F shall not apply to:
a. Police officers and their service animals during the official performance of their duties and while actively engaged in an emergency situation;
b. Handlers of search and rescue animals during the official performance of their duties; or
c. Persons with disabilities utilizing assistance animals. (1952 Code § 6-07-17)
5-1-5: NONCOMMERCIAL KENNELS:
A. License Required: It shall be unlawful to keep, maintain, harbor or possess upon the premises of any one household more than four (4) dogs or cats, or
any combination of such animals, unless the owner or person in charge shall have obtained a noncommercial kennel license. (1952 Code § 6-07-21)
B. Application; Fee Deposit: Application for a noncommercial kennel license shall be made to the Clerk or humane shelter and must be accompanied by
the written consent to such noncommercial kennel by at least seventy five percent (75%) of all the persons in possession of premises within a radius of
one hundred feet (100') of the premises upon which such noncommercial kennel is to be maintained. The application shall be accompanied by the
deposit of a license fee in such amount as established by the City Council, which deposit shall be returned to the applicant if the license is not issued.
(1952 Code § 6-07-21; amd. 2019 Code)
C. Content Of Application; Referral To Health Department: The application shall state the name and address of the owner, where the noncommercial
kennel is to be located and the number of dogs or cats. The application shall be in duplicate and the duplicate thereof shall be referred to the Central
District Health Department, which department shall, within five (5) days thereof, make its report of whether or not the location and operation of said
noncommercial kennel complies with their health regulations. Where the Central District Health Department report denies approval of the location or
operation of said proposed noncommercial kennel, then no license shall be issued.
D. Nontransferable; Term; Additions: Noncommercial kennel licenses shall not be transferable, and shall expire December 31 of the year in which issued.
Whenever additions are made to the number of dogs for which a noncommercial kennel license has been issued, the licensee shall, within three (3)
days, report to the Office of the Clerk or to the humane shelter and pay the required license fee; provided, however, that whenever puppies or kittens
are born, such puppies or kittens shall not be counted in computing the license fee until three (3) months old.
E. Dog Licenses Required; Zoning Regulations Applicable: The issuance of a noncommercial kennel license shall not obviate the necessity of obtaining an
individual dog license, nor shall any of the provisions of this chapter be deemed to vary or alter any of the zoning regulations of the City.
F. Renewal: Noncommercial kennel licenses may be renewed upon expiration by filing an application and paying required fee.
G. Suspension Or Revocation: Any licensee who shall: 1) violate any provision of this chapter or fail to comply with any of the conditions under which any
license shall be issued; or 2) violate any statute or ordinance regarding the operation of the noncommercial kennel, shall be subject to have his license
suspended or revoked. The procedure for license revocation shall follow the procedure set forth in title 3, chapter 1, article A of this Code.
H. Inspections: It shall be the duty of the Clerk to inspect, or cause to be inspected, noncommercial kennel facilities for which licenses under this chapter
have been issued as often as it may be necessary for the adequate control and supervision of such facilities. The Clerk, or designee, shall have the
right to enter all such facilities at any reasonable time for the purpose of making necessary investigations and inspections, and shall be charged with
the responsibility of enforcing and administering the provisions of this section. (1952 Code § 6-07-21)
5-1-6: RABIES, DISEASES AND QUARANTINE:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 187/503
A. Vaccination:
1. The owner or person having charge of any dog or cat over sixteen (16) weeks of age within the City shall be required to have them vaccinated for
rabies and to keep such vaccinations current.
2. Waiver of the rabies vaccination requirement shall only be obtained by providing a written statement from a licensed veterinarian stating the medical
reason for waiver.
B. Animals Afflicted With Rabies: It shall be unlawful for a person, other than a veterinarian or the humane shelter, to own, keep or harbor any animal
afflicted with rabies.
C. Disposition Of Afflicted Animal: The Chief of Police, his designee, the Humane Shelter Director or the owner shall secure disposition of any animal
afflicted with rabies.
D. Surrender For Confinement: It shall be the duty of every owner of an animal showing symptoms of rabies, or which has bitten any person causing an
abrasion of the skin, to surrender the animal for confinement and isolation at the humane shelter or to a licensed veterinarian for a period not to exceed
fifteen (15) days. If such animal shall be determined free of rabies, it shall be returned to the owner upon payment of the regular fee for keeping such
animal impounded. If such fee is not paid, the animal shall be subject to disposal as provided in this chapter. At the discretion of either the Chief of
Police, the Humane Shelter Director or the Health Department, the quarantine of an animal may be upon the premises of the animal owner, or the
person in charge of such animal, if the animal is securely confined, kept from contact with other animals and is submitted to a veterinarian for
examination at the owner's expense to determine whether the animal is rabid.
E. Contagious Diseased Animals At Large: It shall be unlawful for any person to permit or allow any animal with a contagious or infectious disease to run
at large upon the public streets, or to be within and upon any public transportation facility, or any other public building or place within the City, or to
expose such animal in any public building or place, whereby the health, safety and well being of the public, or any member or members thereof, may
be affected; nor shall such animal be shipped or removed from the premises of the owner of such animal, except under the supervision of the Humane
Shelter Director. (1952 Code § 6-07-22)
5-1-7: VICIOUS ANIMALS:
A. Harboring For Prohibited Purpose Or Intent:
1. No person shall own or harbor any animal for the purpose of animal fighting, or train, torment, badger, bait or use any animal for the purpose of
causing or encouraging said animal to unprovoked attacks upon human beings or domestic animals.
2. No person shall possess with intent to sell, or offer for sale, breed or buy, or attempt to buy, any vicious animal within the City. (1952 Code § 6-07-09)
B. Requirements For Registration: No vicious animal shall be licensed by the City for any licensing period commencing after January 1, 1988, unless the
owner or keeper of such vicious animal shall meet the following requirements:
1. The owner shall present to the City Clerk or other licensing authority, proof that the owner or keeper has procured liability insurance in the amount of
no less than five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00), covering any damage or injury which may be caused by such vicious animal during the
twelve (12) month period for which licensing is sought, which policy shall contain a provision requiring the City to be named as additional insured for
the sole purpose of the City Clerk or other licensing authority where such animal is licensed to be notified by the insurance company of any
cancellation, termination or expiration of the liability insurance policy.
2. The owner shall, at his own expense, have the licensing number assigned to such vicious animal, or such other identification number as the City
Clerk or other licensing authority shall determine, tattooed upon such vicious animal by a licensed veterinarian or person trained as a tattooist and
authorized as such by any state, city or Police Department. The tattoo shall be placed either on the upper inner lip, inside ear or inside rear thigh of
the vicious animal. The humane shelter may, in its discretion, designate the particular location of said tattoo. Said number shall be noted on the City
licensing files for such vicious animal, if it is different from the license number of such vicious animal. For the purposes of this section, "tattoo" shall
be defined as any permanent numbering of a vicious animal by means of indelible or permanent ink with the number designated by the licensing
authority, or any other permanent, acceptable method of tattooing.
3. The owner shall display a "sign" in conformance with and as defined in section 5-1-1 of this chapter on his or her premises warning that there is a
vicious animal on the premises. Said sign shall be visible and capable of being read from the public highway.
4. The owner shall sign a statement attesting that:
a. The owner shall maintain and not voluntarily cancel the liability insurance required by this section during the twelve (12) month period for which
licensing is sought, unless the owner shall cease to own or keep the vicious animal prior to expiration of such license.
b. The owner shall, on or prior to the effective date of such license for which application is being made, have an enclosure for the vicious animal on
the property where the vicious animal will be kept or maintained.
c. The owner shall notify the licensing authority and the animal control officer within twenty four (24) hours if a vicious animal is on the loose, is
unconfined, has attacked another animal or has attacked a human being, or has died or has been sold or given away. If the vicious animal has
been sold or given away, the owner shall also provide the licensing authority with the name, address and telephone number of the new owner of
the vicious animal. (1952 Code § 6-07-07)
C. Confinement And Control:
1. All vicious animals shall be confined in an enclosure. It shall be unlawful for any owner to maintain a vicious animal upon any premises which does
not have a locked enclosure.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 188/503
2. It shall be unlawful for any owner to allow any vicious animal to be outside of the dwelling of the owner or outside of the enclosure unless it is
necessary for the owner to obtain veterinary care for the vicious animal or to sell or give away the vicious animal, or to comply with commands or
directions of the animal control officer with respect to the vicious animal, or to comply with the provision of subsection B1 or B2 of this section. In
such event, the vicious animal shall be securely muzzled and restrained with a chain having a minimum tensile strength of three hundred (300)
pounds and not exceeding three feet (3') in length, and shall be under the direct control and supervision of the owner of the vicious animal. (1952
Code § 6-07-08)
D. Action For Damages; Destruction; Civil Penalty: If any vicious animal shall, when unprovoked, kill or wound, or assist in killing or wounding any sheep,
lamb, cattle, horse, hog, swine, fowl or other domestic animal, belonging to or in the possession of any person, or shall, when unprovoked, attack,
assault, bite or otherwise injure any human being or assist in attacking, assaulting, biting or otherwise injuring any human being while out of or within
the enclosure of the owner or keeper of such vicious animal, or while otherwise on or off the property of the owner, whether or not such vicious animal
was on a leash and securely muzzled or whether the vicious animal escaped without fault of the owner or keeper, the owner or keeper of such animal
shall be liable to the person aggrieved as aforesaid, for all damage sustained, to be recovered in a civil action, with costs of suit. It is rebuttably
presumed as a matter of law that the owning, keeping or harboring of a vicious animal in violation of this chapter is a nuisance. It shall not be
necessary, in order to sustain any such action, to prove that the owner of such vicious animal knew that such vicious animal possessed the propensity
to cause such damage or that the vicious animal had a vicious nature. Upon such attack or assault, the animal control officer in the City is hereby
empowered to confiscate and destroy such vicious animal, if the conduct of such vicious animal or its owner constituted a violation of the provisions of
this chapter, punishable by the confiscation and destruction of the animal. (1952 Code § 6-07-10)
E. Enforcement:
1. An animal control officer is hereby empowered to make whatever inquiry is deemed necessary to ensure compliance with the provisions of this
section, and any such animal control officer is hereby empowered to seize and impound any vicious animal whose owner fails to comply with the
provisions hereof.
2. In the event that the owner of the animal refuses to surrender the animal to the animal control officer, the animal control officer may request a police
officer to obtain a search warrant from a Magistrate of the District Court and to seize the animal upon execution of the warrant. (1952 Code § 6-07-
07)
F. Exemptions:
1. Subsections A through E of this section shall not apply to kennels licensed in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
2. The provisions of this section shall not apply to K-9 or other animals owned by any Police Department or any law enforcement officer which are used
in the performance of law enforcement police work. (1952 Code § 6-07-11)
G. Determination Of Vicious Animal:
1. Hearing:
a. In the event that the animal control officer or law enforcement officer has probable cause to believe that an animal is vicious, the Chief of Police or
the Director of the humane shelter, or his designee, shall be empowered to convene a hearing for the purpose of determining whether or not the
animal in question should be declared vicious. The animal control officer or Chief of Police shall conduct or cause to be conducted an investigation
and shall notify the owner of the animal that a hearing will be held, at which time he or she may have the opportunity to present evidence why the
animal should not be declared vicious. The hearing shall be held promptly within no less than five (5) nor more than ten (10) days after service of
notice upon the owner of the animal. The hearing shall be informal and shall be open to the public.
b. After the hearing, the owner of the animal shall be notified in writing of the determination. If a determination is made that the animal is vicious, the
owner shall comply with the provisions of this chapter in accordance with a time schedule established by the Director of the humane shelter, but in
no case more than thirty (30) days subsequent to the date of the determination. If the owner of the animal contests the determination, he or she
may, within five (5) days of such determination, bring a petition in the Magistrate Court in the Fourth Judicial District of the State, in and for the
County of Ada, wherein the animal is owned, praying that the court conduct its own hearing on whether or not the animal should be declared
vicious. After service of notice upon the animal control officer, the court shall conduct a hearing de novo and make its own determination as to
viciousness. Said hearing shall be conducted within fourteen (14) days of the service of the notice upon the animal control officer or law
enforcement officer involved. The issue shall be decided upon the preponderance of the evidence. If the court rules the animal to be vicious, the
court may establish a time schedule to ensure compliance with this chapter, but in no case more than thirty (30) days subsequent to the date of the
court's determination.
c. The court may decide all issues for or against the owner of the animal regardless of the fact that said owner fails to appear at said hearing.
d. The determination of the Magistrate Court shall be final and conclusive upon all parties thereto. However, the animal control officer or any law
enforcement officer shall have the right to declare an animal to be vicious for any subsequent actions of the animal. In the event that the animal
control officer or law enforcement officer has probable cause to believe that the animal in question is vicious and may pose a threat of serious
harm to human beings or other domestic animals, the animal control officer or law enforcement officer may seize and impound the animal pending
the aforesaid hearings. The owner of the animal shall be liable to the City for the costs and expenses of impoundment of such animal.
2. Petition:
a. If the owner of an animal impounded for an alleged violation of this section shall believe that there shall not have been a violation of such section
hereof, such owner may petition the Magistrate Court of the Fourth Judicial District of the State, in and for the County of Ada, praying that the
impounded animal not be destroyed.
b. The impounded animal shall not be destroyed pending resolution of such owner's petition if the petition shall have been filed within five (5) days of
impoundment of such animal and notice shall have been served within five (5) days of the impoundment of such animal upon the animal control
officer or keeper of the impounded animal. The hearing shall be conducted within fourteen (14) days from serving of the notice. The decision of the
Magistrate Court may be appealed to the District Court by any aggrieved party within forty two (42) days of the decision. The animal shall remain
impounded pending the appeal. If the court finds that there shall not have been a violation of this section, such animal may be released to the
custody of the owner upon payment to the humane shelter or animal control officer of the expense of keeping such animal. The schedule of such
costs as provided for by subsection 5-1-17C of this chapter shall be paid in full or upon the signing of a promissory note to the City. If the owner of
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 189/503
the animal violates any of the terms and conditions of subsection B4 of this section, said owner shall be fined one hundred dollars ($100.00) for the
first such violation and two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for each subsequent violation. (1952 Code § 6-07-14)
H. Violations; Penalty:
1. Any vicious animal:
a. Which does not have a valid license in accordance with the provisions of this chapter; or
b. Whose owner does not secure the liability insurance coverage required in accordance with subsection B1 of this section; or
c. Which is not maintained on property with an enclosure; or
d. Which shall be outside of either the dwelling of the owner or an enclosure, except as provided in subsection C of this section; or
e. Which is not tattooed;
shall be confiscated by the animal control officer and destroyed in an expeditious and humane manner after the expiration of a five (5) day waiting
period, exclusive of Sundays and holidays. In addition, the owner shall pay a two hundred fifty dollar ($250.00) fine.
2. If any vicious animal shall, when unprovoked, kill, wound, or worry or assist in killing or wounding any animal described in subsection D of this
section, the owner of said animal shall pay a two hundred fifty dollar ($250.00) fine and the animal control officer is empowered to confiscate and,
after the expiration of a five (5) day waiting period exclusive of Sundays and holidays, shall destroy said vicious animal. For each subsequent
violation, the owner of said animal shall pay a fine of three hundred dollars ($300.00).
3. If any vicious animal shall, when unprovoked, attack, assault, wound, bite or otherwise injure or kill a human being, the owner shall pay a three
hundred dollar ($300.00) fine.
4. No fine and/or tattooing requirement shall be suspended by any court of competent jurisdiction. (1952 Code § 6-07-12)
5-1-8: WILD ANIMALS:
A. Prohibited Animals: It shall be unlawful for any person to harbor, keep, maintain or possess within the City any of the following animals:
1. Mammals:
a. All members of the family Felidae (cat family), except domesticated cats.
b. All members of the family Canidae (dog family), except domesticated dogs.
c. All nonhuman primates.
d. All members of the order Insectivora, except hedgehogs.
e. All rodents, except domestic rats, mice, guinea pigs, hamsters, gerbils and squirrels not otherwise restricted by Federal law.
f. All marine mammals, including, but not limited to, whales, dolphins and seals.
g. All animals from the order Xenarthra, including giant anteaters, sloths, tamanduas, armadillos and pangolins.
h. All members of the family Procyonidae, except the raccoon native to Idaho (Procyon lotor).
i. All members of the family Mustelidae, except domestic ferrets (Mustela putorious).
j. All civets, meerkats and members of the family Vivirridae.
k. All marsupials, except Virginia opossum, sugar gliders and bettongs.
l. All members of the family Hyaenidae, including, but not limited to, hyenas and aardwolves.
m. All members of the order Tubulidentata (aardvarks).
n. All members of the order Hyracoidae (hyraxes).
o. All hoofed animals belonging to the orders Perrisodactyla and Artiodactyla, except domesticated farm or pack animals.
2. Birds:
a. Ostriches.
b. Cassowaries.
c. Penguins of any kind.
d. Cranes of any kind.
e. Flamingos.
f. Hornbills.
g. Herons and their relatives from the order Ciconiiformes.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 190/503
h. All birds of prey from the order Falconiformes.
i. All owls from the order Strigiformes.
3. Reptiles:
a. Sea turtles of any kind.
b. Aldabra or Galapagos tortoises.
c. Komodo dragons.
d. All members of the order Crocodilia.
e. Wild caught Gila monsters and beaded lizards.
f. Elapids (family of venomous snakes) except North American species, such as coral snakes, that are housed under State guidelines.
g. Viperids (family of venomous snakes) except North American species, including, but not limited to, rattlesnakes, cotton mouths and copperheads
that are housed under State guidelines.
h. Tuataras.
i. Anacondas.
4. Insects: All insects listed as agricultural pests by the USDA and Idaho Department of Agriculture.
B. Threatened Or Endangered Animals: All animals listed as threatened or endangered on either a State or Federal level and all illegally imported animals
shall be prohibited in the same manner as those listed in subsection A of this section.
C. Exceptions: The provisions of subsections A and B of this section shall not apply to the keeping of such animals by any bona fide licensed veterinary
hospital for treatment, bona fide educational or medical institutions or museums, or by rehabilitators, breeders or exhibitors who are properly licensed
or permitted by the City, the Idaho Department of Agriculture, the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, or U.S. Department of Agriculture. (1952 Code § 6-07-
06)
5-1-9: NUISANCES:
It shall be unlawful for any owner to fail to exercise proper care and control of his animal to prevent it from becoming a public nuisance. Every person shall
be guilty of allowing an animal to become a nuisance when such person permits or allows an animal to:
A. Excessive, continuous or untimely barking, or noise;
B. Molest passersby or chase vehicles;
C. Habitually attack other domestic animals;
D. Trespass upon public or private property in such a manner as to damage the property; or
E. The excessive accumulation of animal feces in such a manner as to affect the health and quiet enjoyment of another person. (1952 Code § 6-07-23)
5-1-10: CRUELTY TO ANIMALS:
A. Acts Specified: It shall be unlawful for any person to act in a cruel manner to any animal within the City. The phrase "cruel manner" shall include, but is
not limited to, the following specific acts and omissions:
1. Any owner of an animal who fails to provide such animal with:
a. Sufficient good and wholesome food; or
b. Proper shelter and protection from the weather; or
c. Proper veterinary care to prevent suffering or disease; or
d. A clean and wholesome environment in which to live; or
e. Protection from the abuse of other persons.
2. Any person who, through act or omission, does any of following specific acts with an animal:
a. Abuses or otherwise mistreats; or
b. Tortures; or
c. Misuses; or
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 191/503
d. Overloads or overrides; or
e. Abandons; or
f. Exposes to unreasonable danger to health or life.
B. Penalties: Any person violating any provision of this section shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of up to one thousand
dollars ($1,000.00), or six (6) months in jail, or both. Each day such violation is committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense. It
shall be the duty of any police officer, animal control officer or other designated City employee to take possession of any animal for which he has
probable cause to believe falls under this section and deliver such animal to the humane shelter. All costs incurred for the maintenance of such animal
will be paid by the person charged with the offense. (1952 Code § 6-07-02)
5-1-11: USE OF ANIMAL TRAPS:
The animal control officers are hereby authorized to place humane animal traps on public property or private property upon request and permission of the
owner. Such traps shall be checked daily by the animal control officers. No person shall disturb or injure such trap or animal confined therein. (1952 Code
§ 6-07-35)
5-1-12: ANIMALS, FOWL AT LARGE:
A. Definition Of Terms: As used in this section:
ANIMAL: Any and all types of animals, both domesticated and wild, male and female, singular and plural.
AT LARGE: Off the premises of the owner or custodian of the animal or fowl and not under the immediate control of the owner or custodian.
FOWL: Any and all fowl, domesticated and wild, male and female, singular and plural. (1952 Code § 6-14-01)
B. Poultry At Large: It shall be unlawful for any person to allow any chickens, ducks, turkeys, geese or other fowl owned by him to run at large upon the
streets, alleys or other public places of the City, or upon the property of any person without the consent of the owner. (1952 Code § 6-07-18)
C. Animals And Fowl Not To Be Permitted At Large: It shall be unlawful for any person, partnership, company, corporation or association owning or having
in his or their custody animals or fowl to permit same to go at large to the injury or annoyance of others, nor shall such animals or fowl be permitted at
large upon the streets or other public ways of the City. (1952 Code § 6-14-02)
D. Nuisance: For any person, partnership, company, corporation or association to permit animals or fowl to go at large upon the public streets or other
public ways of the City or to go at large to the injury or annoyance of others is hereby declared to be a nuisance, which by this subsection is defined to
be injurious and dangerous to public health and safety, an obstruction to the free use of property and an interference with the comfortable enjoyment of
life or property. (1952 Code § 6-14-03)
E. Property Owner May Impound: Any person finding any animal or fowl upon his property to his injury or annoyance may take up same and, as soon as
possible, notify the poundmaster of the City pound of his custody, giving a description of the animal or fowl and the name of the owner, if known. (1952
Code § 6-14-04)
F. Pound To Take Possession: The City pound, as soon as possible after receiving notice from the property owner taking up and impounding an animal or
fowl, will dispatch a police officer, dog catcher or other suitable employee to the premises of the said property owner and take possession of the animal
or fowl. (1952 Code § 6-14-05)
G. Officer May Impound: Any police officer, dog catcher or other employee designated by the pound for such purpose is authorized to capture and
impound any animal or fowl found at large, impounding to be in accordance with the procedure provided and authorized by this chapter. (1952 Code
§ 6-14-06; amd. 2019 Code)
H. Notification To Owner: The City pound shall notify the owner or custodian of the animal or fowl that such animal or fowl has been impounded, and the
owner or custodian may redeem the animal or fowl so impounded from the City pound by paying the board bill on a per diem basis in an amount as
specified in this chapter. If the pound, after reasonable diligence, is unable to find who owns or has custody of the animal or fowl, or if the owner or
custodian of an animal or fowl after notification has not redeemed said animal or fowl within twenty four (24) hours after such notification, the pound
may dispose of the animal or fowl or sell said animal or fowl in accordance with the manner and procedure provided by the applicable provisions of this
chapter. (1952 Code § 6-14-07; amd. 2019 Code)
I. Penalties: Any person, partnership, firm, company, corporation or association violating any of the provisions of this section shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor, and each day such violation is committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such
hereunder. (1952 Code § 6-14-08)
J. Payment Of Fees, Fines And Other Penalties:
1. The Police Court shall, from time to time, list and post with the poundmaster the amount of fine which is automatically levied for the violation of any
of the provisions of this section, which fine may be paid to the poundmaster without appearance before the court. Any police officer, dog catcher or
other authorized employee shall, upon delivery to the pound of any animal or fowl seized and taken up, in accordance with the provisions of this
section, deliver to the poundmaster a citation provided by this chapter, which citation shall, in addition to the information required by this chapter,
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 192/503
contain information of the amount of fines set by the Police Court, which may be paid by such person to the poundmaster, or otherwise a person
shall appear before the Police Court within five (5) days. All fines so paid to the poundmaster shall be remitted to the Police Court daily. The owner of
any animal or fowl taken up and impounded under the provisions of this section may recover possession of such animal or fowl upon payment to the
poundmaster of the required license fee, if any, together with the payment of the costs, fees, and fines as provided by this section and this chapter.
2. If the owner or custodian of any animal or fowl taken up and impounded shall fail to pay any license fee and costs, fines and fees required by this
section and/or this chapter within five (5) days after notice has been given to such owner or custodian, the poundmaster may destroy such animal or
fowl. (1952 Code § 6-14-09; amd. 2019 Code)
5-1-13: COMMANDING ANIMAL TO ATTACK:
Except where great bodily harm or death is likely to immediately ensue, it shall be unlawful for any person to command, encourage or aid, by word or
conduct, any animal to bite, chase, attack or attempt to bite, chase or attack, another person or animal. (1952 Code § 6-07-03)
5-1-14: INTERFERENCE WITH OFFICIALS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to hinder or molest any animal control officer who may be engaged in seizing, keeping or removing any animal in
conformity with the provisions of this chapter. (1952 Code § 6-07-04)
5-1-15: ANIMALS IN PUBLIC BUILDINGS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to permit, allow, keep or carry any animal in, upon or within a public transportation facility, or any other public building or
facility, particularly a building or facility in which food or drink is prepared or stored, except that a blind person shall not be denied the use of any common
carrier or public transportation facility or admittance to any other public building or place within the City by reason of his being accompanied by a seeing
eye or guide dog specially trained for such purpose. It is the intent of this section to permit and authorize a blind person to have a seeing eye or guide dog
with him or her in such places and while using such facilities without being required to pay any additional charges for his seeing eye or guide dog, but such
blind person shall be liable for any damage or disturbance caused by such seeing eye or guide dog. (1952 Code § 6-07-19)
5-1-16: DRIVING OR RIDING ANIMALS:
No person shall lead, drive or ride any horse, pig, sheep, goat, mule, cattle or other animal over, across or upon any sidewalk, parkway or public parking
area, or over or across any public park, except upon roadways, trails or areas designated for such use. (1952 Code § 6-07-20)
5-1-17: IMPOUNDING:
A. Records Maintained: The humane shelter shall keep a record of all animals impounded, which record shall contain a description of the animal, the place
where, and the date when, taken into custody or when delivered to the humane shelter. (1952 Code § 6-07-24)
B. Authority To Impound; Policy:
1. A police officer, animal control officer or any other person may seize and impound all dogs at large. All animals seized must be immediately delivered
to the humane shelter for impoundment.
2. The owner of any animal taken up and impounded may recover possession of such animal upon payment to the humane shelter of the required
license fee and fees authorized to be received and charged by the humane shelter. If the owner or representative of the owner of any animal taken
up and impounded shall fail to pay the license fees and costs and fees of the pound within twenty four (24) hours after actual notice to the owner or
representative of the owner, or within five (5) days after reasonable and diligent effort to notify the owner or representative of the owner, or within five
(5) days after notice has first been posted pursuant to subsection E of this section, the humane shelter may dispose of an animal either through
adoption, provided the new owner shall pay the license fee and the costs and fees as herein provided, or through euthanasia. (1952 Code § 6-07-28)
C. Fees For Impounding:
1. The humane shelter shall be entitled to charge a fee for the keeping and selling of any animal, which fees shall be retained by the humane shelter as
payment toward the costs and expenses incurred in the keeping and selling of such animal. The fees which may be charged by the humane shelter
for impounding, keeping and selling any animal, to be paid upon redemption or sale of such animal, shall be in such amounts as established by the
City Council.
2. The fee for impounding of a nonspayed or nonneutered dog shall be refunded by the humane shelter if the owner elects to have the dog spayed or
neutered within forty five (45) days of release from the shelter. Proof of spaying or neutering must be provided to the humane shelter to receive this
refund.
3. In addition to the foregoing, any person redeeming any dog or vicious animal, shall, prior to or at the time of the redemption, take out a license for
same and fulfill all licensing requirements of this chapter, unless such dog or vicious animal shall already have a license for the calendar year.
4. A fraction of a day shall be deemed a full day, and a portion of a day in excess of any multiple to twenty four (24) hours, shall be deemed a day.
(1952 Code § 6-07-26; amd. 2019 Code)
D. Redemption Of Impounded Animal:
1. Any animal impounded because it was found running at large or without a license, may be redeemed by the owner prior to the sale or destruction of
such animal, by paying all charges against the same, as provided by this section.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 193/503
2. Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and each day such violation is committed or
permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such. (1952 Code § 6-07-25)
E. Sale; Notice: At any time after any horse, mule, any kind of cattle, hog or any stock animal, shall have been impounded, the humane shelter, shall give
notice of sale by posting a notice at the humane shelter, describing the animal impounded, and notifying the owner to pay the charges thereon and
remove same prior to the time fixed for the sale thereof; and that, otherwise, the animal will be sold at a public sale at a time and place named in said
notice, which time shall be not less than five (5) days from the date of the posting of such notices.
F. Adoption: The Director of the Humane Society shall have the authority to adopt out animals unclaimed by owner after five (5) days of impoundment.
(1952 Code § 6-07-27)
G. Destruction Of Diseased Animals: Any animal impounded hereunder and suffering from serious injury or disease, may be euthanized at the discretion
of the humane shelter. (1952 Code § 6-07-29)
5-1-18: LIABILITY OF PARENTS FOR MINORS OWNING ANIMALS:
In the event that the owner of any animal is a minor, the parent or guardian of such minor shall be liable for all injuries, property damage, fines and
impoundment fees caused or incurred by said animal. (1952 Code § 6-07-16)
5-1-19: NONLIABILITY OF CITY:
The City shall not in any manner be liable by reason of any act done by the humane shelter, or any of its officers or employees, whether in the
performance of the duties prescribed by this chapter, or otherwise, except as otherwise stated in the contract between the City and the animal control
contractor. (1952 Code § 6-07-33)
5-1-20: UNIFORM CITATIONS; FINES AND PROCEDURE:
A. Citations; Payment In Lieu Of Court Appearance: The uniform citation shall be used by the animal control officers, peace officers and City Clerk in the
enforcement of this chapter. Fines of one hundred dollars ($100.00) or less may be paid by mail. All other fines or penalties shall require a court
appearance. Any offense hereunder may be prosecuted by complaint. (1952 Code § 6-07-15)
B. Administrative Procedure:
1. In order to eliminate burdening the court system with violations of dog licensing and running at large ordinances, and as a convenience to the public,
the named defendant on the uniform citation alleging such a violation under this chapter may pay the fixed penalty, including any required license
fees, to the City Clerk within ten (10) days of the issuance of the uniform citation. The following license fees and fixed penalties shall be imposed for
violations of dog licensing and running at large ordinances under this chapter:
a. If any dog is licensed, but the dog's license tag is not attached to its collar as required by subsection 5-1-4D of this chapter, a penalty of ten dollars
($10.00).
b. If any dog is found unlicensed sixty (60) days after the license renewal date, January 1, in violation of subsection 5-1-4A of this chapter, the
license fee prescribed by subsection 5-1-4A of this chapter, plus a penalty of twenty five dollars ($25.00) for failure to license the dog.
c. If any dog is found running at large in violation of subsection 5-1-4E of this chapter, a penalty of twenty five dollars ($25.00) for the first dog
running at large ordinance violation, and, within any calendar year, fifty dollars ($50.00) for a second dog running at large ordinance violation. Any
subsequent violation in any calendar year shall be at the discretion of the court.
2. All fees and penalties collected as prescribed by subsection B1 of this section shall be accounted for in the time and manner provided by subsection
5-1-2B of this chapter.
3. In the event payment is not made in accordance with the administrative procedure set out herein, the uniform citation alleging an ordinance violation
shall be filed in the Magistrate Division of the District Court. (1952 Code § 6-07-36)
5-1-21: PENALTY:
A. Violation of sections 5-1-13 and 5-1-14 of this chapter is punishable by a maximum three hundred dollar ($300.00) fine or imprisonment in the County
Jail for a term not to exceed six (6) months, or both. Regardless of the form of judgment, the court shall impose a minimum mandatory ten (10) days
jail.
B. Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter for which a fixed penalty had not been designated is guilty of a misdemeanor, which is
punishable by a fine not to exceed three hundred dollars ($300.00) or by imprisonment in the County Jail for a term not to exceed six (6) months, or by
both such fine and imprisonment. (1952 Code § 6-07-37)
Chapter 2
GENERAL OFFENSES
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 194/503
5-2-1: FAILURE TO DISPERSE:
A. Unlawful: When two (2) or more people congregate in a public place and the acts of such persons create a substantial risk of injury, alarm or serious
inconvenience to any person or property, or hinder or obstruct the free passage of any person or vehicle upon a public right-of-way, a peace officer or
other public official engaged in executing and enforcing the law may order the participants and others in the immediate vicinity to disperse. A person
who refuses a lawful order to disperse or a person who knowingly and intentionally fails to obey such an order is guilty of a misdemeanor.
B. Exceptions:
1. No such order shall apply to a news reporter or other person observing or recording the events on behalf of the public press or other news media,
unless he is physically obstructing lawful efforts by such officer to disperse the group.
2. Nothing in this section requires persons to disperse who are peaceably assembled for a lawful purpose. (1952 Code § 6-01-03)
5-2-2: USE OF TOBACCO BY MINORS; SALES TO MINORS:
A. Possession: Every person under eighteen (18) years of age who shall buy, accept or have in his or her possession any cigarette, cigar or tobacco in any
form, or any cigarette paper or wrapper intended for the wrapping of tobacco in the form of a cigarette, or compounds of tobacco used in the filling or
makeup of cigarettes, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
B. Furnishing: Every person who shall give, sell or furnish, directly or indirectly, any cigarettes, cigars or tobacco in any form or any cigarette paper or other
paper or wrapper intended for the wrapping of tobacco in the form of a cigarette, or any compound of tobacco used in the filling or makeup of
cigarettes, or any other equipment or materials used for the consumption of tobacco to any person under the age of eighteen (18) years, shall be guilty
of a misdemeanor.
C. Retail Tobacco Businesses: No person under the age of eighteen (18) years shall enter, remain or loiter in or about the premises of any "retail tobacco
business", as defined by section 3-5-1 of this Code, nor shall any owner, employee, agent or other person in charge of such business permit or allow
any person under the age of eighteen (18) years to enter, remain or loiter in or about the premises of such place. Any person who violates this section
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
D. Photographic Identification: Every retail tobacco business shall employ a person to sit or stand at each entrance to the retail tobacco business and such
person shall demand "photographic identification", as defined by section 3-5-1 of this Code, from each person desiring entrance to the business. The
failure of the owner, employee, agent or other person in charge of the business to demand and examine photographic identification from all persons
prior to the entry into a retail tobacco business shall be a misdemeanor.
E. False Identification: It shall be a misdemeanor for a person under the age of eighteen (18) years to provide false identification, or make any false
statement, regarding his or her age in an attempt to obtain a "tobacco product", as defined in section 3-5-1 of this Code, or enter a "retail tobacco
business", as defined by section 3-5-1 of this Code.
F. Refusal To Present Identification: It shall be a misdemeanor for any person to refuse to present identification indicating age, when requested by a peace
officer of the State when: 1) he or she shall possess, purchase, attempt to purchase or use a "tobacco product", as defined by section 3-5-1 of this
Code; or 2) he or she is on the premises of a "retail tobacco business", as defined by section 3-5-1 of this Code.
G. Exceptions:
1. A person under the age of eighteen (18) years who is assisting with a random unannounced inspection in accordance with Idaho Code section 39-
5710(2) shall not be in violation of this section.
2. A person under the age of eighteen (18) years may possess, but not sell or distribute tobacco products, in the course of employment, for duties such
as stocking shelves or carrying purchases to customers' vehicles.
3. A person under the age of eighteen (18) years may enter a tobacco business temporarily with a parent or guardian in order for the parent or
guardian to purchase tobacco products. (1952 Code § 6-01-04)
5-2-3: DISORDERLY CONDUCT:
A. Violations: Any person who violates the provisions below is guilty of a misdemeanor:
1. Occupying, lodging or sleeping in any building, structure or place, whether public or private, or in any motor vehicle, without the permission of the
owner or person entitled to possession or in control thereof; or
2. Loitering, prowling or wandering upon the private property of another, without lawful business, permission or invitation by the owner or the lawful
occupants thereof; or
3. Loitering or remaining in or about school grounds or buildings, without having any reason or relationship involving custody of or responsibility for a
pupil or student, school authorized functions, activities or use. (1952 Code § 6-01-05)
B. Availability Of Overnight Shelter:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 195/503
1. Law enforcement officers shall not enforce subsection A of this section (disorderly conduct) when the individual is on public property and there is no
available overnight shelter. The term "available overnight shelter" is a public or private shelter, with an available overnight space, open to an
individual or family unit experiencing homelessness, at no charge. If the individual cannot utilize the overnight shelter space due to voluntary actions,
such as intoxication, drug use, unruly behavior or violation of shelter rules, the overnight shelter space shall still be considered available.
2. This section does not affect subsection 7-7A-5E or 7-7A-10A of this Code, which do not prohibit sleeping in a public park during hours of operation.
(Ord. 38-14, 9-23-2014)
5-2-4: PUBLIC INTOXICATION:
Any person, who is in public and intoxicated at a level that presents a danger to others or creates a disturbance of the peace, shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor. (1952 Code § 6-01-06)
5-2-5: AGGRESSIVE SOLICITATION:
A. Definitions: The following words and phrases used in this section shall have the following meanings unless a different meaning clearly appears from the
context:
AGGRESSIVE MANNER: To:
1. Intentionally make any nonconsensual physical contact with another person in the course of a solicitation; or
2. Approach or follow the person being solicited in a manner that is intended to cause a reasonable person to be intimidated into responding
affirmatively to the solicitation for fear of imminent bodily harm to oneself or another; or damage to or loss of property; or
3. Continuing to solicit within five feet (5') of the person being solicited after the person has given or expressed a negative response, if continuing
the solicitation is intended to cause a reasonable person to be intimidated into responding affirmatively to the solicitation for fear of imminent bodily
harm to oneself or another, or damage to or loss of property; or
4. Intentionally obstruct the safe or free passage of the person being solicited, causing the person, including a person operating a vehicle, to move
from his or her intended path to avoid reasonably imminent nonconsensual physical contact with the person making the solicitation; or
5. Make any threatening statement or gesture immediately before or during the solicitation or after a refusal to make a donation intended to cause
a reasonable person to be intimidated into responding affirmatively to the solicitation for fear of imminent bodily harm to oneself or another, or
damage to or loss of property.
SOLICIT OR SOLICITATION: To request, ask or beg, whether by words, bodily gestures, signs or other means, for an immediate donation of money
or other thing of value, including the purchase of an item or service for an amount far exceeding its value, under circumstances where a reasonable
person would understand that the purchase is a donation. (Ord. 5-14, 1-14-2014)
B. Prohibited Acts; Penalty: It shall be unlawful for a person to solicit in an aggressive manner. Any person found guilty of violating this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor. (Ord. 5-14, 1-14-2014; amd. 2019 Code)
5-2-6: DISORDERLY HOUSEHOLD OR PREMISES:
A. Definitions: The following words and phrases used in this section shall have the following meanings unless a different meaning clearly appears from the
context:
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE: Any beverage containing alcohol, including liquor, spirits, beer and wine.
HOUSEHOLD OR PREMISES: Any home, apartment, condominium, premises or other dwelling unit or meeting room or hall, including the yard and
curtilage of such household or premises which are owned, rented, leased or under the control of the person or persons responsible for the party,
regardless of whether such premises is occupied on a permanent or temporary basis, or merely occupied as a premises for a social function.
KNOWINGLY: Having a general knowledge of or reason to know, which warrants further inquiry or inspection.
MINOR: A person under the age of twenty one (21) years.
PARTY: A party, gathering or event or other assembly of persons for a social occasion or activity.
PERSON RESPONSIBLE FOR THE PARTY: 1. The person or persons in charge of the premises where the party takes place; and/or
2. The person or persons authorizing the use of the premises for the party; and/or
3. The person or persons who organized the party.
B. Prohibited Acts: It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to host a party, gathering or event on private property within any residential area of the
City:
1. Which is disruptive to the public peace, health, safety or welfare due to the magnitude of the crowd, loud music or other noise, disturbances, unruly
behavior by those attending the party, excessive traffic or destruction of property; or
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 196/503
2. Where a person under the age of twenty one (21) years is in possession of, is consuming or is under the influence of an alcoholic beverage and the
person or persons responsible for the party knew or reasonably should have known that the person in possession of, consuming or under the
influence of an alcoholic beverage is under the age of twenty one (21) years.
C. Restitution: The court may order restitution to be paid by the person or persons responsible for a party or gathering that requires a subsequent law
enforcement or emergency response. Such restitution, if ordered, would include actual costs for law enforcement or other emergency services incurred
for the purpose of abating any of the conditions or violations described in subsection B of this section.
D. Penalty: Any person in violation of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. (1952 Code § 6-01-08)
5-2-7: FIGHTING:
It shall be unlawful for any person to intentionally, knowingly or recklessly fight with another person in a public place. (1952 Code § 6-01-10)
5-2-8: RESISTING AND OBSTRUCTING OFFICERS:
Every person who wilfully resists, delays or obstructs any public officer, in the discharge, or attempt to discharge, of any duty of his office, or who refuses a
lawful order of a public officer, is guilty of a misdemeanor. (1952 Code § 6-01-12)
5-2-9: FALSE REPORTS:
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or organization of any kind: (1952 Code § 6-01-13)
A. To make or file, or cause to be made or filed, an accident report knowing the same to be false; (1952 Code § 6-01-13; amd. 2019 Code)
B. To knowingly give or cause to be given false information to any law enforcement officer or any State or local government agency or personnel;
C. To intentionally make a false call or turn in false information regarding the need for police or emergency assistance, or aid or abet in the commission of
such act;
D. To file a knowingly false statement, claim, complaint or document to be used or reviewed by the Ethics Commission. (1952 Code § 6-01-13)
5-2-10: UNLAWFUL CONSUMPTION OF OR POSSESSION OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES IN PUBLIC PLACE:
A. Definitions: As used in this section, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings given herein when not inconsistent with the context.
Words used in the present tense include the future, words in the plural number include the singular number, and words in the singular number include
the plural number. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE: Any beverage containing alcohol that is a product of distillation of any fermented liquor, or synthetic ethyl alcohol, including
liquor, spirits, beer, wine or any liquid containing liquor, spirits, beer or wine.
BEER: Shall have the meaning it is given in title 3, chapter 3 of this Code.
PUBLIC PLACE: An area to which the general public has an unrestricted right of access and that is generally open or used by the public, regardless of
whether it is publicly or privately owned. Examples of public places include, without limitation, streets, highways or public rights-of-way, sidewalks,
bridges, alleys, plazas, parks, public driveways, parking lots, transit stations, trains, buses, moving or stationary motor vehicles, shelters, tunnels and
buildings, including, without limitation, stores and restaurants.
WINE: Shall have the meaning it is given in title 3, chapter 3 of this Code. (Ord. 30-15, 7-7-2015; amd. Ord. 19-18, 6-5-2018)
B. Specified: Except as otherwise provided by license, permit or law, it shall be unlawful for any person:
1. To consume any alcoholic beverage in a public place within the City; or
2. To possess, in a public place within the City, any alcoholic beverage in any bottle, can or other receptacle which has been opened, or has a seal
broken, or where the contents of which have been partially removed.
C. Exceptions: The provisions of this section shall not apply to the possession or consumption of any alcoholic beverage by a person who is at least twenty
one (21) years of age when such possession or consumption occurs:
1. Within any private residence or upon the yard thereabout, or within any apartment, duplex, condominium, boarding house or other structure lawfully
used as a permanent residence, or within any common area or area designated exclusively for and appurtenant to such residential occupancy;
2. Within an establishment, business place or other location properly licensed and permitted by the State, the County and the City for the consumption
of any alcoholic beverage; (Ord. 30-15, 7-7-2015)
3. Within the area defined on exhibit A on file in the City and depicted on exhibit B on file in the City, between the hours of ten o'clock (10:00) A.M. and
ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. on any day the Boise State University football team plays a home game at Boise State's football stadium against an NCAA
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 197/503
opponent, or on any day the City hosts an NCAA bowl game at Boise State's football stadium; provided, that the alcoholic beverage is held in an
opaque plastic container that is not labeled or branded by an alcohol manufacturer or distributor and that such possession or consumption does not
occur on or in the Boise River. Should there be a conflict between the boundary description (exhibit A on file in the City) and the approximate
boundary depiction (exhibit B on file in the City), the description contained in exhibit A on file in the City shall control; or (Ord. 30-15, 7-7-2015; amd.
Ord. 19-18, 6-5-2018; 2019 Code)
4. Pursuant to a valid City special event permit issued by the City; provided, that the alcoholic beverage is held in an opaque plastic container that is
not labeled or branded by an alcohol manufacturer or distributor and that such possession or consumption does not occur on or in the Boise River.
(Ord. 30-15, 7-7-2015; amd. Ord. 19-18, 6-5-2018)
D. Possession Or Consumption: The provisions of this section shall not apply to the possession of an open container or the consumption of beer or wine
by a person who is at least twenty one (21) years of age, when such possession or consumption occurs while the person is a passenger within a
vehicle operated by a company licensed by the City as a touring vehicle service pursuant to title 3, chapter 13, article B of this Code. (Ord. 19-18, 6-5-
2018)
5-2-11: VOYEURISM:
It shall be unlawful for any person to enter another person's private property without permission and to peer, peep or look through doors or windows of that
property with the intent to intrude upon or interfere with a person's privacy, or within a public place, to peer, peep or look into an area where a person has a
reasonable expectation of privacy and has taken steps to conceal themselves from the general public, such as a restroom, locker room or changing room,
without that person's consent and with the intent to invade that person's privacy. (1952 Code § 6-01-16)
5-2-12: INTOXICATION BY INHALATION OF TOXICANTS OR SOLVENTS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to become or attempt to become intoxicated by inhaling the fumes of gasoline, toluene or any other solvent or product
containing any such solvent. (1952 Code § 6-01-17)
5-2-13: PUBLIC URINATION:
It shall be unlawful for any person to excrete human waste, including urine or feces, upon the ground, into a body of water, or upon anything attached or
setting upon said surfaces within the City, except for toilet facilities used as receptacles for human waste. (1952 Code § 6-01-18)
5-2-14: POSSESSION OF FALSE IDENTIFICATION CARD:
It shall be unlawful for any person who is under twenty one (21) years of age to display or have in his or her possession a driver's license, identification
card, or any other written, printed or photographic evidence of age and identity which is fraudulent, reproduced, altered or not actually his or her own. A
violation of this section shall be an infraction, subject to penalty as provided in section 1-4-2 of this Code. (1952 Code § 6-01-19; amd. 2019 Code)
5-2-15: MINORS; PURCHASE, CONSUMPTION OR POSSESSION OF ALCOHOL:
Any person under twenty one (21) years of age who shall purchase, attempt to purchase, consume or otherwise possess any alcohol beverage, including
any distilled spirits, beer or wine, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished according to the schedule set out in Idaho Code section 18-1502,
which is hereby adopted by the City, as presently in effect or as may hereafter be amended, for the limited purpose of providing penalties for this section
only. (1952 Code § 6-01-20)
5-2-16: PENALTY:
Unless otherwise specified, a violation of this chapter is a misdemeanor, subject to penalty as provided in section 1-4-1 of this Code. (1952 Code § 6-01-
21; amd. 2019 Code)
Chapter 3
OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC OR PRIVATE PROPERTY
5-3-1: OFFENSES TO PROPERTY:
It shall be unlawful for any person to:
A. Maliciously injure or destroy any real or personal property not his own in cases other than as specified in this chapter.
B. Wilfully or carelessly set on fire, or cause to be set on fire, public or private property.
C. Build a campfire in any public park and leave the same without totally extinguishing such fire.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 198/503
D. Injure, damage, cut or destroy, or sever from the freehold, any produce, crops, vegetables and fruit, or trees, shrubbery, plants and flowers, or any kind
of wood or timber belonging to another standing or cultivated and growing upon the lands of another.
E. Dig, take or carry away from any lot, parcel or tract of land, without the license or consent of the owner or legal occupant thereof, any earth, soil or
stone.
F. Dig, take or carry away from any land dedicated or laid down on a map or plat or a recorded subdivision, or otherwise recognized or established, as a
street, alley, avenue or park, without the license or consent of the proper authorities, any earth, soil or stone.
G. Tear down or otherwise destroy any fence on the enclosed land of another, or open any gate, bar or fence of another and leave it open without the
consent of the owner or legal occupant thereof.
H. Cover up or encumber in any manner the land of another without written permission from the owner or legal occupant thereof.
I. Use, or procure, encourage or assist another to use, any force or violence in entering upon or detaining any lands or possessions of another.
J. Settle, reside upon or take possession of any lands or the improvements thereon when a person has been removed, or has been directed to remove
and quit, from such lands or improvements pursuant to lawful adjudication or direction of any court, tribunal or officer.
K. Refuse to depart from any real property after having been first notified in writing, or verbally, by the owner or authorized agent of the owner to
immediately depart from such property.
L. Break, dig up, obstruct or injure any pipe, main, line or cable for conducting gas or water or for the transmission of communications and electricity, or
any appurtenances connected therewith.
M. Desecrate or molest in any way any portion of any grave, cemetery, headstone, grave marker, mausoleum, crypt or other place of burial, whether whole
bodies or ashes, or other evidence of remains of a deceased human body.
N. Place, paint or cause to be placed or painted, election posters or literature or other promotional or sales materials upon public or private property, real
or personal, unless such person has first obtained permission and consent in writing from the owner or owners of such property. (1952 Code § 6-17-01)
5-3-2: OFFENSES AGAINST STREETS; MONUMENTS, ORNAMENTS AND PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS; IRRIGATION WORKS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to:
A. Move or remove any monument erected for the purpose of designating any point in the boundary of any lot, tract or parcel of land, or move, remove,
deface, mar or destroy any other type of monument, surveyor's stake or stone erected or placed for the purpose of designating any point in the
boundary of any lot, tract or parcel of land.
B. Tamper with, injure, deface, destroy or remove any sign, milepost or guidepost erected upon, within or adjacent to any street, alley or public way, or any
notice, marker, fire alarm box, fire hydrant or any work of art, landmark or historic structure, or any other personal property, erected, placed or
maintained and operated by lawful authority.
C. Without written consent, move, cut, break, mutilate or otherwise injure, damage or interfere with any street, sidewalk, curb, culvert, drain, waterway,
embankment, ditch, retaining wall, bridge, grade separation structure, or roadside improvement appurtenant to or on the right-of-way of any street, alley
or public way, or cut, mar, disfigure, break, mutilate or remove, or otherwise injure or damage any tree, plant, shrub, ornamental plant or other useful or
ornamental improvements upon the right-of-way of any street, alley or public way where the same have been landscaped or beautified by the City or
with the approval and consent of lawful authority. For the purposes of this subsection, the terms "street", "alley" and "public way" shall be construed to
include the entire right-of-way of such street, alley or public way.
D. Cut down, remove, destroy, mar, disfigure or uproot any flowering or ornamental tree, shrub, perennial or annual plant in any park.
E. Obstruct, encroach, injure or damage any public road, street, sidewalk, alley or public way, or ride or drive horses, cattle or motor vehicles upon a
sidewalk.
F. Run, or cause to run, suffer, permit or allow any water used for the purpose of irrigation, or for any other purpose, to flow into, across or upon any public
highway, road, street, alley or public way in any other manner than that authorized by law.
G. Take or divert water from any canal, ditch, flume or reservoir used for the purpose of holding or conveying water for beneficial uses and purposes or
without authority, raise, lower, open, close, change or otherwise disturb or interfere with any gate, headgate, water box, weir or valve, or measuring or
regulating device or other appurtenances used for the control or measurement of water, or empty or place, or cause to be emptied or placed, into any
canal, ditch, flume or reservoir, any rubbish, trash, garbage or other substances and matter obstructing the free flow of water.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 199/503
H. Waste water for irrigation, or any waters of any stream, the waters of which are used for irrigation, or divert the same for an unnecessary use or
purpose, or allow such water to waste so that the same cannot be used for a beneficial use or purpose. (1952 Code § 6-17-02)
5-3-3: LARCENY OF PROPERTY:
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to:
1. Steal, take and carry away the personal property of another, when the property taken, stolen or carried away has a value of less than fifty dollars
($50.00);
2. Find lost property under circumstances which give knowledge of, or means of inquiry as to, the true owner, and appropriate such property to his own
use or to the use of another person not entitled thereto, without first making a reasonable and just effort to find and restore the property to the owner;
3. Conceal the goods, wares or merchandise of any store or merchant, while still upon the premises of such store or merchant. Goods, wares or
merchandise found concealed upon the person shall be prima facie evidence of a wilful concealment.
B. If the thing stolen, taken or carried away consists of any evidence of debt, or represents security for an indebtedness remaining unsatisfied, the value of
the thing stolen, taken or carried away is the money due thereon.
C. The provisions of this section shall apply where the thing taken is any fixture or part of the realty and is severed at the time of taking, in the same
manner as if the thing had been severed by another person at some previous time. (1952 Code § 6-17-03)
5-3-4: COMMUNICATIONS AND FACILITIES:
It shall be unlawful for any person to:
A. Without lawful authority, wilfully and wrongfully, open, remove or damage any parking meter, coin telephone or other vending machine dispensing goods
or services, or a part thereof; or possess a key or device specifically designed to open or break any parking meter, coin telephone or other vending
machine dispensing goods or services; or possess a drawing, print or mold of a key or device specifically designed to open or break any parking meter,
coin telephone or other vending machine dispensing goods or services.
B. Cut down or burn or otherwise materially injure, any electric light pole, or shoot so as to materially injure any insulator, or knock said insulator loose from
the pole to which it is attached, or otherwise materially injure such insulator, or shoot any electric light wire, thereby breaking said wire, or otherwise
cut, break or injure such wire.
C. Fail or refuse to relinquish the use of a telephone line upon the request of another person to use such line for an emergency message (any person
requesting that another person using a telephone line relinquish the use of such line for the purpose of an emergency message shall inform such
person of the nature of the emergency and their name and telephone number upon request); providing, that emergency telephone calls for the purpose
of this subsection are calls for police, medical and fire aid.
D. Procure use of a telephone line for a nonexisting emergency. (1952 Code § 6-17-04)
5-3-5: PROHIBITED ACTS ON BOISE RIVER:
This section is intended to address certain acts on or about the Boise River. Through regulation of those acts, this section seeks to preserve the natural
habitat of the Boise River and ensure the protection of life and property. The provisions of this section shall apply to all public property surrounding the
river for a distance of seventy feet (70') horizontally landward from the ordinary high water mark into and including the river itself. In the above delimited
area it shall be unlawful to:
A. Damage, cut, carve, transplant or remove, without a permit from the Supervisor of Urban Forestry, any tree, shrub or plant, or to strip any bark, pick any
flowers or collect any seeds from any such tree, shrub or plant. Nor shall any person:
1. Use any bungee, rope, wire or other such similar object attached to any tree or plant, except as may be authorized by the Parks and Recreation
Commission by duly promulgated rule or regulation.
2. Dig or disturb any natural habitat area or in any other way disturb, impair or injure the natural habitat of the area.
B. Hunt, molest, harm, frighten, kill, trap, chase, tease, annoy, shoot or throw objects at any animal, reptile or bird within the habitat area. The Parks
Department staff, representatives of the State Fish and Game or Ada County Animal Control, may, in the performance of their duties, with the
concurrence and approval of the Park System Director, do such acts necessary to protect life or property or improve the wildlife habitat. Nor shall any
person collect any nests or eggs from any wild bird or reptile. Nothing in this subsection shall be construed to prohibit lawful fishing activities on or in
the Boise River.
C. Operate or park any motor vehicles. This subsection specifically excludes watercraft, emergency vehicles, motorized wheelchairs or other similar
vehicles used by the physically or mentally challenged or those vehicles authorized by the Department of Parks and Recreation.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 200/503
D. Fire or discharge any firearms of any description, or any air rifles, spring guns, bow and arrows, slings or any other form of weapon potentially inimical
to wildlife and dangerous to human safety, except for duly authorized animal control officers and law enforcement personnel certified by the State
Department of Police Officer Standards and Training in the course and scope of their employment as law enforcement officials. Nor shall any person
use any instrument that can be loaded with and fire blank cartridges, or any kind of trapping device.
E. Possess, transport or carry any air rifles, spring guns, bows and arrows, slings or any other form of nonfirearm weapon potentially inimical to wildlife and
dangerous to human safety.
F. Have in one's possession, any fireworks defined by section 5-12-61 of this title.
G. Set up any tents, shacks or other temporary shelter for the purpose of camping, as defined in section 7-3A-2 of this Code. No person shall be permitted
to camp or otherwise remain in the proscribed area overnight.
H. Use, carry or be in the possession of any beverage container made of glass.
I. Deposit or discard any trash, rubbish or refuse, as defined by this Code, except in Parks Department refuse containers.
J. Use or ride in or upon the Boise River within the City:
1. An object commonly referred to as a "boogie board", "body board" or "river board", which, for the purposes of this section, shall be defined to mean
any object regardless of the type of material from which it is constructed which creates a surf type wave upon or within the water surface or is used to
ride upon or against the current and which is secured by, tied to, held or belayed from any rope, line, cord, bungee, or the like attached at any time to
any object or fixture within, adjacent to, or spanning any portion of the Boise River, except as may be authorized by the Parks and Recreation
Commission by rule or regulation with notice of such posted by City in the location where the activity is permitted.
2. Any motorized watercraft, except by personnel authorized by the Fire Chief or designated representative for the purpose of safety and rescue, or the
park system staff, State Fish and Game personnel or Ada County Animal Control staff in the performance of their duties and with the concurrence
and approval of the Park System Director. For the purpose of this section, "motorized watercraft" shall include, but shall not be limited to, craft
propelled by jet propulsion, electric motor propeller and gasoline powered motor and propeller.
K. It shall be unlawful for any person to jump from, or throw or drop any object, including a person, from any bridge, tree or other landscape features into
the Boise River within fifty feet (50') of any boater, floater, rafter or tuber. (1952 Code § 6-17-06)
5-3-6: PENALTY:
Any person in violation of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, subject to penalty as provided in section 1-4-1 of this Code,
except for a violation of subsection 5-3-5J or K of this chapter, which violation is an infraction, subject to penalty as provided in section 1-4-2 of this Code.
(1952 Code § 6-17-08; amd. 2019 Code)
Chapter 4
WEAPONS AND FIREARMS
5-4-1: DISCHARGE OF WEAPONS AND FIREARMS PROHIBITED:
A. Definitions: As used in this chapter:
DISCHARGE: The act that causes the potential release, expulsion, propulsion or ejection of a projectile from a weapon or a firearm. If the weapon or
firearm is capable of the expulsion of a projectile, the act of firing or releasing it shall be sufficient to constitute a discharge, without regard to whether or
not a projectile was actually ejected, propelled, expelled or released.
FIREARM: A pistol, revolver, gun, rifle or other ordnance, including a miniature weapon, which projects a missile or shot by force of gunpowder or any
other explosive or chemical reaction.
WEAPON: Any instrument, device, article, item or thing capable of releasing, expelling, propelling or ejecting a projectile through the action or release
of a spring, pressurized gas, compressed air, expanding gas, explosive, chemical reaction or other force producing means or method, including, but not
limited to, objects commonly referred to as air guns, air pistols, air rifles, BB guns, pellet guns, blow guns, airsoft guns or paintball markers or paintball
guns. (Ord. 40-15, 9-22-2015)
B. Prohibition; Exceptions: It is unlawful for any person to discharge a weapon or a firearm anywhere within the corporate limits of the City of Boise City,
except:
1. At a shooting gallery, sport shooting range, or archery range operated in compliance with title 11 of this Code, as required by Idaho Code section 18-
3302J(4)(b);
2. At, upon, or within a structure on private property specifically designed and constructed for the safe discharge of a weapon or firearm. Boise City
Council reserves the right to approve, disapprove, revoke, or terminate the allowed use of such structure based on its assessment of whether such
structure creates a hazard or is otherwise detrimental to the public safety or convenience;
3. By a law enforcement officer while acting in the course and scope of his official duties;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 201/503
4. In the lawful defense of a person or persons or property, as required by Idaho Code section 18-3302J(4)(a); or
5. The discharge of blank rounds from a firearm during burial ceremonies, celebrations of historical events or events of military significance, theatrical
performances, to start athletic events (such as races), or in other similar activities, provided that: a) if the firing of a blank round is proposed to occur
within a City park or facility, other than in a cemetery during a burial service performed by a recognized veterans' organization, prior written approval
is obtained from the Director of Boise City's Parks and Recreation Department; b) if the firing of a blank round is proposed to occur anywhere within
Boise City that is not on school property and not within a Boise City park, facility, or cemetery, prior written approval is obtained from the Chief of the
Boise Police Department (or his or her designee), except when such firing occurs at a burial or memorial service conducted by a recognized
veterans' organization, in which case prior approval is not required, but notice must be given to Boise Police Department dispatch at least one hour
prior to firing. (Ord. 43-18, 9-25-2018)
5-4-2: PENALTY:
The violation of any one of the provisions of this chapter is punishable as a general misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be subject to penalty
as provided in section 1-4-1 of this Code. (Ord. 40-15, 9-22-2015; amd. 2019 Code)
Chapter 5
MINORS
5-5-1: REGULATIONS FOR MINORS:
It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of eighteen (18) years living or found in the City to be or to remain a person who has run away from his
parents, guardian or other legal custodian, or who commits or has committed any act or acts placing him beyond the control of his parents, guardian or
other legal custodian, or to become or attempt to become intoxicated by inhaling the fumes of gasoline, toluene, or any other solvent or product containing
any such solvent. (1952 Code § 6-12-01; amd. 2019 Code)
5-5-2: CURFEW:
5-5-2-1: DEFINITIONS:
The terms as used in this section 5-5-2 shall have the following meanings:
EMERGENCY: An unforeseen circumstance or combination of circumstances that requires immediate action to safeguard life, limb or property.
Emergencies shall include, but shall not be limited to, fires, natural disasters, automobile crashes or other similar circumstances.
ESTABLISHMENT: Any privately owned place of business operated for a profit to which the public is invited, including, but not limited to, places for
amusement or entertainment. The operator of an establishment shall include the person authorized with management responsibilities who is on the
premises of the establishment at the time in which a minor is located on the premises, the person with overall authority for managing the establishment
and the person or entity who owns the establishment.
GUARDIAN: A person who has been judicially appointed as the legal guardian, or a person over the age of eighteen (18) who has been authorized by the
legal guardian or parent to assume care, control and responsibility for the minor for a definitive period of time.
MINOR: Any person under the age of eighteen (18).
PARENT: A minor's biological, adoptive or stepparent.
PUBLIC PLACE: Any place to which the public or a substantial group of the public has access, including, but not limited to, streets, highways,
thoroughfares, sidewalks, alleys, parking lots, parks and the common areas of schools, hospitals, apartment complexes, office buildings, transportation
facilities, entertainment facilities and shops.
REMAIN: To stay or linger at or upon a place; or to fail to depart when requested to do so by a police officer or a person with authority to act in the interest
of the establishment or public place at which the minor is located. (1952 Code § 6-10-01)
5-5-2-2: REGULATIONS:
A. Regulation Of Minors: It shall be unlawful for any minor to remain in or upon any public place, to remain in any motor vehicle operating or parked in or
upon a public place or establishment, or to remain in or upon the premises of any establishment, between the hours of twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight
and five o'clock (5:00) A.M., unless their presence is explained by one of the enumerated exceptions. (1952 Code § 6-10-02.01)
B. Exceptions: Exceptions to the regulation of minors include:
1. The minor is accompanied by a parent or guardian.
2. An emergency situation exists.
3. The minor is engaged in an employment activity, or is going to or returning home from such activity without detour or stop, except for purposes of
obtaining fuel for transportation.
4. The minor is on a sidewalk directly abutting the place in which they reside; or within three hundred feet (300') of their residence and the neighboring
residents have not issued a complaint about the minor's presence.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 202/503
5. The minor is attending an activity sponsored by a school, religious or civic organization, by a public organization or entity, or by another similar
organization or entity, which activity is supervised by adults; or is going to or returning from such activity without detour or stop, except for purposes
of obtaining fuel for transportation.
6. The minor is on an errand and has in their possession written parental authorization for the errand, to include the destination of the errand, time
allotted for the errand and a contact telephone number to verify parental authorization.
7. The minor is involved in interstate travel through, or beginning or terminating in, the City.
8. The minor is exercising First Amendment rights protected by the United States Constitution, such as the free exercise of religion, freedom of speech
and the right of assembly. (1952 Code § 6-10-02.02)
C. Parental Responsibility: It is the responsibility of the parent or legal guardian to ensure that a minor complies with this section 5-5-2. It shall be unlawful
for a parent or legal guardian to knowingly permit, allow or encourage a violation of this section 5-5-2. (1952 Code § 6-10-02.03)
D. Operator Of Establishment: It shall be unlawful for any operator of an "establishment", as defined in section 5-5-2-1 of this chapter, to knowingly permit,
allow or encourage a minor to remain at or upon the premises of the establishment in violation of this section. It shall be a defense to this violation that
the operator or an employee of the establishment promptly notified police that a minor was present at the establishment and refused to leave when
requested. (1952 Code § 6-10-02.04)
E. Operator Or Owner Of Motor Vehicle: It shall be unlawful for the owner or operator of a motor vehicle to knowingly permit, allow or encourage a violation
of this section 5-5-2. (1952 Code § 6-10-02.05)
F. Required Information: Every person suspected of a curfew violation shall provide their name and age to a police officer upon request. Any person who
refuses to provide such information, or who knowingly gives false information regarding their name or age, or another person's name or age to any
police officer conducting an investigation under this section 5-5-2 shall be in violation of this section 5-5-2. (1952 Code § 6-10-02.06)
5-5-2-3: ENFORCEMENT:
Before taking any enforcement action under this section, a police officer shall investigate whether the minor's presence in a public place, motor vehicle or
establishment falls within one of the enumerated exceptions to minor regulations. If the officer cannot reasonably determine the existence of one of the
enumerated exceptions, and probable cause otherwise exists, the officer may take appropriate enforcement action. (1952 Code § 6-10-03.01)
5-5-2-4: PENALTY:
Any person found to be in violation of any of the provisions of this section 5-5-2 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be
subject to penalty as provided in section 1-4-1 of this Code. (1952 Code § 6-10-03.02; amd. 2019 Code)
Chapter 6
PUBLIC NUDITY
5-6-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and phrases used in this chapter shall have the following meanings unless a different meaning clearly appears from the context:
NUDITY: The showing of the human male or female genitals, pubic area or buttocks with less than a fully opaque covering; the showing of the female
breast with less than a fully opaque covering of any part of the nipple; the exposure of any device, costume or covering which gives the appearance of or
simulates the genitals, pubic hair, natal cleft, perineum anal region or pubic hair region; or the exposure of any device worn as a cover over the nipples
and/or areola of the female breast, which device simulates and gives the realistic appearance of nipples and/or areola.
PUBLIC PLACE: All outdoor places owned by or open to the general public, and all buildings and enclosed places owned by or open to the general public,
including such places of entertainment, taverns, restaurants, clubs, theaters, dance halls, banquets halls, party rooms or halls limited to specific members,
restricted to adults or to patrons invited to attend, whether or not an admission charge is levied. (1952 Code § 6-22-01)
5-6-2: NUDITY PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for a person to knowingly and intentionally, in a public place, appear in a state of nudity. (1952 Code § 6-22-02)
5-6-3: EXCLUSIONS:
A. This prohibition shall not apply to any child under the age of ten (10) years of age, or any person exposing a breast in the process of breast feeding.
B. This prohibition shall not apply to persons engaged in dance, ballet, music or dramatic performances, or artistic displays which are of serious artistic
merit and are offered on premises in which the predominant business or attraction is not the offering to customers of entertainment which is intended to
provide sexual stimulation or sexual gratification. This exclusion does not apply to any activities which may take place on the following premises, as
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 203/503
defined in subsection 11-012-02.3 and section 11-012-05 of this Code: adult arcade, adult bookstore, adult cabaret, adult motion picture theater, adult
theater, bikini bar (other, commercial), sexually oriented business (other, commercial) or sexual encounter premises. (Ord. 31-16, 10-25-2016)
5-6-4: CONSTRUCTION AND SEVERABILITY:
It is the intention of the City that the provisions of this chapter be construed, enforced and interpreted in such a manner as will cause the least possible
infringement of the constitutional rights of free speech, free expression, due process, equal protection or other fundamental rights consistent with the
purposes of this chapter. Should a court of competent jurisdiction determine that any part of this chapter, or any application or enforcement of it is
excessively restrictive of such rights or liberties, then such portion of this chapter, or specific application of this chapter, shall be severed from the
remainder, which shall continue in full force and effect. (1952 Code § 6-22-04)
5-6-5: PENALTY:
Violation of the provisions of this chapter is a misdemeanor, punishable as provided in section 1-4-1 of this Code. (1952 Code § 6-22-05; amd. 2019 Code)
Chapter 7
NOISE CONTROL
5-7-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is the protection of the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the City. It is determined that sound can and does constitute
a hazard to the health, safety, welfare and quality of life of residents of the City. The Mayor and Council, by way of Idaho Code section 50-308, are
empowered to impose reasonable limitations and regulations upon the production of sound to reduce the harmful effects thereof. Now, therefore, it is
hereafter the policy of this City to prevent and regulate sound generated by loud amplification devices wherever it is deemed to be harmful to the health,
safety, welfare or quality of life of the citizens of the City, and this chapter shall be liberally construed to effectuate that purpose. (1952 Code § 6-20-01)
5-7-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
CITY: Boise City, Idaho, or the area within the City limits of Boise City, Idaho.
COMMON AREAS: The areas of a facility, complex, apartment unit, hotel, motel or the like that are open either to the general public or persons with the
permission of the owner or agent of the owner of the area. This definition would include, but not be limited to, the following: swimming pools, restaurants,
patios, hot tubs, saunas, laundry rooms, meeting rooms, lobbies, lounges, bars and other areas within the facility that are either constructed or designed
for use in this manner.
EMERGENCY: Any occurrence or set of circumstances involving actual or imminent physical trauma or property damage demanding immediate attention.
EMERGENCY VEHICLE: A motor vehicle belonging to a Fire Department, Firefighting Association or Fire District, an ambulance, or a motor vehicle
belonging to a Federal, State, County or Municipal law enforcement agency.
LOUD AMPLIFICATION DEVICE: Any equipment designed or used for sound production, reproduction or amplification, including, but not limited to, any
radio, television, phonograph, musical instrument, stereo, tape player, compact disc player, loud speaker, public address (PA) system, sound amplifier or
comparable sound broadcasting device.
PERSON: Any individual, association, organization or entity having a legally recognized existence, whether public or private.
PLACE OF RESIDENCE: Any building or portion thereof adapted or used and intended for the overnight accommodation of persons. In the event the
building is used for multiple individual units (i.e., apartment, condominium, hotel, motel, duplex, triplex, etc.) each individual unit shall be considered a
separate residence for the purposes of this chapter.
PLAINLY AUDIBLE: Sound for which the information content is clearly communicated to the listener, including, but not limited to, understandable spoken
speech, comprehension of whether a voice is raised or normal, comprehensible musical rhythms, melody or instrumentation, and the source of which is
identifiable to the listener. (1952 Code § 6-20-02)
5-7-3: NOISE PROHIBITIONS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or permit the operation of any loud amplification device in such a manner that the sound therefrom:
A. Is plainly audible within any place of residence not the source of the sound; or
B. Is plainly audible upon a public right-of-way or street at a distance of one hundred feet (100') or more from the source of such sound. (1952 Code § 6-
20-03)
5-7-4: EXEMPTIONS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 204/503
The following sounds are exempted from the provisions of this chapter:
A. Sounds caused by any emergency vehicle or personnel when responding to an emergency call or acting in time of emergency;
B. Sounds caused by activities upon any outdoor Municipal, school, religious or publicly owned property or facility; provided, that such activities have been
authorized by the owner of such property or facility or its agent;
C. Sounds caused by parades, fireworks displays or any other event for which a permit for that type of activity is required and has been obtained from the
authorized governmental entity within such hours as may be imposed as a condition for the issuance of said permit;
D. Sounds caused by locomotives or other railroad equipment;
E. Sounds caused by burglar alarms that are not in violation of this Code;
F. Sounds caused by safety warning devices required by law;
G. Sounds caused by devices approved for use within the confines of the particular zoning designation that the device is located or pursuant to a
conditional use permit (i.e., drive-through window speakers, car lot PA systems);
H. Sounds emanating from devices used within the common areas of a multi-unit facility whose use has been approved by the owners or management of
the facility. Said use must be in compliance with any regulations imposed by the owners or management of the facility to be exempt under this chapter.
This exemption only applies in relation to other units within the same facility. (1952 Code § 6-20-06)
5-7-5: PROVISIONS CUMULATIVE:
The provisions of this chapter shall be cumulative and nonexclusive and shall not affect any other claim, cause of action or remedy; nor, unless specifically
provided, shall it be deemed to repeal, amend or modify any law, ordinance or regulation relating to noise or sound, but shall be deemed additional to
existing legislation and common law on such subject. (1952 Code § 6-20-05)
5-7-6: ENFORCEMENT:
A. Peace Officer Citation: Any City peace officer or person empowered to enforce this provision of this Code is authorized to issue a uniform citation upon
his own observation of a violation without the necessity of a citizen complainant's signature on said citation. By signing the citation, the officer or person
is certifying that he has reasonable grounds to believe that the person cited committed the offense contrary to law.
B. Citizen Citation: A uniform citation may also be signed by any citizen or person in whose presence an alleged violation of this chapter occurred and be
witnessed by a City peace officer or person empowered to enforce this provision of this Code whose name shall be endorsed on the citation. (1952
Code § 6-20-04)
5-7-7: PENALTY:
Any person who shall violate any of the terms or provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of an infraction and shall be subject to penalty as provided in
section 1-4-2 of this Code. (1952 Code § 6-20-07; amd. 2019 Code)
Chapter 8
ASSEMBLAGES
5-8-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meanings given herein. When not inconsistent with the context, words in the
present tense include the future, words in the plural number include the singular number, and words in the singular number include the plural number. The
word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
ASSEMBLY: A group of persons gathered together at any one time for any purpose.
OCCUPANT LOAD: The total number of persons that may occupy a building, or a portion thereof, at any one time; or the total number of persons that can
be accommodated by the seating arrangements of a building, structure, arena, stadium, bleacher or grandstand, or parts thereof; or the maximum seating
or maximum live load capacity of said building, structure, arena, stadium, bleacher, grandstand or parts thereof.
PERSON: Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or organization of any kind. (1952 Code § 6-18-01)
5-8-2: EXCESSIVE OCCUPANT LOAD UNLAWFUL:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 205/503
It shall be unlawful for any person:
A. To sell tickets and/or admit persons without consideration, for any event or for any purpose in excess of the occupant load of a building, structure,
arena, stadium, bleacher or grandstand, or parts thereof;
B. To permit, maintain, conduct or promote an assembly of persons in excess of the occupant load of a building, structure, arena, stadium, bleachers and
grandstands, or parts thereof; and
C. To permit any person, except ushers or other employees, to remain standing in any aisles, corridors or exits during an assembly of persons, it being the
duty of the person permitting, maintaining, conducting or promoting an assembly of persons to provide adequate unobstructed exits to permit rapid
egress of all persons attending. (1952 Code § 6-18-02)
5-8-3: EXAMINATION OF PREMISES:
It shall be the duty of the person permitting, maintaining, conducting or promoting an assembly of persons to comply with all provisions of this Code
relating to the health and safety of people, and in particular, ordinances, rules and regulations relating to building, electrical, fire, safety and health. No
such assembly for any purpose shall be held or presented unless premises upon or within which that assembly shall be held have been examined by a
designated employee of the Fire Department, Planning and Development Services or the Police Department, not less than three (3) days before the date
of such assembly and found to be free from any hazard and suitable for the purpose of the assembly. (1952 Code § 6-18-03; amd. 2019 Code)
5-8-4: PENALTY:
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be subject to
penalty as provided in section 1-4-1 of this Code. (1952 Code § 6-18-04; amd. 2019 Code)
Chapter 9
LITTERING
5-9-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivatives shall have the meanings given herein. When not inconsistent with
the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and words used in the
singular number include the plural number. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
DEBRIS: The remains, fragments, pieces or parts of something broken down, damaged or destroyed.
GARBAGE: Putrescible animal and vegetable wastes resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food.
LITTER: "Garbage", "refuse" and "rubbish", as defined in this section, and junk and all other waste or discarded materials and substances, including, but
not excluding by enumeration, paper, bottles, glass, nails, tacks, hoops, cans, wire (barbed or otherwise), building materials (lumber, boards, plasterboard,
mortar, insulation, sheet metal, plumbing materials and fixtures, electrical materials and fixtures, water and gas materials and fixtures, sand and gravel,
and roofing and siding materials), automobile bodies, including the parts and components thereof, and tires.
PARK: A park, reservation, playground, recreation center or any other public area in the City owned or used by the City and devoted to active or passive
recreation.
PERSON: Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or organization of any kind.
PRIVATE PREMISES: Any dwelling, house, building or other structure, designed or used wholly or in part for private residential purposes, whether
inhabited or temporarily or continuously uninhabited or vacant, and shall include any yard, grounds, walk, driveway, porch, steps or mailbox belonging or
pertinent to such dwelling, house, building or other structure.
PUBLIC PLACE: Any and all streets, sidewalks, boulevards, alleys or other public ways and any and all public parks, squares, spaces, grounds,
easements and buildings.
REFUSE: All putrescible and nonputrescible solid waste (except body waste), including garbage, rubbish, trash, ashes, street cleanings, dead animals,
abandoned automobiles, junk, and solid market and industrial waste.
RUBBISH: Nonputrescible solid waste consisting of both combustible and noncombustible waste, such as paper, wrappings, cigarettes, cardboard, tin
cans, yard clippings, leaves, wood, glass, bedding, crockery and other similar materials.
VEHICLE: Every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a street, except devices moved solely by
human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks. (1952 Code § 6-16-01)
5-9-2: LITTER IN PUBLIC PLACES:
It shall be unlawful for any person, in person or by his agent, employee or servant, to cast, throw, sweep, sift, deposit, place, leave or dump in any manner
any debris, garbage, litter, rubbish and refuse, or cause, permit or allow such debris, garbage, litter, rubbish and refuse to be carried, blown, scattered or
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 206/503
deposited by the elements, in or upon any street, sidewalk or other public place, river, canal, public water, drain, sewer or receiving basin within the
corporate limits of the City. (1952 Code § 6-16-02)
5-9-3: PLACEMENT IN RECEPTACLE TO PREVENT SCATTERING:
Persons placing debris, garbage, litter, rubbish or refuse in public receptacles or in authorized private receptacles shall do so in such a manner as to
prevent it from being blown, carried, scattered or deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk or other public place, or upon private property.
(1952 Code § 6-16-03)
5-9-4: SWEEPING LITTER INTO GUTTERS PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any person, in person or by his agent, employee or servant, to sweep into or deposit or place in any gutter, street or other public
place within the City the accumulation of debris, garbage, litter, rubbish or refuse from any building or lot, or from any public or private sidewalk or
driveway. Persons owning or occupying property shall keep the sidewalk in front of their premises free from such debris, garbage, litter, rubbish or refuse.
(1952 Code § 6-16-04)
5-9-5: MERCHANTS DUTY TO KEEP SIDEWALKS CLEAN:
No person owning or occupying a place of business shall sweep into, or deposit or place in, any gutter, street or other public place within the City the
accumulation of litter from any building or lot or from any public or private sidewalk or driveway. Persons owning or occupying places of business within the
City shall keep the sidewalk in front of their premises free of such debris, garbage, litter, rubbish and refuse. (1952 Code § 6-16-05)
5-9-6: LITTER THROWN BY PERSONS IN VEHICLES:
It shall be unlawful for any person, while a driver or passenger in a vehicle, to throw, cast, deposit or place or permit or cause such to be cast, thrown,
deposited or placed, any debris, garbage, litter, rubbish or refuse upon any street or other public place within the City, or upon private property. Each
owner of a vehicle shall be liable and responsible for the actions and conduct of the driver or passengers in a vehicle from which vehicle debris, garbage,
litter, rubbish or refuse is thrown, cast, deposited or placed. The operation of a vehicle by any person other than the owner and the actions and conduct of
such driver or operator of, and the passengers in, such vehicle shall be imputed to the owner for all purposes of this section. (1952 Code § 6-16-06)
5-9-7: TRUCK LOADS CAUSING LITTER:
It shall be unlawful for any person, in person or by his or its agent, employee or servant, to operate, drive, move or use any truck or other vehicle within the
City to haul or transport any kind of debris, litter, garbage, rubbish or refuse, unless such truck or vehicle is so constructed or loaded as to prevent any of
the load or contents thereof or any debris, garbage, litter, rubbish or refuse thereon from spilling or dropping, or from being carried, scattered or blown by
the elements, or in any other way deposited, placed or dumped, upon any street, alley or other public place. (1952 Code § 6-16-07)
5-9-8: LITTER IN PARKS:
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to throw, leave, deposit, dump or place debris, garbage, litter, rubbish or trash in any park within the City, except in
public receptacles and in such a manner that such debris, garbage, litter, rubbish or refuse will be prevented from being scattered, carried, blown or
deposited by the elements upon any part of the park or upon any street or other public place.
B. Where public receptacles are not provided, all such debris, garbage, litter, rubbish and refuse shall be carried away from the park by the person
responsible for its presence and properly dispose of such in the manner provided elsewhere by this Code. (1952 Code § 6-16-08)
5-9-9: LITTER IN LAKES AND FOUNTAINS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to throw, deposit or place litter in any fountain, pond, lake, stream, canal, river or any other body of water in any park or
elsewhere within the City. (1952 Code § 6-16-09)
5-9-10: DROPPING LITTER FROM AIRCRAFT:
It shall be unlawful for any person in an aircraft to throw out, drop or deposit within the City any litter, handbill or any other object or substance. (1952 Code
§ 6-16-10)
5-9-11: LITTER ON OCCUPIED PRIVATE PROPERTY:
It shall be unlawful for any person to throw, deposit, place, leave or dump debris, garbage, litter, rubbish or refuse on any occupied private property within
the City, whether owned by such person or not, or cause, permit or allow such debris, garbage, litter or refuse to be carried, blown, scattered or deposited
by the elements upon any private property, except that the owner or person in control of private property may maintain authorized private receptacles for
the collection and storage in such a manner that such debris, garbage, litter, rubbish or refuse will be prevented from being carried, blown, scattered or
deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk or other public place or upon any private property. (1952 Code § 6-16-11)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 207/503
5-9-12: LITTERING PUBLIC PARKING FACILITIES:
A. Definition: For the purpose of this section, "public parking facility" is defined as any place or grounds where the parking of motor vehicles is permitted by
the payment of a fee or rental for such purpose, or any area used and maintained for the parking, by the public, of motor vehicles in connection with
grocery or other stores, or premises or grounds maintained in connection with businesses commonly known as "drive-ins", where food, beverages or
refreshments are served to patrons in motor vehicles, or at tables or stands in open area, for consumption either on or off the premises. (1952 Code
§ 6-13-01)
B. Signage Required: Persons owning, operating, managing or conducting a public parking facility shall place in conspicuous places at said facility, signs
on which are written in legible English, in letters at least two inches (2") in height on contrasting background, words or phrases requesting patrons to
refrain from throwing of any waste material upon the parking area, sidewalk, street, roadway or gutter, or adjoining property. (1952 Code § 6-13-02)
C. Littering Public Ways Prohibited: No person shall place, throw or deposit any waste material upon the outside premises or parking area of a public
parking facility or on any street or alley adjoining such public parking facility, except in adequate receptacles provided for that purpose. (1952 Code § 6-
13-03)
D. Obligation Of Operator: The owner or his agent or operator shall keep the premises whereon the public parking facility is located, together with the
parking area and that portion of any street or alley adjoining such facility free from waste material. The owner or his agent or operator shall provide the
public parking facility with a sufficient number of adequate refuse containers. (1952 Code § 6-13-04)
5-9-13: OWNER TO MAINTAIN PREMISES FREE OF LITTER:
The owner or person in control of any private property shall at all times maintain the premises free of debris, garbage, litter, rubbish and refuse; provided,
however, that this section shall not prohibit the storage of such debris, garbage, litter, rubbish and refuse as provided elsewhere in this Code. (1952 Code
§ 6-16-12)
5-9-14: LITTER ON VACANT LOTS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to throw, deposit, place, leave or dump any debris, garbage, litter, rubbish or refuse on any open or vacant private
property within the City, whether owned by such person or not. (1952 Code § 6-16-13)
5-9-15: CLEARING OF LITTER FROM PRIVATE PROPERTY BY CITY:
The Departments of Building and Public Works are charged with the responsibility of administering and enforcing the provisions of this chapter, but the
Department of Building shall be restricted and limited to enforcing and administering the removal of litter defined as refuse, junk, building materials
(lumber, boards, plasterboard, mortar, insulation, sheet metal, plumbing fixtures and materials, electrical materials and fixtures, water and gas materials
and fixtures, sand and gravel, roofing and siding materials), automobile bodies, including the parts and components thereof, and tires.
A. Notice To Remove: The department is hereby authorized and empowered to notify the owner of any private property within the City, including the
sidewalks, alleys and parking within the curbing abutting such private property, or the agent of such owner, to promptly remove such debris, garbage,
litter, rubbish and refuse from such property. Such notice shall be by registered or certified mail, addressed to said owner at his last known address.
B. Action Upon Noncompliance: Upon the failure, neglect or refusal of any owner or agent so notified, to properly dispose and remove such debris,
garbage, litter, rubbish and refuse within fifteen (15) days after receipt of written notice provided for in subsection A of this section, or within fifteen (15)
days after the date of such notice in the event the same is returned to the City undelivered, provided the same was properly addressed to the last
known address of such owner or agent, the department is hereby authorized and empowered to pay for the disposal or removal of such debris,
garbage, litter, rubbish or refuse, or to order its disposal or removal at the cost to the City.
C. Charges Of Removal Or Disposal Constitute Special Assessment: When the City has effected the disposal or removal of such debris, garbage, litter,
rubbish or refuse, or has paid for the disposal or removal of such, the actual cost thereof, plus accrued interest at the rate of not more than ten percent
(10%) per annum from the date of the completion of such disposal or removal, shall be chargeable and assessable to the owner of such property. All
such charges and special assessments, if not paid within thirty (30) days to the City Treasurer, shall be declared delinquent and may be certified to the
Tax Collector of Ada County by the City Clerk, placed upon the tax rolls and collected in the same manner and subject to the same penalties as other
City taxes. (1952 Code § 6-16-14)
5-9-16: PENALTY:
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, subject to penalty as provided in section 1-4-1 of this
Code. Each day such violation is committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such hereunder. (1952
Code § 6-16-14; amd. 2019 Code)
Chapter 10
FALSE SECURITY ALARMS
5-10-1: PURPOSE:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 208/503
The purpose of this chapter is to reduce the number of false security alarms, thereby enhancing police response time for critical calls for service and
reducing the costs to the City for the police response to the increasing number of false security alarms. Further, the intent of this chapter is to encourage
alarm businesses and alarm users to maintain the operational viability of security alarm systems and to hold owners of alarm systems accountable for the
costs associated with responding to false alarms. (1952 Code § 6-15-01)
5-10-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases and words, and derivations thereof, shall have the meanings given herein. The word "shall"
is mandatory and not merely directory.
ALARM INSTALLATION COMPANY: A person in the business of selling, providing, maintaining, servicing, repairing, altering, replacing, moving or
installing an alarm system in a business or residence.
ALARM MONITORING BUSINESS: Any person, firm or corporation who is engaged in the monitoring of security alarm systems and the summoning of
police response to activations thereof. This includes both businesses that are engaged in alarm monitoring for profit and businesses that have specialized
units or subsidiaries that monitor only their own alarm systems.
ALARM OFFICER: The Chief of the Boise City Police Department or his designee.
ALARM SYSTEM: Any mechanical, electrical or other device which is designed or used for the detection of a trespass, burglary or robbery within a
building, structure or facility, or for alerting others to a hazard or to the commission of an unlawful act within a building, structure or facility, or which emits a
sound or transmits a signal or message when activated and which is designed to elicit a response from the Police Department. Alarm systems include, but
are not limited to, direct dial telephone devices, audible alarms and proprietor alarms. Devices which are not designed or used to register alarms but are
audible, visible or perceptible outside the protected building, structure or facility are not included with this definition. An alarm system includes all the
necessary equipment designed and installed for the detection of a trespass, burglary, robbery or other hazard in a single building, structure or facility, or for
alerting others to the commission of an unlawful act within a building, structure or facility.
ALARM USER: Any person who purchases, leases, contracts for or otherwise obtains a security alarm system or contracts for the servicing or
maintenance of a security alarm system.
AUDIBLE ALARM: A device designed for the detection of unauthorized entry or presence on certain premises which generates an audible sound or signal
on such premises when it is activated.
AUTOMATIC DIALING DEVICE: An alarm system which automatically sends over regular telephone lines, by direct connection or otherwise, a
prerecorded voice message or coded signal indicating the existence of an emergency situation that the alarm system is designed to detect.
EMERGENCY: Any condition for which the alarm was designed and installed, and which results in a response of police personnel.
ENHANCED CALL VERIFICATION: An independent method whereby the alarm monitoring company attempts to determine that a signal from an
automatic alarm system reflects a need for immediate police assistance or investigation. This verification process will be conducted by the alarm system
monitoring personnel and shall consist of making two (2) phone calls to the responsible party or parties and shall not take more than five (5) minutes from
the time the alarm signal has been accepted by the alarm system monitoring company. At least one of the two (2) phone calls must be made to a party off
the premises upon which the alarm system is installed.
FALSE ALARM: An alarm signal, message, transmittal or communication which is activated from an alarm system and which is responded to by personnel
of the Police Department for which no emergency situation exists or existed as determined by the responding police personnel. False alarms shall not
include alarms caused by natural occurrences, such as hurricanes, tornadoes, earthquakes or other extraordinary circumstances determined by the alarm
officer to be clearly beyond the control of the alarm user.
HOLDUP ALARM (Also DURESS ALARM, ROBBERY ALARM OR PANIC ALARM): An alarm signal generated by the manual or automatic activation of a
device, or any system, device or mechanism on or near the premises intended to signal that a robbery or other crime is in progress, and that one or more
persons are in need of immediate police assistance in order to avoid injury, serious bodily harm or death at the hands of the perpetrator of the robbery or
other crime.
ONE PLUS DURESS ALARM: A security alarm system which permits the manual activation of an alarm signal by entering on a keypad a code that either
adds the value of 1 to the last digit of a normal arm/disarm code (e.g., the normal arm/disarm code "1234" if entered as "1235" automatically activates the
duress alarm feature) or that involves entering any incorrect final digit to a normal arm/disarm code.
PENALTY STATUS: That status achieved by more than one false alarm within the calendar year beginning January 1 and ending December 31.
PERSON: Any individual, partnership, association, corporation or organization of any kind, or any governmental entity or political subdivision thereof.
SIA CONTROL PANEL STANDARD CP-01: The American National Standard Institute (ANSI) approved Security Industry Association (SIA) CP-01 Control
Panel Standard, as may be updated from time to time, that details recommended design features for security system control panels and their associated
arming and disarming devices to reduce the incidence of false alarms. Control panels built and tested to this standard by Underwriters Laboratory (UL), or
other nationally recognized testing organizations, will be marked to state: "Design Evaluated in Accordance With SIA CP-01 Control Panel Standard
Features for False Alarm Reduction". (1952 Code § 6-15-02)
5-10-3: DUTIES OF ALARM INSTALLERS AND MONITORING COMPANIES:
A. Instructions To Users: The alarm installation company shall provide written and oral instructions to each of its alarm users in the proper use and
operation of their alarm systems. Such instructions will specifically include all instructions necessary to turn the alarm system on and off and to avoid
false alarms. (1952 Code § 6-15-03)
B. Review Of Checklist: After completion of the installation of an alarm system, an alarm installation company employee shall review with the alarm user
the customer alarm prevention checklist (maintained by the Police Department) or an equivalent checklist approved by the alarm officer. The signed
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 209/503
checklists shall be maintained by the company for a period of three (3) years. (1952 Code § 6-15-03; amd. 2019 Code)
C. One Plus Duress Alarms: After the effective date hereof, alarm installation companies shall not program alarm systems so that they are capable of
sending one plus (1+) duress alarms. Monitoring companies may continue to report one plus (1+) duress alarms received from alarm systems
programmed with one plus (1+) duress alarms prior to enactment of this chapter. However, upon the effective date hereof, when a takeover or
conversion occurs or if an alarm user requests an alarm system inspection or modification, the alarm installation company must remove the one plus
(1+) duress alarm capability from such alarm system.
D. Holdup Alarm: After the effective date hereof, alarm installation companies shall not install a device to activate a holdup alarm which consists of a single
action and nonrecessed button.
E. Automatic Dialing Devices: An alarm installation or monitoring company shall not install or use automatic dialing devices.
F. Enhanced Call Verification: Enhanced call verification is required. After the effective date hereof, every alarm monitoring company shall verify every
security alarm signal prior to requesting a police dispatch by making two (2) phone calls to the responsible party or parties not more than five (5)
minutes from the time the alarm signal has been accepted by the alarm system monitoring company. At least one of the two (2) phone calls must be
made to a party off the premises upon which the alarm system is installed.
G. Silencing Alarm Upon Activation: Upon notification that an alarm system is activated, the alarm monitoring company shall immediately proceed to
silence the alarm or ensure that the alarm is silenced. The silencing of the alarm must be completed within fifteen (15) minutes after notification of
activation when the alarm system is protecting a residential structure or within thirty (30) minutes when the alarm system is protecting a commercial or
industrial structure. (1952 Code § 6-15-03)
5-10-4: RESPONSIBILITIES OF ALARM USERS:
A. Maintenance: Each alarm user shall maintain each alarm system in good working order, and provide the necessary service to prevent malfunctions.
B. Proper Use: Each alarm user is responsible for assuring that the alarm system is used properly and in accordance with the manufacturer's directions
and the law. Inherent in this responsibility is assuring that all persons with access to the alarm system are properly trained on correct use of the system
and are authorized to cancel accidental activations, and assuring that procedures and practices are followed that minimize the risk of false alarms.
C. Silencing Alarm: Upon notification that an alarm system is activated, the alarm user shall immediately proceed to silence the alarm or ensure that the
alarm is silenced. The silencing of the alarm must be completed within fifteen (15) minutes after notification of activation when the alarm system is
protecting a residential structure or within thirty (30) minutes when the alarm system is protecting a commercial or industrial structure.
D. Service Fees: Each alarm user is responsible for paying service fees when it is determined that the alarm user has maintained a public nuisance alarm.
(1952 Code § 6-15-04)
5-10-5: MAINTAINING PUBLIC NUISANCE ALARM:
A. Prohibited: No person shall maintain, operate, use or attempt to use an alarm system which generates more than one false alarm in a calendar year.
(1952 Code § 6-15-05)
B. Service Fee: Any alarm system maintained, operated, used or attempted to be used in violation of this section shall be deemed a public nuisance alarm.
In addition to reimbursement or any other remedy available to the City, the City may impose a service fee for each and every false alarm after one
within the calendar year as determined by the fee schedule on file in the Police Department. (1952 Code § 6-15-05; amd. 2019 Code)
C. Notice Of Public Nuisance: Where the alarm system is deemed a public nuisance as provided in this section, the alarm officer shall provide the alarm
user written notice informing the alarm user of the penalty status and the finding of public nuisance.
D. Special Rule For Public Schools: The fee for the second false alarm in any calendar year is waived for an alarm system at any public or private
elementary or secondary school. The third and subsequent false alarms in any calendar year are charged at the standard service fee rate.
E. Review By Alarm Officer:
1. The alarm user may request the alarm officer to review and reconsider the determination of public nuisance by submitting a written request to the
alarm officer within ten (10) days upon receipt of the notice of penalty status and nuisance. Failure to submit a written request in compliance with this
subsection is deemed a waiver of any and all rights to appeal.
2. The alarm officer shall review the determination and send the alarm user his findings as to whether the alarm system is a public nuisance in writing
by certified mailing within fifteen (15) days.
F. Appeal To City Council: The alarm user may request a hearing before the City Council after filing a written notice of appeal to the City Clerk no later than
ten (10) days after mailing of the alarm officer's finding of public nuisance. (1952 Code § 6-15-05)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 210/503
5-10-6: COMPLIANCE:
A. Assessment Of Service Fee: An alarm user who has notice of the alarm system being deemed a public nuisance shall be assessed a service fee in
accordance with section 5-10-5 of this chapter.
B. Remittance: An alarm user who has notice of the assessed penalty or any amount due in reimbursement shall remit within fifteen (15) days the amounts
due to the City. (1952 Code § 6-15-06)
5-10-7: PROHIBITED ALARM SYSTEMS:
A. Automatic Dialing Device: No person shall use or operate an automatic dialing device or any device programmed to initiate and deliver a message or
signal to any telephone number belonging to the City or to any law enforcement dispatch service.
B. Entry Or Exit Delay: No system shall have an entry or exit delay of less than forty five (45) seconds. (1952 Code § 6-15-07)
5-10-8: VIOLATIONS:
A. Alarm System: It shall be unlawful to operate or maintain any "alarm system", as defined in section 5-10-2 of this chapter, for any purpose other than
reporting such trespasses, burglaries, robberies or other crimes involving potential serious bodily injury or death.
B. Public Safety System: It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or use a public safety alarm system for any purpose other than that for which it is
installed, or for any purpose other than detecting and reporting a trespass, burglary, robbery or other permitted purpose.
C. Malfunctioning Unit: It shall be unlawful for any alarm user or other person to install, operate or use any "alarm system", as defined in section 5-10-2 of
this chapter, which malfunctions due to improper installation or operation and that results in the generation of false alarms. (1952 Code § 6-15-08)
Chapter 11
SMOKE FREE AIR
5-11-1: SHORT TITLE:
This chapter shall be known as the BOISE CITY SMOKE FREE AIR ORDINANCE, and any other ordinances or resolutions in conflict herewith are
repealed upon the effective date hereof. (1952 Code § 6-23-01)
5-11-2: AUTHORITY:
This chapter is adopted pursuant to the authority granted by Idaho Code sections 39-5511, 39-5713, 50-302 and 50-304. (1952 Code § 6-23-02)
5-11-3: FINDINGS AND INTENT:
A. Public health officials have concluded that secondhand tobacco smoke causes disease, including lung cancer and heart disease, in nonsmoking adults,
as well as causing serious conditions in children, such as asthma, respiratory infections, middle ear infections and sudden infant death syndrome. In
addition, public health officials have concluded that secondhand smoke can exacerbate adult asthma and allergies and cause eye, throat and nasal
irritation. The conclusions of public health officials concerning secondhand tobacco smoke are sufficient to warrant measures that regulate smoking in
public places in order to protect the public health and the health of employees who work in public places.
B. The intent of this chapter is to protect the public health, the health of employees who work in public places, and the rights of nonsmokers to breathe
clean air by prohibiting smoking in public places and in places of employment. (1952 Code § 6-23-03)
5-11-4: OTHER APPLICABLE LAWS:
This chapter shall not be interpreted or construed to permit smoking where it is otherwise restricted by other applicable laws. (1952 Code § 6-23-14)
5-11-5: LIBERAL CONSTRUCTION:
This chapter shall be liberally construed so as to further its purposes. (1952 Code § 6-23-15)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 16-19 - SMOKING. Go to new ordinance.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 211/503
5-11-6: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter:
BAR: An establishment that is devoted to the serving of alcoholic beverages for consumption by guests on the premises and in which the serving of food is
only incidental to the consumption of those beverages, including, but not limited to, taverns, nightclubs, cocktail lounges, bikini bars and cabarets.
BUSINESS: A sole proprietorship, partnership, joint venture, corporation or other business entity, either for profit or not for profit, including retail
establishments where goods or services are sold; professional corporations and other entities where legal, medical, dental, engineering, architectural or
other professional services are delivered; and private clubs.
E-CIGARETTE: Any electronic oral device, such as one composed of a heating or ultrasonic element, battery and/or electronic circuit, which provides a
vapor of nicotine or any other substance, and use or inhalation of which simulates smoking. The term shall include any such device, whether
manufactured, distributed, marketed or sold as an e-cigarette, e-cigar, e-pipe or under any other product name or descriptor.
EMPLOYEE: A person who is employed by an employer in consideration for direct or indirect monetary wages or profit, and a person who volunteers his
or her services for an employer.
EMPLOYER: A person, business, association, municipal corporation or trust that employs the services of one or more individual persons.
ENCLOSED AREA: All space between a floor and a ceiling that is bounded on all sides by walls, doorways or windows, whether open or closed. A wall
includes any retractable divider, garage door or other physical barrier, whether temporary or permanent.
EXCLUSIVE RETAIL TOBACCONIST: A retail tobacco business which derives more than ninety five percent (95%) of sales from tobacco and tobacco
products sold on the premises for consumption off the premises and which the sale, manufacture or promotion of other products is merely incidental. The
status as an exclusive retail tobacco business is lost if at any time the business premises provides seating for more than four (4) patrons or is used to sell
or serve food or drink, vend lottery tickets or newspapers or magazines not primarily for tobacco enthusiasts, or if the premises is used for dancing,
karaoke, gaming or live entertainment, or performance of any kind.
HEALTHCARE FACILITY: An office or institution providing care or treatment of diseases, whether physical, mental or emotional, or other medical,
physiological or psychological conditions, including, but not limited to, hospitals, rehabilitation hospitals or other clinics, including weight control clinics,
nursing homes, long term care facilities, homes for the aging or chronically ill, laboratories and offices of surgeons, chiropractors, physical therapists,
physicians, psychiatrists, dentists and all specialists within these professions. This definition shall include all waiting rooms, hallways, private rooms,
semiprivate rooms and wards within healthcare facilities.
PLACE OF EMPLOYMENT: An area under the control of a public or private employer.
PUBLIC PLACE: An area to which the public is invited or in which the public is permitted for any purpose, whether the place is publicly owned or private.
Public places are as further defined in section 5-11-8 of this chapter.
RESTAURANT: An eating establishment, including, but not limited to, coffee shops, cafeterias and food stands, which gives or offers for sale food to the
public, guests or employees, as well as kitchens and catering facilities in which food is prepared on the premises for serving elsewhere. The term
restaurant shall include a bar area within the restaurant.
RETAIL TOBACCO BUSINESS: A business which, during the normal course of business, primarily distributes any tobacco and/or tobacco product or
provides any equipment or material used for the consumption of tobacco.
SERVICE LINE: An indoor or outdoor location in which one or more persons are waiting for or receiving service of any kind, whether or not the service
involves the exchange of money, including, but not limited to, persons waiting to use an ATM, attend a concert, obtain food or drink from a vendor,
purchase movie tickets, purchase or board public transit or attend a sporting event.
SHOPPING MALL: An enclosed public walkway or hall area that serves to connect retail or professional establishments.
SMOKING: Inhaling, exhaling, burning, carrying or possessing any combusting (heated, lit or smoldering) tobacco, or any other substance, whether
contained in a cigar, cigarette or pipe, or any other object. "Smoking" does not include possession of an unlit or unheated cigar, cigarette or pipe. Smoking
does not include use of an e-cigarette which creates only a vapor without any smoke.
SPORTS ARENA: Places where members of the general public assemble to engage in physical exercise, participate in athletic competition or witness
sports or other events. This term includes, but is not limited to, sports pavilions, stadiums, gymnasiums, health spas, boxing arenas, swimming pools, roller
and ice rinks, and bowling alleys.
TEMPORARY SPECIAL EVENT ZONE: Any outdoor area set aside to accommodate people in a smoke free space for such activities as concerts, movies
or other entertainment in a public space. A temporary special event zone shall be designated by a perimeter of "No Smoking" signs placed at each
entrance to the zone and spaced approximately every fifty feet (50') at a height of between three feet (3') (measured from the top edge of the sign) and five
feet (5') (measured from the bottom edge of the sign). The signs shall be no less than one hundred (100) square inches with the words "No Smoking" in
letters at least one inch (1") high or displaying the international "No Smoking" symbol, consisting of a pictorial representation of a burning cigarette
enclosed in a red circle with a red bar across it. If the permit is issued for an area in which smoking is not otherwise prohibited, a temporary special event
zone may be required as a condition of issuance of a special event permit/citizen use permit for the entire duration of the event authorized in the permit.
TOBACCO AND TOBACCO PRODUCTS: Tobaccos, cigarettes, cigars, pipes, tobacco pipe tobaccos, humidors, cigar cutters, pipe cleaners, pipe
maintenance tools and literature primarily for tobacco enthusiasts. (1952 Code § 6-23-04)
5-11-7: APPLICATION TO CITY OWNED FACILITIES:
All vehicles and enclosed areas owned, leased or operated by the City shall be subject to the provisions of this chapter. (1952 Code § 6-23-05)
5-11-8: SMOKING IN ENCLOSED PUBLIC PLACES:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 212/503
Smoking shall be prohibited in all enclosed public places within the limits of the City, including, but not limited to, the following places:
A. Aquariums, galleries, libraries and museums.
B. Businesses patronized by the public, including, but not limited to, banks, laundromats, professional offices and retail service establishments.
C. Bars.
D. Bingo facilities.
E. Child care and adult daycare facilities.
F. Convention facilities.
G. Educational facilities, both public and private.
H. Elevators.
I. Gaming facilities.
J. Health care facilities.
K. Hotels and motels, except as provided in Idaho Code.
L. Lobbies, hallways and other common areas in apartment buildings, condominiums, trailer parks, retirement facilities, except where permitted by Idaho
Code, nursing homes and other multiple unit residential facilities.
M. Polling places.
N. Private clubs. (1952 Code § 6-23-06)
O. Public transportation vehicles, including buses and taxicabs, and ticket, boarding and waiting areas of public transportation facilities, including bus, train
and airport facilities. (1952 Code § 6-23-06; amd. 2019 Code)
P. Restaurants.
Q. Restrooms, lobbies, reception areas, hallways and other common use areas.
R. Retail tobacco businesses, except an exclusive retail tobacconist.
S. Rooms, chambers, places of meeting or public assembly, including school buildings, under the control of a public agency, board, commission,
committee or council of a political subdivision of the State, to the extent the place is subject to the jurisdiction of the City.
T. Shopping malls.
U. Sports arenas, including enclosed places in outdoor arenas.
V. Theaters and theatrical productions, except as provided in Idaho Code. (1952 Code § 6-23-06)
5-11-9: SMOKING IN ENCLOSED PLACES OF EMPLOYMENT:
Smoking shall be prohibited in all enclosed places of employment in the City without exception. This includes, but is not limited to, common work areas,
auditoriums, classrooms, conference and meeting rooms, private offices, retail spaces and showrooms, elevators, hallways, medical facilities, cafeterias,
employee lounges, stairs, restrooms and garages. (1952 Code § 6-23-07)
5-11-10: SMOKING IN OUTDOOR AREAS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 213/503
Smoking shall be prohibited in the following outdoor public places:
A. Within the bus transfer location known as the Downtown Boise Transit Mall, consisting of the entire sidewalk on the north side of Idaho Street from
Capitol Boulevard to 9th Street and the entire sidewalk on the south side of Main Street from Capitol Boulevard to 9th Street.
B. Within the bus transfer location at the Towne Square Mall, consisting of the entirety of the raised concrete waiting location and extending out twenty feet
(20') into the parking lot on all sides.
C. Within twenty feet (20') of all other bus stops, benches, stations, platforms and shelters.
D. Within twenty feet (20') of entrances or exits to schools, including public and private elementary, secondary, vocational and trade schools or colleges, so
as to ensure that tobacco smoke does not enter those areas.
E. Within twenty feet (20') of entrances or exits to buildings owned or managed by the City, so as to ensure that tobacco smoke does not enter those
areas.
F. Within twenty feet (20') of any sidewalk cafe (as defined by the designated footprint area set forth in the sidewalk cafe map on file with the City Clerk's
Office and/or the State Police Bureau of Alcohol Beverage Control) and in any dining patio and/or outdoor seating or serving areas of restaurant legally
accessible to persons under the age of twenty one (21).
G. Within twenty feet (20') of all outdoor service lines.
H. Within the Grove Plaza bounded by Capitol Boulevard, 9th Street, Main Street and Front Street, except for those areas specifically designated for
smoking by the City Clerk or designee following recommendation of those areas by the Capital City Development Corporation.
I. Within the sidewalk and roadway of 8th Street, extending from Main Street to Bannock Street and from the building faces on either side and into the
alleyways for the first twenty feet (20') measured from start of the building faces along 8th Street.
J. Within any designated "temporary special event zone". (1952 Code § 6-23-08)
5-11-11: WHERE SMOKING IS NOT REGULATED:
Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter to the contrary, the following areas shall be exempt from the provisions of sections 5-11-8, 5-11-9 and
5-11-10 of this chapter:
A. Private residences, unless used as a child care, adult daycare or health care facility, or as a home office that is accessible to one or more employees or
members of the public.
B. Privately owned outdoor spaces legally accessible only to persons age twenty one (21) and over, including rooftop patios and courtyards of bars, but
not including sidewalk cafes. Any such privately owned outdoor spaces established consistent with all applicable building and zoning codes existing at
the time of the effective date hereof shall be exempt from the twenty foot (20') rule in subsection 5-11-10F of this chapter.
C. An "exclusive retail tobacconist", as defined in section 5-11-6 of this chapter.
D. American Indian/Alaska native ceremonies. A religious ceremony using a traditional pipe under this section is subject to any applicable State or local
law, except as provided in this section. A person is exempt from the restrictions of this chapter if the person:
1. Is a member of an American Indian/Alaska native tribe whose members are recognized as eligible for the special programs and services provided by
the United States to American Indians/Alaska natives who are members of those tribes; and
2. Is an American Indian/Alaska native who actively practices an American Indian/Alaska native religion, the origin and interpretation of which is from a
traditional American Indian/Alaska native culture; and
3. Is smoking tobacco using the traditional pipe of an American Indian/Alaska native tribal religious ceremony, of which tribe the person is a member,
and is smoking the pipe as part of that ceremony; and
4. The ceremony is conducted by a pipe carrier, American Indian/Alaska native spiritual person, or medicine person recognized by the tribe of which
the person is a member and by the American Indian/Alaska native community. (1952 Code § 6-23-09)
5-11-12: DECLARATION OF ESTABLISHMENT AS NONSMOKING:
Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, an owner, operator, manager or other person in control of an establishment, facility or outdoor area
may declare that entire establishment, facility or outdoor area as a nonsmoking place. Smoking shall be prohibited in any area in which a sign conforming
to the requirements of section 5-11-13 of this chapter is posted. (1952 Code § 6-23-10)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 214/503
5-11-13: POSTING OF SIGNS AND REMOVAL OF ASHTRAYS:
The owner, operator, manager or other person in control of a place of employment or a public place where smoking is prohibited by this chapter shall:
A. Clearly and conspicuously post in that place:
1. "No Smoking" signs or the international "No Smoking" symbol, consisting of a pictorial representation of a burning cigarette enclosed in a red circle
with a red bar across it; and
2. A sign at every entrance that clearly states that smoking is prohibited. If the place of employment is a vehicle, there shall be at least one
conspicuous sign, visible from the exterior of the vehicle, clearly stating that smoking is prohibited.
B. Remove all ashtrays from any area where smoking is prohibited by this chapter, except for ashtrays displayed for sale and not for use on the premises.
(1952 Code § 6-23-11)
5-11-14: ENFORCEMENT:
In addition to any law enforcement officer, any citizen who desires to complain about a violation of this chapter for which there is probable cause may
initiate enforcement by requesting to sign a uniform citation as the complaining party and State's witness. (1952 Code § 6-23-12)
5-11-15: RESPONSIBILITIES, VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES:
A. Smoking Where Prohibited: A person who smokes in any public place where smoking is prohibited by the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of an
infraction, subject to the penalty prescribed by the Idaho Infraction Rules for Smoking in violation of the Idaho Indoor Clean Air Act.
B. Observance Of Violator: An employer, owner, manager, operator or employee of an establishment regulated by this chapter, who observes a person
smoking in apparent violation of this chapter shall ask the person to extinguish all lighted smoking products. If the person persists in violating this
chapter, the employer, person in charge, agent or employee shall ask the person to leave the premises. Any person who refuses to either extinguish all
lighted smoking products or leave the premises is guilty of an infraction and is subject to the penalty prescribed by the Idaho Infraction Rules for
Smoking in violation of the Idaho Indoor Clean Air Act. Any violation may be reported to a law enforcement officer.
C. Permitting Smoking Where Prohibited: No employer or other person in charge of a public place or publicly owned building or office shall knowingly or
intentionally permit smoking in violation of this chapter. Any employer or other person in charge of a public place or publicly owned building or office
who violates the provisions of this section is guilty of a separate act of permitting smoking where smoking is prohibited, each of which is an infraction,
subject to the penalty prescribed by the Idaho Infraction Rules for Smoking in violation of the Idaho Indoor Clean Air Act. (1952 Code § 6-23-13; amd.
2019 Code)
D. Discrimination Against Complaining Employee: Any employer who discharges or in any manner discriminates against an employee because that
employee has made a complaint or has given information to the Department of Health and Welfare or the Department of Labor pursuant to this section
shall be subject to a civil penalty of not less than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) nor more than five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) for each violation.
E. Public Nuisance Declared: Violation of this chapter is hereby declared to be a public nuisance, which may be abated by the City by restraining order,
preliminary and permanent injunction, or other means provided for by law, and the City may take action to recover attorney fees and/or costs of the
nuisance abatement. (1952 Code § 6-23-13)
Chapter 12
FIRE PREVENTION CODE
Adoption
5-12-1: DECLARATION OF INTENT:
It is the intent of the Council, by the passage of this chapter, to adopt minimum standards necessary to safeguard life and limb, health, property and public
welfare by regulating: a) the storage, use and handling of dangerous and hazardous materials, substances, devices and processes; b) the maintenance of
buildings, premises and certain equipment; c) the maintenance of adequate egress facilities; d) construction and remodel of buildings and premises in
cooperation with the International Building Code as administered by Planning and Development Services; and e) fire safety measures for minimizing
losses of life and property. It is the further intent of the Council not to duplicate, overlap or conflict with codes adopted by the Council heretofore, and as
said codes are hereafter amended, which provide minimum standards necessary to safeguard life or limb, health, property and public welfare by regulating
and controlling the design, layout, construction, quality of materials, use, occupancy and location of buildings and certain equipment required for the
construction and operation of buildings. However, it is the intent of the Council by this chapter to acknowledge that in addition to setting maintenance
requirements, the International Fire Code also regulates new construction. It is therefor the intent of Council to coordinate the provisions of the
International Fire Code with the various International Codes (Building, Plumbing, Gas and Mechanical) so that these various International Codes
complement each other to regulate construction, installation and occupancy use. (1952 Code § 7-01-01)
5-12-2: CODE ADOPTED:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 215/503
Intending each provision to have the force and effect of ordinance, the Council hereby adopts all the rules, regulations and ordinances of a general and
permanent character relating and applying to and regulating: a) the storage, use and handling of dangerous and hazardous materials, substances, devices
and processes; b) the maintenance of buildings, premises and certain equipment; c) the maintenance of adequate egress facilities; d) construction and
remodel of buildings and premises; and e) fire safety measures for minimizing losses of life and property, as said rules, regulations and ordinances are
printed and contained in a book in Code form designated and entitled International Fire Code, 2006 edition, printed and published by the International Fire
Code Institute with the amendments contained in this chapter. (1952 Code § 7-01-02)
Amendments To Chapter 1 Of The IFC
5-12-3: AMENDMENT TO SECTION 101.1, TITLE:
Section 101.1 is amended to read as follows:
101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known hereafter as the Fire Code of Boise City, hereinafter referred to as "this Code".
(1952 Code § 7-01-03)
5-12-4: AMENDMENT TO SECTION 101.4, SEVERABILITY:
Section 101.4 is revised to read as follows:
101.4 Severability. If any clause, sentence, paragraph, section, or any part of this ordinance shall be adjudged to be invalid or unconstitutional by a
court of competent jurisdiction, such invalidity or unconstitutionality shall not effect, invalidate or nullify the remainder of this ordinance.
(1952 Code § 7-01-04)
5-12-5: AMENDMENT TO SECTION 103.2, APPOINTMENT:
Section 103.2 is amended to read as follows:
103.2 Appointment. The Code official shall be appointed by the chief appointing authority of the jurisdiction. The Fire Chief shall be defined as the
chief appointing authority and shall function as the Code official. The Chief may appoint the Fire Marshal to act as the Code official.
(1952 Code § 7-01-05)
5-12-6: AMENDMENT ADDING SECTION 103.3.1, FIRE MARSHAL:
Add section 103.3.1 to read as follows:
The Chief is authorized to designate a member of the Fire Department to exercise the powers and perform the duties of Fire Marshal as set forth in
this Code. The Fire Marshal, under the direction of the Fire Chief, shall manage the Fire Prevention Bureau and shall be responsible for fire
prevention programs of the Department of Fire and for the enforcement of this chapter and title 1, chapter 10, article E, title 2, chapter 3, and title 7,
chapter 7, article A of the Boise City Code and the International Fire Code as adopted by the City Council.
The Fire Marshal or his representative shall sign all certificates, notices, and orders pertaining to fire control and fire hazards. A record of all
certificates, notices, orders, and inspections made by the bureau, including the date of such inspections and a summary of any violations found to
exist, the date of the service of notices, a record of the final disposition of all violations and a record of all other transactions and operations of the
bureau shall be kept for a period of time consistent with the requirements of this Code. Such records shall be open to the inspection of the Mayor and
Council.
(1952 Code § 7-01-06)
5-12-7: AMENDMENT ADDING SECTION 103.3.2, ASSISTANT FIRE MARSHAL:
Add section 103.3.2 to read as follows:
103.3.2 Assistant Fire Marshal. The Chief is authorized to establish an Assistant Fire Marshal position to assist the Fire Marshal as is deemed
necessary.
(1952 Code § 7-01-07)
5-12-8: AMENDMENT ADDING SECTION 105.1.4, STARTING WORK BEFORE SECURING PERMIT:
Add section 105.1.4 to read as follows:
Section 105.1.4 Starting Work Before Securing A Permit. It is unlawful to commence any work or cause work to be commenced before obtaining the
necessary permits.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 216/503
Exception: Emergency installation work which modifies the system, such as replacement of a defective fire alarm panel, sprinkler valve, or other
component, with a different make or model, which is performed during off business hours to mitigate an impairment of the system. Such emergency
installation work shall be reported to PDS/Fire on the next business day and a permit obtained for the work performed.
(1952 Code § 7-01-08)
5-12-9: AMENDMENT ADDING SECTION 105.1.1.1, FIRE DEPARTMENT PLAN REVIEW:
Add section 105.1.1.1 to read as follows:
105.1.1.1 Declaration Of Intent. It is the intent of the Council by passage of this section to adopt minimum standards of life and property safety by
requiring that all commercial building plans be submitted to the Fire Department for review for compliance with the International Fire Code as
adopted and amended. It is further the intent of the Council that to avoid confusion, any amendments, waivers, variances, or approved equivalents to
sections of the International Building Code, or any other adopted Code in the City, which are duplicated in the International Fire Code do not
automatically constitute amendment, waiver, variance, or approved equivalent of the affected section of the Fire Code, unless the Fire Code official
has specifically approved an amendment, waiver, variance, or an equivalent of the affected section of the Fire Code.
In addition to those items specified elsewhere in this Code, the Fire Department shall review and approve plans for the following before a building
permit is issued:
1. All new commercial buildings;
2. All remodels in commercial buildings requiring modification to fire sprinklers;
3. Any change of occupancy classification of a building or any part thereof;
4. New residential occupancies of four (4) or more units;
5. Commercial parking lots;
6. Commercial grading or drainage.
(1952 Code § 7-01-09)
5-12-10: AMENDMENT TO SECTIONS 105.2.1.1 AND 105.2.1.2, RE-REVIEW FEE:
Add sections 105.2.1.1 and 105.2.1.2 to read as follows:
105.2.1.1 Re-Review Fee. The Code official is authorized to assess a fee for re-reviewing plans, including but not limited to, construction or fire
protection systems which have been rejected for not satisfying the requirements of this Code. The re-review fee shall apply to each resubmittal
starting with the third review. The re-review fee shall be in accordance with the conditions, amounts, and limitations listed in the adopted and
amended edition of the Building Code.
105.2.1.2 Plan Modifications. Plan revisions submitted for approval after a permit and approved plans have been issued, shall be charged the normal
permit fee based on the number of heads/initiating devices affected (hydraulically or electrically) by the modification.
(1952 Code § 7-01-10)
5-12-11: AMENDMENT TO SECTION 105.3.3, OCCUPANCY PROHIBITED BEFORE APPROVAL:
Add paragraphs to the end of section 105.3.3 to read as follows:
No Certificate of Occupancy, temporary Certificate of Occupancy, or any other documentation indicating or implying that the requirements of this
Code have been satisfied or allowing occupancy shall be issued or renewed until the Fire Department has approved issuing said documentation.
This paragraph shall include temporary or special events requested for such buildings such as, but not limited to, vacant buildings, buildings under
construction, or buildings with an Occupancy Certificate approving a different occupancy than that required for the event.
All buildings, new and existing, within Boise City shall have a valid Certificate of Occupancy or equivalent issued by the Building Department.
Temporary Occupancy. In buildings of phased construction, a temporary Certificate of Occupancy, as approved by the Fire Code official, shall be
permitted; provided, that the Fire Code official determines those portions of the building to be occupied meet the requirements of this Code and that
the remainder do not pose a significant hazard to the safety of the proposed occupants or adjacent buildings. The Fire Code official shall set a time
period during which the temporary Certificate of Occupancy is valid.
(1952 Code § 7-01-11)
5-12-12: AMENDMENT TO SECTION 105.4.3, APPLICANT RESPONSIBILITY:
Add a paragraph to the end of section 105.4.3 to read as follows:
Where this Code as adopted, or the referenced standards, indicates "where approved by the Fire Code official" or similar wording of this intent, the
permit application shall include a separate written request for Fire Code official approval, citing the specific Code section involved and including all
pertinent details necessary for an evaluation of the request. "Approval" cannot be assumed until it has been specifically requested and granted by
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 217/503
the Fire Code official.
(1952 Code § 7-01-12)
5-12-13: AMENDMENT TO SECTION 105.8, PERMIT FEES:
Add section 105.8 to read as follows:
105.8 Permit Fees. Permit fees shall be as contained in the permit fee list as adopted by resolution. The appropriate fee shall accompany the permit
application.
(1952 Code § 7-01-13)
5-12-14: AMENDMENT ADDING SECTION 106.5, RE-INSPECTION FEE:
Add section 106.5 to read as follows:
106.5 Re-Inspection Fees. A re-inspection fee may be assessed for each re-inspection when such portion of work for which inspection is called is not
completed or when corrections called for are not made within the allotted time. This section is not to be interpreted as requiring re-inspection fees the
first time a premises is noted as failing to comply with the requirements of this Code, but as controlling the practice of calling for inspections before
the job is ready for such inspection, or ignoring the allotted time in which to correct a Code deficiency.
Re-inspection fees necessitated by noncompliance with requirements or conditions associated with construction work and a building permit, or for
failing to request said required inspections, shall be in accordance with the conditions, amounts, and limitations listed in the adopted and amended
edition of the Building Code. Re-inspection fees necessitated by noncompliance with requirements associated with periodic inspections of existing
buildings authorized by this Code shall be equal to the cost recovery of the inspection.
(1952 Code § 7-01-14)
5-12-15: AMENDMENT TO SECTION 108.1, BOARD OF APPEALS:
To the end of section 108.1, add the following to read:
The Board shall be made up of five (5) members, one of which shall specifically be a representative of the fire sprinkler industry. Candidates for the
dedicated "sprinkler" position shall posses at least one of the following qualifications:
1. Be certified by the National Institute for Certifying Engineering Technologies (NICET) at Level III or higher in fire sprinkler layout or,
2. Own a fire sprinkler firm or,
3. Manage a fire sprinkler firm.
The length of service for each appointment shall be four (4) years.
(1952 Code § 7-01-15)
5-12-16: AMENDMENT TO SECTION 109.3, VIOLATION PENALTIES:
Amend section 109.3 by inserting the following to read:
...shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or by imprisonment not exceeding six (6)
months or both...
(1952 Code § 7-01-16)
5-12-17: AMENDMENT TO SECTION 111.4, FAILURE TO COMPLY:
Amend section 111.4 to read as follows:
Any person who shall continue to perform any work after having been served with a stop work order, except such work as that person is directed to
perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars
($1,000.00) or by imprisonment not exceeding six (6) months, or both such fine and imprisonment. Each day that a violation continues after due
notice has been served shall be deemed a separate offense.
(1952 Code § 7-01-17)
Amendments To Chapter 2 Of The IFC
5-12-18: AMENDMENT TO SECTION 202, GENERAL DEFINITIONS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 218/503
Code Official. The Fire Chief is the Code official. The Fire Chief may designate the Fire Marshal or the Assistant Fire Marshal to act as the Code official.
(1952 Code § 7-01-18)
5-12-19: AMENDMENT TO SECTION 202, GENERAL DEFINITIONS:
Education Group E, Daycare, is amended to read as follows:
The use of a building or structure, or portion thereof for educational, supervision or personal care services for more than twelve (12) children older
than two and one-half (21/2) years of age, shall be classified as a Group E occupancy and shall also be regulated by adopted City ordinances for
childcare facilities. Exception: Daycare services provided for twelve (12) or fewer children of any age in residential buildings governed by the
International Residential Code, as set forth in IBC section 101.2, shall be exempt from this provision and shall be regulated by adopted City
ordinances for child care facilities.
(1952 Code § 7-01-19)
5-12-20: AMENDMENT TO SECTION 202, GENERAL DEFINITIONS:
Group I-4, Daycare Facilities, is amended to read as follows:
A facility that provides supervision and personal care on a less than twenty four (24) hour basis for more than twelve (12) children, two and one-half
(21/2) years of age or less, shall be classified as Group I-4 and shall also be regulated by adopted City ordinances for childcare facilities. Exception:
Daycare services provided for twelve (12) or fewer children of any age in residential buildings governed by the International Residential Code, as set
forth in IBC section 101.2, shall be exempt from this provision and shall be regulated by adopted City ordinances for child care facilities.
Group R-3 Occupancies, Daycare Facilities, shall be amended to add the following:
...and shall be regulated by adopted City ordinances for child care facilities. Exception: Daycare services provided for twelve (12) or fewer children of
any age in residential buildings governed by the International Residential Code, as set forth in IBC section 101.2, shall be exempt from this provision
and shall be regulated by adopted City ordinances for child care facilities.
(1952 Code § 7-01-20)
Amendments To Chapter 3 Of The IFC
5-12-21: AMENDMENT ADDING SECTION 304.1.2.1, WEED AND GRASS MITIGATION:
Add section 304.1.2.1 to read as follows:
304.1.2.1 Weed And Grass Mitigation. When cut or uncut weeds, grass, vines, and other vegetation are over ten inches (10") in height or otherwise
determined by the Code official to be a fire hazard, the owner shall be notified of the hazard by registered or certified mail addressed to said owner at
his last known address or hand delivered. Upon failure, neglect, or refusal of any owner or agent to abate the hazard by cutting or removing the
vegetation within five (5) days of receipt of the notice or five (5) days after the date of said notice if it is returned as undelivered, the Code official is
hereby authorized and empowered to pay for cutting and removing of cut or uncut weeds, grass, vines, and other vegetation, as authorized by Idaho
Code section 50-317. The charges for cutting and removing cut or uncut weeds, grass, vines, and other vegetation shall constitute a special
assessment and be collected as authorized under Idaho Code section 50-1008.
(1952 Code § 7-01-21)
5-12-22: AMENDMENT TO SECTION 307, OPEN BURNING:
Section 307.2 is revised to read as follows:
307.2 Permit Required. The following types of fires may be allowed provided the proper permit is obtained through the Fire Department:
A. Field burning where there is no alternative cropping practice which provides equivalent benefits.
B. Irrigation ditches and fence rows.
C. Fires used for control or alleviation of a fire hazard, where no other means is available.
D. Fires used in the training of organized firefighting personnel.
E. Special fires allowed at the discretion of the Boise City Fire Department. Special fires are fires not falling into A through D above.
(1952 Code § 7-01-22)
5-12-23: AMENDMENT ADDING SECTION 307.2.2, AIR QUALITY INDEX:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 219/503
Add section 307.2.2 to read as follows:
307.2.2. All open burning, even if a valid permit has been issued or no permit is required, is prohibited when the air quality index (AQI) as reported by
the Idaho Department of Environmental Quality (DEQ) reaches sixty (60) or higher for any pollutant. It is the responsibility of the holders of valid
permits or anyone wishing to ignite a fire for which no permit is required to determine the level of the AQI prior to igniting any fire. The daily AQI may
be determined by calling DEQ or visiting the DEQ web page.
(1952 Code § 7-01-23)
Amendments To Chapter 4 Of The IFC
5-12-24: AMENDMENT ADDING SECTION 401.3.4, COST RECOVERY FOR FALSE ALARMS:
401.3.4 Cost Recovery For False Alarms. The Code official shall be authorized to seek emergency response cost recovery from the responsible party for
false alarms as defined in section 5-13-2 of the Boise City Code. Emergency response cost recovery for false alarms shall be as specified in section 5-13-
3 of the Boise City Code and in such amounts as specified in the fee schedule approved by Mayor and Council applicable at the time of the false alarm.
(1952 Code § 7-01-24)
5-12-25: AMENDMENT ADDING SECTION 401.3.5, SILENCING FIRE ALARMS:
Add section 401.3.5 to read as follows:
401.3.5 Silencing Fire Alarms. It is prohibited for anyone other than Fire Department personnel or fire protection system contractors while in the
performance of their duties to silence, restore, or reset a fire alarm system without the expressed permission of the Fire Department.
(1952 Code § 7-01-25)
5-12-26: AMENDMENT ADDING SECTION 401.6, COST RECOVERY FOR ILLEGAL FIRES:
401.6 Cost Recovery For Illegal Fires. The Code official is authorized to seek emergency response cost recovery from the responsible party for illegal
fires, as defined in section 5-13-2 of the Boise City Code. Emergency response cost recovery for illegal fires shall be as specified in section 5-13-3 of the
Boise City Code and in such amounts as specified in the fee schedule approved by Mayor and Council applicable at the time of the illegal fire.
(1952 Code § 7-01-26)
Amendments To Chapter 5 Of The IFC
5-12-27: AMENDMENT ADDING SECTION 501.5, AUTHORITY FOR ESTABLISHING STANDARDS AND REQUIREMENTS FOR
FIRE ACCESS ROADS:
Add a section 501.5 to read as follows:
501.5 Authority For Establishing Standards And Requirements For Fire Access Roads. The Ada County Highway District (ACHD) is the authority that
regulates all aspects of public streets. However, should ACHD remain silent on an issue, or in the event ACHD defers a decision to the Fire
Department, the standards in this Code shall be considered requirements.
In addition, the Fire Department shall be considered as the authority having jurisdiction and the requirements of this Code shall apply to any and all fire
access roads considered to be or defined as "private" and therefor not in the jurisdiction of ACHD. Furthermore, it is the intent of the Boise City Fire
Department that the standards of this Code be considered as the Fire Department's official position on fire access roadways whether public or private. The
Fire Department requests that ACHD incorporate the standards in this Code into their standards.
(1952 Code § 7-01-27)
5-12-28: AMENDMENT ADDING TO SECTION 503.1.1, BUILDINGS AND FACILITIES, EXCEPTIONS:
Add to section 503.1.1 exception 4 as follows:
4. The structures are used solely as public restrooms or public picnic shelters and meet all of the following: single story, above grade,
noncombustible construction, five hundred (500) square feet or less in area within the surrounding exterior walls or within the horizontal projections of
the roof for unenclosed structures; sixty foot (60') open yards on all sides.
(1952 Code § 7-01-28)
5-12-29: AMENDMENT TO SECTION 503.2.4, TURNING RADIUS:
Add a sentence to the end of section 503.2.4 to read as follows:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 220/503
The minimum outside turning radius shall be forty eight feet (48'). The minimum inside turning radius shall be twenty eight feet (28').
(1952 Code § 7-01-29)
5-12-30: AMENDMENT TO SECTION 503.2.6, BRIDGES AND ELEVATED SURFACES:
Add the following paragraph to the end of section 503.2.6:
The Fire Department shall require that bridges over the Boise River provide a minimum of eight feet (8') clearance between the lowest part of the
bridge and the water surface at three thousand (3,000) cfs flow.
(1952 Code § 7-01-30)
5-12-31: AMENDMENT ADDING SECTION 503.7, BARRICADE SPECIFICATIONS:
Add section 503.7 to read as follows:
503.7 Barricade Specifications. If other city or county agencies require that emergency vehicle access roadways be secured with a barricade, chain,
gate, or bollard, such barricade must meet the following criteria: Removal or opening of said barricade must result in a clear unobstructed road width
of twenty feet (20'). Chains and locks shall be of such quality so as not to damage Fire Department cutting tools nor shall cutting operations result in
any unnecessary time delay. Bollards must be of an easily removable type, shall leave nothing protruding up from the roadway surface when
removed, and shall be approved by the Code official. If gates are electronically operated they shall: 1) be of a fail open version in the event of loss of
power; and 2) be equipped with an automatic opening mechanism activated by the Opticom system currently in use by the Fire Department.
(1952 Code § 7-01-31)
5-12-32: AMENDMENT ADDING SECTION 503.8, NO PARKING:
Add section 503.8 to read as follows:
503.8 No Parking. Areas where parking is prohibited shall be so designated by curb markings or "No Parking" signs by one of the following methods:
1. "No Parking Fire Lane" (or approved or standardized equal) signs shall be placed at all points of entry to properties or subdivisions and at seventy
five foot (75') intervals on all sides of a vehicle pathway on which parking is prohibited. Signs shall face oncoming traffic.
2. "Notice All Roads Are Fire Lanes Park Only In Designated Parking Areas" (or approved or standardized equal) signs shall be placed at all points
of entry to properties or subdivisions with marked parking stalls and shall face traffic entering the property.
3. All curbs along roads or lanes where parking is prohibited shall be painted red, contain three inch (3") high by three-fourths inch (3/4") stroke white
letters reading "Fire Lane-No Parking" (or other approved marking), with the lettering spaced every fifty feet (50') on center.
4. It shall be considered as an approved alternative to items 1 through 3 above for "No Parking Fire Lane" designations to be in accordance with
ACHD standards for such markings.
(Ord. 16-17, 5-9-2017)
5-12-33: AMENDMENT ADDING SECTION 503.9, TRAFFIC CALMING DEVICES:
Add new section 503.9 to read as follows:
503.9 Traffic Calming Devices. The Fire Department shall prohibit the installation of traffic delaying or traffic calming devices without the approval of
the Code official. Prohibited devices include, but are not limited to, speed bumps, speed humps, speed dips, chokers, circles, or conversation
corners.
(1952 Code § 7-01-33)
5-12-34: AMENDMENT ADDING SECTION 503.10, DIVE BOAT ACCESS:
Add section 503.10 entitled Dive Boat Access to read as follows:
503.10 Dive Boat Access. The Code official may require developments or construction projects to provide access to waterways including, but not
limited to, rivers, creeks, canals, ponds, or lakes. Dive team boat access shall meet all the standards and requirements specified in this Code except
as follows:
1. Dive rescue boat access roads shall be capable of supporting twelve thousand (12,000) pounds gross vehicle weight;
2. Shall be twelve feet (12') wide;
3. Shall provide ten inches (10") of ground clearance;
4. Shall have a maximum grade of twenty percent (20%) on the launch ramp;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 221/503
5. Shall be asphalt, concrete, or ACHD approved road mix surface;
6. Shall have a minimum of three feet (3') of water at eight hundred (800) cfs flow at the launch point;
7. Shall have a minimum outside turning radius of twenty five feet (25').
(1952 Code § 7-01-34)
5-12-35: AMENDMENT ADDING SECTION 503.11, OPTICOM:
Add section 503.11 to read as follows:
503.11 Opticom. All new traffic control signals installed after the adoption of this Code shall be equipped with the Fire Department Opticom system.
(1952 Code § 7-01-35)
5-12-36: AMENDMENT ADDING SECTION 505.3, ADDRESS FOR CORNER LOTS:
Add section 505.3 to read as follows:
505.3 Building Access And Addresses. If a building on a corner lot has primary access to the building or parking lot from a street other than the
address street, the building number and the street name/number shall appear on both faces of the building.
(1952 Code § 7-01-36)
5-12-37: AMENDMENT ADDING SECTION 505.4, ADDRESS FOR TENANT SPACE:
Add section 505.4 to read as follows:
505.4 Tenant Space Addresses. All individual tenant spaces shall be readily identified by a suite or space number, letter, or other approved method.
Such suite or space designation shall be consistent with all building maps, building directories, and fire alarm system identification methods for the
site.
(1952 Code § 7-01-37)
5-12-38: AMENDMENT ADDING SECTION 505.5, ADDRESS FOR MULTI-FAMILY DWELLINGS:
Add section 505.5 to read as follows:
505.5 Multi-Family Dwelling Address.
A. When individual apartment, condominium, or townhouse structures within a common complex are designated with separate addresses, individual
unit numbers shall be assigned so there is no duplication of unit designations within a building. First floor shall be 100 series, second floor 200 series
and so on for each successive floor. Basements shall be 10 series if the next higher floor is designated the first floor; or basements shall be
designated 100 series if the next level is called the second floor.
B. When apartment, condominium, or townhouse complexes (more than one structure) have been assigned one address, each individual building
shall also be assigned a letter. Unit or apartment numbers shall then be assigned in the 10, 100, 200, 300 series per floor as identified in paragraph
A of this section.
(1952 Code § 7-01-38)
5-12-39: AMENDMENT ADDING SECTION 506.1.2, KEY BOXES REQUIRED:
Add section 506.1.2 to read as follows:
506.1.2 Key Boxes Required. Unless determined otherwise by the Code official, key boxes are required for all structures with fire alarm or sprinkler
systems which are connected to a monitoring service.
Exception: The Code official may approve a twenty four (24) hour on location security service as negating the requirement for a key box.
(1952 Code § 7-01-39)
5-12-40: AMENDMENT ADDING SECTION 508.1.1, HYDRANT DISTANCE TO BUILDINGS:
Add section 508.1.1 to read as follows:
508.1.1 Fire Hydrant Distance From Buildings. Fire hydrants shall not be installed closer than forty feet (40') to buildings. In such areas of the City
where forty feet (40') is an impractical distance, the Code official may allow a lesser distance.
(1952 Code § 7-01-40)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 222/503
5-12-41: AMENDMENT TO SECTION 508.2, TYPE OF WATER SUPPLY:
To the end of the first sentence of section 508.2, add the following to read:
...at minimum twenty (20) psi residual pressure.
(1952 Code § 7-01-41)
5-12-42: AMENDMENT ADDING TO SECTION 508.5.1, FIRE HYDRANT SYSTEMS, WHERE REQUIRED, EXCEPTION 3:
To section 508.5.1, add exception 3 as follows:
3. Structures used solely as public restrooms or public picnic shelters which meet all of the following: single story, above grade, noncombustible
construction, five hundred (500) square feet or less in area within the surrounding exterior walls or within the horizontal projections of the road for
unenclosed structures; sixty foot (60') open yards on all sides.
(1952 Code § 7-01-42)
5-12-43: AMENDMENT ADDING SECTION 508.6, FIRE HYDRANT SUPPLY CONNECTION:
Add section 508.6 to read as follows:
508.6 Fire Hydrant Supply Connections. It shall be prohibited for underground water supply lines with a single connection from a municipal main to
supply both fire hydrants and fire suppression systems. Looped supply lines that are supplied from two (2) points of connection shall be allowed for
hydrants and fire suppression system supplies.
(1952 Code § 7-01-43)
5-12-44: AMENDMENT ADDING SECTION 508.7, ACCEPTABLE HYDRANT MAKES AND MODELS:
Add section 508.7 to read as follows:
508.7 Acceptable Hydrant Makes And Models. Unless otherwise approved by the Fire Department, acceptable hydrant models are limited to: 1)
Waterous Pacer 100; 2) Mueller Centurion; and 3) Clow Medallion.
(1952 Code § 7-01-44)
5-12-45: AMENDMENT ADDING SECTION 508.8, HYDRANT INSTALLATION SPECIFICATIONS:
Add section 508.8 to read as follows:
508.8 Hydrant Installation Specifications. Maintenance and installation of fire hydrants shall require prior approval of the water purveyor. It is a
specific misdemeanor violation of this section for site improvements such as landscaping to result in a condition where a hydrant falls into
noncompliance with the requirements of the water purveyor or this Code. Further, the largest diameter outlet, commonly referred to as the steamer
connection, shall face the street as opposed to facing driveways.
(1952 Code § 7-01-45)
5-12-46: AMENDMENT ADDING LANGUAGE TO SECTION 509.1, FIRE COMMAND CENTER:
Amend item 13 to read as follows:
13. The work table surface shall be at least three foot by five foot (3' x 5').
(1952 Code § 7-01-46)
5-12-47: AMENDMENT ADDING SECTION 510.2, FACP LOCATION AND SIGNS:
Add section 510.2 to read as follows:
510.2 Fire Alarm Control Panel Location And Signs. When a fire alarm control panel (FACP) is mounted in such a location or room so as to not be in
obvious view from the front entry of the building, a remote annunciator shall be provided at the main entrance of the building, and approved signs
shall be posted for the purpose of leading emergency personnel to the room or location of the FACP.
(1952 Code § 7-01-47)
Amendments To Chapter 9 Of The IFC
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 223/503
5-12-48: ADDITION TO SECTION 901.2, CONSTRUCTION DOCUMENTS:
Add new paragraphs to the end of section 901.2 to read as follows:
When fire protection construction documents or calculations are required, a minimum of three (3) and a maximum of five (5) complete sets of layout
documents shall be submitted for review. Contractors may copy approved sets that have been returned. However, any copies made from City
approved documents must be complete and contain all the information required of original sets plus the City's plan review notes. The issued plan set
stamped "These plans must be kept on the job site at all times", and the FIR permit inspection record card shall be kept on the job site from the start
of work until the job has passed all the final acceptance inspections and the FIR permit inspection record card is signed indicating final acceptance
by the Fire Inspector.
Construction documents shall be consistent with the approved building plans and each set shall include all the information listed in relevant sections
of this Code and the appropriate standard for the system in question, copies of material data sheets on all system equipment, including but not
limited to valves, sprinklers and escutcheons, water supply data cover sheet, switches, detectors, horns, strobes, batteries, and control panels. The
Code official reserves the right to request additional information when such information is considered necessary to determine compliance with the
Code and appropriate standards. It shall be the responsibility of the submitting contractor to compile the construction documents, and resubmittal
information, into complete sets.
Construction documents shall be required when:
A. Any fire protection system is to be installed or modified, regardless of the number of sprinkler or alarm devices involved or the dollar value of the
work.
B. The Code official reserves the right to waive the requirement of such a submittal when in his opinion a review is not necessary to verify
compliance.
(1952 Code § 7-01-48)
5-12-49: AMENDMENT ADDING SECTION 901.4.2.1, VOLUNTARY FIRE ALARM SYSTEM INSTALLATION:
Add section 901.4.2.1 to read as follows:
901.4.2.1 Voluntary Fire Alarm System Installation. When fire alarm systems not required by this or any other Code are installed, the notification
appliances shall meet the same minimum layout, installation, and performance requirements for systems which are required by this or any other
Code. Nonrequired fire alarm systems shall provide the same level of occupant notification that required systems provide. Partial automatic or
manual activation alarm systems are allowed provided they are installed in accordance with the requirements and limitations of the appropriate
standard.
(1952 Code § 7-01-49)
5-12-50: AMENDMENT ADDING SECTION 903.1.2, SPRINKLER SYSTEM CONTROL VALVE LOCATION AND SIGNS:
Add section 903.1.2 to read as follows:
903.1.2 Sprinkler System Control Valve Location And Signs. Unless specifically approved by the Code official, the fire sprinkler system main control
valve(s) shall be installed in any one of the following configurations:
1. A post indicator valve (PIV). Where practical a PIV shall be installed at least forty feet (40') from the building.
2. A wall post indicator valve (WPIV).
3. A valve(s) installed on the riser itself provided the sprinkler riser room is separated from the building on all sides by a one hour occupancy
separation assembly, including opening and penetration protection, as defined by the Building Code. In addition to any other access doors, direct
access into the riser room from the outside shall be provided. Signs identifying doors leading to the sprinkler system control assembly shall be
permanently affixed to all doors so as to clearly identify the path to the riser assembly.
The valve configurations required in this section are listed in order of preference, not in order of requirement.
(1952 Code § 7-01-51)
5-12-51: AMENDMENT ADDING SECTION 903.1.3, FLOOR CONTROL ASSEMBLIES:
Add section 903.1.3 to read as follows:
903.1.3 Floor Control Assemblies. Unless approved otherwise by the Code official, sprinkler systems in any building two (2) or more levels in height
shall be separated by floor control assemblies in addition to main control and alarm features. Floor control assembly components shall include, but
not be limited to, properly placed and installed control valve, alarming device, test and drain assembly, and pressure gage.
Exception: Systems installed in one- and two-family dwellings.
(1952 Code § 7-01-52)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 224/503
5-12-52: AMENDMENT ADDING SECTION 903.1.4, "SPEC" WAREHOUSE SPRINKLER SYSTEMS:
Add section 903.1.4 to read as follows:
903.1.4 "Spec" Warehouse Sprinkler Systems. Fire sprinkler systems installed in warehouse type buildings commonly referred to as "spec"
warehouses where storage heights of combustible materials over twelve feet (12') are possible, but exact commodity and height are unknown, shall
meet the following criteria:
At a minimum, systems shall be for Class IV commodity, to the maximum available storage height, allowing for in-rack sprinklers, with high
temperature sprinklers at the ceiling. It should be noted that if the warehouse is used to store a higher commodity class material, upgrades to the
sprinkler system will be required. (See also NFPA 13 Appendix A.)
This section is not intended to prohibit the use of ESFR sprinkler systems.
It shall be the responsibility of the Code official to evaluate all requests for a system layout meeting the requirements for a less hazardous storage
configuration.
(1952 Code § 7-01-53)
5-12-53: AMENDMENT ADDING SECTION 903.3.1.3.1, NFPA 13D SPRINKLER ALARMS:
Add section 903.3.1.3.1 to read as follows:
903.3.1.3.1 NFPA 13D Sprinkler Alarms. Any and all NFPA 13D systems shall be equipped with an alarm initiating device, commonly referred to as a
flow switch, and an outside alarm indicating device.
(1952 Code § 7-01-54)
5-12-54: AMENDMENT ADDING SECTION 903.3.5.2, SECONDARY WATER SUPPLY:
Add paragraph to end of the section to read:
Note: It shall be acceptable to use a combination of a single fire tank conforming to the requirements of NFPA 22 and a single fire pump conforming
to the requirements of NFPA 20 to meet this secondary water requirement, where the tank is automatically filled from the primary City supply and a
bypass suction connection is provided to supply the fire pump in the event the tank is out of service, and a Fire Department pumper section
connection with appropriate system valving is provided to allow the Fire Department to draw the water from the tank under a positive pressure and
pressurize the standpipe with the required sprinkler and hose stream demand, in the event the fire pump is out of service. The hose stream design
requirement shall not be less than that specified in NFPA 13 for combined inside and outside hose streams. Alternative designs shall provide
equivalent redundancy and shall be subject to approval by the Code official.
(1952 Code § 7-01-55)
5-12-55: AMENDMENT ADDING SECTION 903.3.8, DEPTH OF COVER:
Add section 903.3.8 to read as follows:
903.3.8 Depth Of Cover. The depth of cover over underground sprinkler water pipes shall be four feet six inches (4'6"), measured from the top of the
pipe to finished grade.
(1952 Code § 7-01-56)
5-12-56: AMENDMENT ADDING SECTION 905.1.1, STANDPIPE HOSE:
Add section 905.1.1 to read as follows:
905.1.1 Standpipe Hose. Any requirement for the installation of fire hose on standpipes shall be omitted.
(1952 Code § 7-01-57)
5-12-57: AMENDMENT ADDING SECTION 912.2.3, FIRE DEPARTMENT ACCESS:
Add section 912.2.3 to read as follows:
912.2.3 Fire Department Connection. The Fire Department connection (FDC) and associated outside alarm for a sprinkler or standpipe system shall
be installed within one hundred feet (100') of an approved Fire Department vehicle access lane and within three hundred feet (300') of Fire
Department vehicle access distance of a fire hydrant.
(1952 Code § 7-01-58)
5-12-58: AMENDMENT ADDING SECTION 913.1.1, FIRE PUMP TEST HEADER:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 225/503
Add section 913.1.1 to read as follows:
913.1.1 Fire Pump Test Header Assembly. It shall be prohibited for a water meter or any other similar device to be installed in lieu of a fire pump test
header assembly without the express approval of the Code official.
(1952 Code § 7-01-59)
Amendments To Chapter 14 Of The IFC
5-12-59: AMENDMENT ADDING SECTION 1401.3, CONSTRUCTION OR DEMOLITION FIRE WATCH:
Add section 1401.3 to read as follows:
1401.3 Fire Watch During Building Construction, Alteration, Or Demolition. The Code official may allow a fire watch in order to allow temporary
occupancy of a building or portion thereof before it is completed or during demolition. The duties of the fire watch personnel shall be to watch for the
occurrence of fire, immediately report the occurrence of a fire in an approved manner, act to prevent the occurrence of fire, and enforce the
provisions of this Code. Fire watch personnel shall not be assigned any other duties which are not related to fire safety. Only fire watches that have
been approved by the Code official are allowed. When a fire watch is approved, personnel determined to be qualified by the Fire Department shall be
provided.
(1952 Code § 7-01-60)
Amendments To Chapter 33 Of The IFC
5-12-60: AMENDMENT TO SECTION 3308.11, RETAIL DISPLAY AND SALE OF FIREWORKS:
Delete section 3308.11 and replace with the following:
3308.11 Retail Display And Sale. The sale and use of fireworks shall conform to the requirements of this Code. In the event of a conflict between
another chapter of this Code or another section of this chapter and section 3309, the specific requirements of section 3309 shall apply.
(1952 Code § 7-01-61)
5-12-61: AMENDMENT ADDING SECTION 3309, FIREWORKS:
Add section 3309 entitled fireworks:
Section 3309 Fireworks.
3309.1 Fireworks Shall Be Defined As Follows. Any composition or device for the purpose of producing a visible or an audible effect for
entertainment purposes by combustion, deflagration, or detonation that meets the definition of 1.4G or 1.3G fireworks.
3309.2 Dangerous Fireworks. Fireworks meeting the following criteria are to be considered "dangerous fireworks":
A. Fireworks containing explosive material that will burn or deflagrate when ignited. Examples include, but are not limited to, firecrackers, cherry
bombs, M-80s.
B. Fireworks that leave the ground of their own accord, or fly when tossed into the air. Examples include, but are not limited to, skyrockets, bottle
rockets, mortar shells, Roman candles.
C. Fireworks designed for ground or near ground use that travel outside of a fifteen foot (15') diameter circle.
D. Fireworks designed for ground or near ground use that, as a means of propulsion, emit showers or sparks longer than twelve inches (12").
E. Fireworks designed for use from a stationary position that emit sparks, showers, or flaming balls, vertically more than twenty feet (20'); or from
which discharged material falls beyond a twenty foot (20') in diameter area.
Exception: The term "fireworks" shall not include any blank cartridge, automotive safety flares, toy guns or toy cannons, caps, or other items
designed for use with toy guns or cannons, party poppers, pop-its, party favors, or other device which contains twenty five hundredths (.25) of a
grain or less of explosive substance.
3309.3 Nonaerial Common Fireworks. Fireworks not meeting the criteria of "dangerous fireworks", or not specifically banned by reference, are to be
considered nonaerial common fireworks.
3309.4 Dangerous Fireworks Prohibition And Permit.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person in the City to import, export, offer for sale, sell, possess, use, keep, or store or permit the keeping or storing of
any "dangerous fireworks" for any use or purpose, except that a person holding a public fireworks display permit issued pursuant to the terms and
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 226/503
conditions of this chapter may use "dangerous fireworks" for a safely supervised and conducted public display of fireworks.
B. Dangerous fireworks may be stored for a period not exceeding ten (10) days immediately preceding the date of said public display, provided the
fireworks are to be used exclusively for public display. Storage of dangerous fireworks to be used in a public fireworks display authorized by a valid
permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall be stored in accordance with any and all applicable provisions of this chapter governing short term
storage containers and all applicable provisions of the International Fire Code, except that no person shall store dangerous fireworks:
1. In a temporary fireworks stand;
2. In any soft sided structure, including, but not limited to, a tent;
3. In any place or in any manner allowing access to such dangerous fireworks by anyone other than the permittee;
4. In any place or in any manner which endangers the health, safety, or welfare of persons or property.
3309.5 Nonaerial Common Fireworks Permit. No person, without having a valid nonaerial common fireworks permit issued pursuant to terms and
conditions set forth in this chapter shall import, export, possess for the purpose of sale, offer for sale, or sell nonaerial common fireworks for any use
or purpose.
3309.6 Application For Nonaerial Common Fireworks Permit. Any person desiring to engage in the sale of nonaerial common fireworks within the
City shall first make written application to the City Clerk's Office for a nonaerial common fireworks permit. Each applicant shall pay the requisite
permit application fee as listed on the most current City Clerk's fee schedule to the City Clerk at the time the application is filed. At the time and as a
condition of such filing and with each application, each applicant shall pay an additional fee to defray costs of preliminary investigations required
hereunder. Such additional preliminary investigation fees are required for each site, are nonrefundable, and are listed on the most current City
Clerk's schedule. All permits are required to be posted in the temporary fireworks stand at all times.
A. Applications for nonaerial common fireworks permits authorizing the permittee to import, export, possess for the purpose of sale, offer for sale,
or sell nonaerial common fireworks during the summer sales period shall be filed with the City Clerk on or before April 15, or the next business day
if such date falls on a nonbusiness day.
B. So long as the application is filed by the applicable April 15 deadline, the City Clerk shall notify the applicant if deficiencies exist in the
application and the applicant shall have five (5) business days from the date of the notice to correct any deficiencies. Notwithstanding any such
extension or extensions, any application requiring action by the application that is still pending more than thirty (30) days after the April 15 deadline
shall be denied.
C. An operator intending to sell fireworks during the winter sales period pursuant to a nonaerial common fireworks permit shall provide written
notification of such intent to the City Clerk by mailing the same by U.S. Postal Service to the City Clerk between the period of December 1 and
December 15 preceding the winter sales period during which the fireworks are to be sold.
3309.7 Application For Public Fireworks Display Permit. Any person desiring to make a public display of dangerous fireworks shall first make written
application to the Boise City Fire Department for a public fireworks display permit. Each applicant shall pay to the Fire Department a fee of one
hundred twenty five dollars ($125.00) at the time the application is filed. In the event the public fireworks display permit is denied, the Fire
Department shall refund the application fee. The applicant shall also reimburse the City for all reasonable expenses incurred in investigation to
determine whether the permit should be granted.
A. Applications for public fireworks display permits shall be filed with the City Clerk at least forty five (45) days preceding the date on which the
proposed public fireworks display is to occur.
B. So long as the application is filed at least forty five (45) days preceding the date on which the proposed public fireworks display is to occur, the
City Clerk shall notify the applicant if deficiencies exist in the application and the applicant shall have five (5) business days from the date of the
notice to correct any deficiencies. Notwithstanding any such extension or extensions, any application requiring action by the applicant that is still
pending within thirty (30) days of the proposed public fireworks display shall be deemed denied.
3309.8 Form Of Application. Each applicant for a nonaerial common fireworks permit or a public fireworks display permit shall file an application with
the City Clerk. A separate application shall be filed for each and every location at which nonaerial common fireworks are to be sold and/or offered for
sale, or for each and every public fireworks display. Each application shall comply with all of the minimum licensing requirements and procedures as
set forth in Boise City Code title 3, chapter 1, article A. In addition to the Boise City Code title 3, chapter 1, article A license application requirements,
each application shall provide the following information:
A. The applicant's name, address, date of birth and social security number. If the applicant is other than a natural person, the address of the
applicant's principal place(s) of business.
B. If the applicant is other than a natural person, the purpose for which the applicant primarily exists and for which it was organized and when and
where the applicant was organized and established.
C. If the applicant is a partnership, corporation, or limited liability company, the names and addresses of the partners, officers, trustees, directors,
or members, if any, and also the name and address of the applicant's registered agent for service of process.
D. The physical address and description of each and every location at which nonaerial common fireworks or dangerous fireworks are to be stored
and the dates such fireworks are to be stored.
E. For nonaerial common fireworks, the physical address and description of any and all locations at which such fireworks are to be sold or offered
for sale, and the dates during which such fireworks are to be sold or offered for sale.
F. For dangerous fireworks, the physical address and description of the location at which the public fireworks display is to occur, and the date(s) on
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 227/503
which the public fireworks display is to occur.
G. The applicant's State sales tax permit number, if applicable.
H. If the applicant is an entity other than a sole proprietorship, the name and general description of the business activities of each parent or
subsidiary company, business or entity, and a general description of the ownership organization of each parent or subsidiary, if any.
I. For a nonaerial, common fireworks permit, a site plan, which shall include a description of the following information:
1. Location, type, and dimensions of any temporary fireworks stand and/or short term storage container to be located at the sales site;
2. Parking areas;
3. Vision sight triangle, if located on a corner;
4. Waste receptacles or garbage cans.
J. For a public fireworks display permit, a site plan for the storage of fireworks to be used in the public fireworks display for which the permit is
sought, which plan shall include, but shall not be limited to, a description of:
1. Location, type and dimensions of short term storage containers to be used;
2. The distance from other structures of any short term storage container;
3. The proposed site of the public fireworks display, which plan shall comply with the standards set forth in the National Fire Protection
Association standards (NFPA) 1123 or NFPA 1126; and
4. Prior pyrotechnical experience.
3309.9 Investigation. The Fire Chief or his designee shall be authorized to:
A. Inspect any and all operations at which fireworks are sold, offered for sale or stored to ensure compliance with this chapter and any and all
other applicable laws.
B. Inspect any and all temporary fireworks stands from which fireworks are sold, offered for sale or stored.
C. Inspect and/or require an operator to produce any records required by law.
D. Revoke a nonaerial common fireworks permit or public fireworks display permit on the grounds and pursuant to the procedures set forth in this
chapter.
E. Conduct any other inspections or undertake any other acts authorized by this chapter and any and all other applicable laws.
3309.10 Revocation Of Permits.
A. In addition to the reasons for license denial, suspension or revocation set forth in Boise City Code title 3, chapter 1, article A, a nonaerial
common fireworks permit or dangerous fireworks display permit issued pursuant to this chapter may be revoked by the City Clerk, the Fire Chief,
or a designee of either, if any of the following occur:
1. The operator conducts or permits a use, condition and/or activity not allowed under the terms of the permit.
2. The operator violates conditions and/or limitations set forth in the permit.
3. The permit is used by a different operator or operation than to whom it was issued.
4. The permit was issued in error in violation of any ordinance or law.
5. The permittee fails to comply with any order or notice duly served in accordance with the provisions of this chapter or other applicable law.
6. The permittee fails to comply with any applicable Federal, State or local law.
B. Any denial of an application for a nonaerial common or dangerous fireworks permit, or any suspension or revocation of such permit, shall be
made following the procedures set forth in Boise City Code title 3, chapter 1, article A.
3309.11 Term Of Permit. A nonaerial common fireworks permit issued pursuant to this chapter is not transferable or assignable and shall be valid for
twelve (12) months from the date of issuance and only for the specific dates and location designated in the permit. A public fireworks display permit
issued pursuant to this chapter is not transferable and shall be valid only for the period and specific location designated in the permit.
3309.12 General Licensing Provisions, Title 3, Chapter 1, Article A; Definitions.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 228/503
A. General Licensing Provisions. To the extent not inconsistent with section 3309 of this chapter, the license provisions set forth in Boise City Code
title 3, chapter 1, article A shall apply with full force and effect to all provisions of this section.
B. Definitions. For the purposes of section 3309 of this chapter, words used throughout this section, but not defined herein, in Boise City Code title
3, chapter 1, article A, or in the currently adopted version of the International Fire Code, shall have their plain, ordinary and common meaning.
When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future tense, words in the plural number include the singular
number, and words in the singular number include the plural number. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory. Words in any
gender shall apply to the feminine, masculine and neuter genders.
3309.13 Insurance Required. Each applicant for a nonaerial common fireworks permit or for a dangerous fireworks permit, shall have filed with the
City Clerk's Office prior to the issuance and validity of any permit issued under this chapter, a policy, or certified true copy thereof, of public liability
and products liability insurance, including both "accident" and "occurrence" coverage. The insurance coverage limits for both public liability coverage
and for products liability coverage shall be at least one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) per occurrence aggregate bodily, and one hundred
thousand dollars ($100,000.00) per occurrence aggregate property damage, or personal injury. Each policy of insurance shall be in form and
substance acceptable to the City, and shall name as insured parties under the terms of the policy Boise City, all officials, elected and appointed, of
the City in performance of official functions regarding all operations under or pertaining to said permit, any licensee or licensor of the applicant, and
all vendors of fireworks covered by the permit to be issued to the applicant. Said policy of insurance shall be so written that it cannot be canceled
without at least ten (10) days' prior written notice to the City from the underwriting insurance company. The policy of insurance shall be underwritten
through or by a qualified and duly licensed insurance company or companies doing or authorized to do insurance business in Idaho, and a copy of
said policy shall be filed with the City Clerk's Office prior to the issuance of the permit.
3309.14 Authorized Dates For Sale And Use Of Fireworks. Nonaerial common fireworks may be sold at retail and used beginning at eleven fifty nine
o'clock (11:59) P.M. on June 22 to eleven fifty nine o'clock (11:59) P.M. on July 5, and beginning at eleven fifty nine o'clock (11:59) P.M. on December
25 to eleven fifty nine o'clock (11:59) P.M. on January 1.
3309.15 Temporary Fireworks. Temporary fireworks stands from which nonaerial common fireworks are to be sold shall be subject to the following
provisions:
A. All retail sales of nonaerial common fireworks shall be permitted only from within a temporary fireworks stand or a tent, and the sale from any
other building or structure is hereby prohibited. No person shall construct, or cause to be constructed, any permanent structure for the sale and/or
offering for sale of nonaerial common fireworks. No operator may sell or offer for sale nonaerial common fireworks from or in a permanent
structure.
B. The stand in which the fireworks will be stored or sold shall not be located within twenty five feet (25') of any other building nor within one
hundred feet (100') of any gasoline station or flammable liquid dispensing device or installation.
C. All such stands shall meet the requirements of the Building Code of the City and all lighting circuits and other electrical equipment shall meet the
requirements of the Electrical Code of the City. No heating device or open flame may be used in a temporary fireworks stand at any time.
D. The stand shall have exit doors at least thirty inches (30") wide at both ends of the stand and one additional door for each thirty two feet (32') of
rear wall in excess of thirty two feet (32'). All doors shall open outward from the stand and all doorways shall be kept free and clear from all
supplies and materials at all times.
E. Each stand shall be provided with a minimum of one Type 2A10BC rated fire extinguisher and one 2A water type fire extinguisher. Such
extinguishers shall be in good working order and easily accessible for use in case of fire, and shall be kept in immediate proximity to the location
where the fireworks are retailed.
F. During business hours, each and every stand shall be staffed by at least one person who is twenty one (21) years of age or older. All fireworks
shall be effectively kept away from any kind of self-service by the public, and shall be placed in a location which is unavailable and inaccessible to
members of the public in capacities other than as legal customers. No person under the age of sixteen (16) shall be allowed in the nonpublic areas
of a temporary fireworks stand. No operator shall sell fireworks to any person who is under the age of sixteen (16) years unless such person is
accompanied by a parent or legal guardian. The burden of verifying the age of purchasers of fireworks shall be borne by the operator.
G. No person shall be permitted to sleep inside any stand when it is not open for business.
H. At least one sign reading "FIREWORKS - NO SMOKING WITHIN 25 FEET" in letters at least four inches (4") high on a contrasting background
shall be posted on each and every exterior wall on the outside of the stand. At least one sign reading "FIREWORKS - NO SMOKING WITHIN 25
FEET" in letters at least two inches (2") high on a contrasting background shall be posted on each and every interior wall of the stand. All such
signs shall be maintained in a legible condition at all times.
I. During the summer selling period, no temporary stand shall be erected before June 15 of any year. The premises on which the stand is erected
shall be cleared of all structures and debris not later than twelve o'clock (12:00) noon on July 12. For the winter selling period, no temporary stand
shall be erected before December 15 of any year. The premises on which the stand is erected shall be cleared of all structures and debris not later
than twelve o'clock (12:00) noon on January 8.
J. No fireworks shall be discharged in or within twenty five feet (25') of any fireworks stand. At least one sign reading "NO FIREWORKS TO BE
DISCHARGED WITHIN 25 FEET" in letters at least four inches (4") high on a contrasting background shall be prominently displayed on each
exterior wall on the outside of the stand. Such signs shall be maintained in a legible condition at all times.
K. No person shall allow any rubbish to accumulate in or around any fireworks stand or permit a fire nuisance to exist. Only noncombustible waste
containers shall be permitted within the stand.
L. No fireworks shall remain unattended at any time regardless of whether the fireworks stand is open for business or not. If any fireworks are
stored, they shall only be stored at such places as are approved for storage of fireworks by the Fire Chief or his representative. Any and all
temporary fireworks stands shall be emptied of all fireworks when not open for business. This provision shall not apply where the operation is not
open for business and the temporary fireworks stand is used as a short term storage facility, in which case all provisions of this chapter governing
short term storage facilities shall apply.
M. No stand shall have a floor area in excess of six hundred (600) square feet.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 229/503
N. No stand shall be erected at a location where retail sales are not allowed under the Boise City Development Code.
O. No dry vegetation, Christmas trees, or any other combustible material may be stored, displayed, sold, or otherwise kept within twenty five feet
(25') of a fireworks stand.
P. Storage.
1. Only one short term storage container in addition to the temporary fireworks stand shall be allowed per location. Short term storage containers
used during the summer sales period shall not be placed at the sales location before June 15 and shall not remain at the location after twelve
o'clock (12:00) noon on July 12. Short term storage containers used during the winter sales period shall not be placed at the sales location
before December 15 and shall not remain at the location after twelve o'clock (12:00) noon on January 8.
2. Short term storage containers shall not be placed or erected within the public right-of-way, unless otherwise authorized by the appropriate
transportation authority. If a private sidewalk or pedestrianway is occupied by a short term storage container, a minimum width of four feet (4')
shall remain unobstructed along the entire width of such private sidewalk or pedestrianway. If such private sidewalk or pedestrianway is
narrower than four feet (4') wide, at least one-half (1/2) of the width thereof shall remain unobstructed along the entire width of such private
sidewalk or pedestrianway.
3. Where a temporary fireworks stand is used as a short term storage facility, and such stand is constructed with canvas or other soft material
sides, it shall be effectively secured by a person who shall remain awake, alert, and on site at all times and who shall prevent any and all access
to fireworks or other merchandise stored therein. A dog or other animal is not a substitute for a person for purpose of this section.
4. The Fire Department shall be notified of the address or location of all short term storage facilities when fireworks will not be stored in a
temporary fireworks stand. If the short term storage facility is not within the boundaries of Boise City, then the permittee shall notify the authority
having jurisdiction where the storage is to take place.
5. Short term storage is allowed in any of the following, provided it is locked or otherwise secured: a temporary fireworks stand, truck, trailer, or
other vehicle. A truck, trailer or other vehicle used for short term storage must remain at least twenty five feet (25') from any other structure that:
a. Is used as a residence or business;
b. Is used for human habitation;
c. Contains open flames;
d. Contains a heating source;
e. Contains a lighting source.
Short term storage may occur in a locked or secured shed, garage, barn or other building or storage container which is detached from an
inhabited building and contains no open flames, including heating and lighting sources.
Q. Only one temporary fireworks stand shall be allowed per location.
R. One caretaker unit may be allowed per sales location and shall be used only for the purpose of security of an operation. Such caretaker unit
shall be located a minimum of twenty five feet (25') from any temporary fireworks stand or short term storage container. Caretaker units used
during the summer sales period shall not be placed at the sales location before June 15 and shall not remain at the location after twelve o'clock
(12:00) noon on July 12. Caretaker units used during the winter sales period shall not be placed at the sales location before December 15 and
shall not remain at the location after twelve o'clock (12:00) noon on January 8.
S. Any and all temporary fireworks stands shall be located at least twenty five feet (25') from any generator or other internal combustion power
sources and/or their fuels.
T. Vehicles shall not be parked within twenty five feet (25') of the exterior walls/sides of any temporary fireworks stand.
3309.16 General Prohibitions. It shall be unlawful for any person, except in compliance with this chapter to:
1. Alter any fireworks;
2. Throw any fireworks:
a. From, into or at a moving vehicle;
b. At any person; or
c. Into or at any structure;
3. Sell, store, possess, discharge, or use any fireworks at any time not permitted under this chapter;
4. Use fireworks in any area that constitutes a severe fire threat based on the vegetative or other conditions during the current fire season as
determined by the Fire Chief, provided that notice of such areas is given in advance.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 230/503
3309.17 Liability With Parents Or Guardians. The parents, guardian or other persons having custody or control of minor shall be liable for damage
caused by the use of fireworks by the minor.
3309.18 Records To Be Kept. Each permittee shall be required to retain at the licensed premises while said premises are open, and at his principal
place of business for a year thereafter, copies of all invoices, receipts and orders evidencing the source from which he acquired the fireworks which
he handled.
3309.19 Compliance With Applicable Law. It shall be the duty of every person issued a fireworks permit to comply with all applicable provisions of the
Idaho State Fireworks Act and the Boise City Code, including this chapter. A conviction or violation of the aforesaid Idaho State Fireworks Act or any
of the provisions of this chapter by the permittee, or by any of its agents, employees, or officers shall constitute a cause, in and of itself, to deny any
subsequent application for a permit.
3309.29 Violations And Penalty.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to violate any of the provisions of this chapter of the Boise City Code, and any violation
thereof shall constitute an infraction and shall be punishable by a fine of one hundred dollars ($100.00) excluding court costs and fees. An
infraction is a civil public offense, not constituting a crime. There is no right to a trial by jury of a citation or complaint for an infraction and such
trials shall be held before the court without a jury. A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or which a violation occurs or
continues.
B. A second and any subsequent conviction of any violation of any of the provisions of this chapter of the Boise City Code within five (5) years shall
constitute a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or by imprisonment for not more than thirty (30)
days, or by both such fine and imprisonment.
C. Fireworks being used in violation of this chapter shall be confiscated by law enforcement or by the Boise City Fire Department.
(1952 Code § 7-01-62; amd. 2019 Code)
Amendment Adding Chapter 46 Of The IFC
5-12-62: AMENDMENT ADDING CHAPTER 46, FOOTHILLS:
Add chapter 46 entitled Foothills to read as follows:
4601 Scope. The requirements of this article shall be specifically applicable to the area of Boise City herein defined as the foothills. The Boise
Foothills shall also be subject to all other provisions of this chapter and title 1, chapter 10, article E, title 2, chapter 3, and title 7, chapter 7, article A
of the Boise City Code.
4602 Definitions.
4602.1 The foothills are defined as that area of the Boise Foothills which fall into the following boundary:
An area bordered on the north and east by the City boundary and on the south and west by the center of Hill Road, beginning on Hill Road at the
western most City boundary, following the center of the following streets: Hill Road easterly to N. 13th Street; N. 13th Street southerly to Heron;
Heron easterly to N. 9th Street; N. 9th Street southerly to Lemp; Lemp easterly to N. 8th Street; N. 8th Street southerly to Ridenbaugh;
Ridenbaugh easterly to N. 7th Street; N. 7th Street southerly to Alturus; Alturus easterly to N. 5th Street; N. 5th Street southerly to Sherman;
Sherman easterly to North Sky; North Sky southerly to Ada; Ada westerly to N. 4th Street; N. 4th Street southerly to Resseguie Street; Resseguie
Street westerly to N. 4th Street; N. 4th Street southerly to Union; Union Street westerly to N. 6th Street; N. 6th Street southerly to Fort Street; Fort
Street southerly to Robbins Road; Robbins Road easterly to Collins Road; Collins Road southerly to Garrison Road; Garrison Road easterly to
Scout Lane; Scout Lane southerly to Mountain Cove; Mountain Cove southerly to Reserve; Reserve easterly to Avenue H; then the south and west
border shall be the north and east curbs of the following streets: Avenue H southerly to Logan; Logan easterly to Floral; Floral easterly to Krall;
Krall easterly to Walnut; Walnut southerly to East Franklin; East Franklin easterly to Coston; Coston easterly to Hillview; Hillview easterly to Bacon;
Bacon southerly to Warm Springs; and Warm Springs easterly to the east City Boundary.
It is intended that as the City annexes land to the north and east that the definition of the foothills be automatically modified to include lands that
are generally north and west of Warm Springs Avenue. Further, as the City annexes land to the north and west that the definition of the foothills be
automatically modified to include lands that are generally north and west of Hill Road.
4603 Not Used.
4604 Roof Covering. It shall be unlawful for any person to install, cause to install, or use other than Class A roof covering materials as defined in the
Building Code Standard 15-2 (test standard for determining the fire retardancy of roof covering materials), on all new buildings constructed and to
existing buildings when fifty percent (50%) or more of the roof is replaced or recovered.
4605 Defensible Space. All structures for which the application for a building permit is filed after the date of adoption of this ordinance shall have a
minimum defensible space as approved by the Code official consistent with the standard set forth in the National Fire Protection Association
Standard 299 (protection of life and property from wildfire); or the International Fire Code Institute (IFCI) Wildland Urban Interface Code, as adopted
by reference in this Code.
4606 Appeals. Any and all appeals of the definition of Class A roof covering materials shall be to the building official who shall convene the Boise
City Building Code Board of Appeals to hear such appeal.
Any and all appeals of defensible space, or any other provisions of this Code shall be to the Fire Marshal of the Fire Department who shall
convene the Fire Department Fire Code Board of Appeals to hear such appeal.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 231/503
4607 Fireworks And Open Flame. It shall be unlawful for any person to use any fireworks, either "dangerous" or nonaerial common fireworks in the
area defined by this Code as "the foothills". It shall also be unlawful for any person to ignite or cause to be ignited any open flame in the area defined
by this Code as the foothills.
(1952 Code § 7-01-63)
Amendment Adding Chapter 47 Of The IFC
5-12-63: AMENDMENT ADDING CHAPTER 47, CHILD CARE FACILITIES EXISTING PRIOR TO JANUARY 1, 2003:
Add chapter 47, Child Care Facilities Existing Prior to January 1, 2003, to read as follows:
4701 Scope. All owners and operators of child care facilities that were licensed and approved in accordance with the requirements of this chapter
(formerly BCC 7-04) prior to January 1, 2003, shall be allowed to continue to comply with the requirements of this chapter. Other requirements of the
Uniform Fire Code, the Uniform Building Code, and the Boise City Code which are not mentioned in this chapter also apply to the extent such
regulations are not in conflict with the requirements in this chapter. Existing facilities remain under these provisions until the facility is closed for more
than six (6) months, and thereafter has to be relicensed. A sale to new owners or operators does not impose IFC rules.
4702 Definitions. For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words, and derivations thereof, shall have the meaning given herein.
The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
Basement. Basement is any floor level below the first story in a building, except that a floor level in a building having only one floor level shall be
classified as a basement unless such floor level qualifies as a first story as defined herein.
Child Care Facility. Unless exempt under title 3, chapter 6 of the Boise City Code, any home or place where nonmedical care, protection, and
supervision is regularly provided to children under thirteen (13) years of age, for periods less than twenty four (24) hours per day. There are three
(3) types of child care facilities:
1. Family Child Care Home. A child care facility which provides care for six (6) or fewer children in a residential building commonly referred to as
"in the home".
2. Group Child Care Home. A child care facility which provides care for seven (7) to twelve (12) children in a residential building commonly
referred to as "in the home".
3. Commercial Child Care Center: A child care facility which provides care for more than twelve (12) children or uses a nonresidential building.
Grade (Adjacent Ground Elevation). Is the lowest point of elevation of the finished surface of the ground, paving or sidewalk within the area
between the building and the property line or, when the property line is more than five feet (5') from the building, between the building and a line
five feet (5') from the building.
Occupant Load. Prior to May, 1, 1994, the occupant load shall be determined by dividing all usable floor space utilized for child care purposes by
thirty five (35). The resulting number shall be the number of children that the facility may be licensed for. After May 1, 1994 occupant load for new
facilities shall not be less than thirty five (35) square feet of usable floor space per person included in the calculation.
Note: After May 1, 1994, this is intended to include all persons present, regardless of the relationship to the caregiver.
Story. That portion of a building included between the upper surface of any floor and the upper surface of the floor next above, except that the
topmost story shall be that portion of a building included between the upper surface of the topmost floor and the ceiling or roof above. If the
finished floor level directly above a usable or unused under floor space is more than six feet (6') above grade as defined herein for more than fifty
percent (50%) of the total perimeter or is more than twelve feet (12') above grade as defined herein at any point, such usable or unused under
floor space shall be considered as a story.
Story, First. The lowest story in a building which qualifies as a story, as defined herein, except that a floor level in a building having only one floor
level shall be classified as a first story, provided such floor level is not more than four feet (4') below grade, as defined herein, for more than fifty
percent (50%) of the total perimeter, or not more than eight feet (8') below grade, as defined herein, at any point.
Uniform Building Code. Unless an edition is specifically mentioned, any reference to the Uniform Building Code herein shall be to the edition as
adopted and amended when the original license was issued.
Uniform Fire Code. Unless an edition is specifically mentioned, any reference to the Uniform Fire Code herein shall be to the edition as adopted
and amended when the original license was issued.
Usable Floor Space. Usable floor space shall include all floor area exclusive of kitchens, closets, utility rooms, furnace rooms, storage rooms, or
any other area not normally occupied by children.
4703 Access. Every child care facility shall be accessible to Fire Department apparatus by way of access roadways which comply with IFC Appendix
D.
4704 Address Identification. Approved numbers or addresses shall be placed on all child care facilities in such a position as to be plainly visible and
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 232/503
legible from the street or road fronting the property. Said numbers shall contrast with their background and be a minimum of four inches (4") high.
4705 Alarm System.
A. An approved fire alarm system shall be provided in child care centers with an occupant load of fifty (50) or more persons. In child care facilities
provided with an automatic sprinkler or detection system, the operation of such systems shall include an alarm mounted on the exterior of the
building.
B. When serving more than one hundred (100) sprinklers, automatic sprinkler systems shall be supervised by an approved central, proprietary or
remote station service or a local alarm which will give an audible signal at a constantly attended location.
C. Fire alarm systems shall meet the approval of the Fire Department as to installation and location and shall be subject to such periodic tests as
required by the Fire Marshal. Plans and specifications shall be submitted to the Fire Department for review approval prior to installation. Design
and installation shall be in accordance with the adopted codes in effect at the time of installation.
4706 Allowable Areas For Child Care.
A. In family child care homes, group child care homes and child care centers, child care rooms shall not be located above the first story.
Exception To A: In buildings equipped with an automatic sprinkler system throughout, rooms used for child care purposes may be located on the
second story, provided there are at least two (2) exits directly to the exterior for the exclusive use of such occupancies.
B. Children shall not be cared for in areas more than one floor level below ground level.
1. Basements in family child care homes, group child care homes and child care centers shall conform to the provisions of the Uniform Building
Code sections 802(c), 3303 and 3318 (1991 edition).
2. An automatic sprinkler system shall be installed in basement in family child care homes, group child care homes and child care centers when
the basement is larger than one thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet in floor area and used for child care purposes.
4707 Commercial Cooking. Provisions of the Uniform Fire Code shall be complied with when an operator of a child care facility prepares food that
produces grease laden vapors in normal cooking operations.
4708 Doors.
A. Swing And Operating Force. Exit doors shall swing in the direction of exit travel when serving a child care center with an occupant load of fifty
(50) or more. The force required to open a side swinging exit door in a child care facility shall not exceed thirty (30) pounds applied at the latch
side.
B. Exit Doors. Exit doors in child care centers shall be so marked that they are readily distinguishable from the adjacent construction.
C. Type Of Lock Or Latch. Exit doors in child care centers shall be able to be opened from the inside without the use of a key or any special
knowledge or effort. Manually operated edge or surface mounted flush bolts and surface bolts are prohibited. The unlatching of any door shall not
require more than one operation.
D. Sliding Doors. Sliding doors in child care centers shall not be used as required exits serving an area having an occupant load of more than ten
(10).
E. Closet Doors. Every closet door latch shall be such that children can open the door from inside the closet.
F. Bathroom Doors. Every bathroom door lock shall be designed to permit opening of the locked door from the outside in an emergency. The
opening device shall be readily accessible to the staff.
G. Landings At Door. Landings in child care centers shall have a width not less than the width of the stairway or the width of the door, whichever is
greater. Doors in the fully open position shall not reduce a required dimension by more than seven inches (7"). When a landing serves an occupant
load of fifty (50) or more, doors in any position shall not reduce the landing dimension to less than one-half (1/2) its required width. Landings shall
have a length measured in the direction of travel of not less than forty four inches (44").
4709 Emergency Lighting. In child care facilities with an occupant load of less than fifty (50), at least one flashlight shall be immediately available for
each staff person. Emergency lighting in child care centers where the occupant load is fifty (50) or more shall be provided in the following areas:
A. In all interior stairs and corridors.
B. In all portions of buildings that are interior or windowless.
Exception To B:
1. Administrative areas.
2. Mechanical rooms and storage areas.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 233/503
Emergency lighting shall meet at least the following specifications:
A. Emergency lighting facilities shall be arranged to maintain not less than one foot-candle power throughout the means of egress for a period of
one and one-half (11/2) hours in the event of failure of the normal lighting system.
B. Emergency lighting shall be so arranged as to provide the required illumination automatically in the event of any interruption of normal power,
such as any failure of public utility or other outside electrical power supply, opening of a circuit breaker or fuse, or any manual act(s), including
accidental opening of a switch controlling normal lighting facilities.
4710 Exits Required. Exits for child care facilities shall conform to the provisions of the Uniform Building Code sections 3303 and 3318 (1991
edition).
Exception:
1. In a family child care home or a group child care home, a sliding door is acceptable as a second exit if there also exists an entry/exit door
meeting all Uniform Building Code requirements for private dwellings in the facility.
2. In a family child care home or a group child care home, exiting through the kitchen area is allowed as a second exit if there is another exit which
meets Uniform Building Code requirements.
Note: A second exit is required for family child care homes, group child care homes and child care centers.
4711 Portable Fire Extinguishers.
A. A minimum of one 2A-10BC portable fire extinguisher shall be provided on each floor of child care facility buildings. Travel distance to portable
fire extinguishers shall not exceed seventy five feet (75').
B. Portable fire extinguisher placement. Portable fire extinguishers in child care centers shall be mounted in plain view or placed in a cabinet
clearly marked "Fire Extinguisher". Required portable fire extinguishers shall be mounted with the bottom of the extinguisher not less than four
inches (4") from the floor or the top of the extinguisher not higher than sixty inches (60") from the floor.
4712 Floor Plan. A floor plan shall be submitted to the Fire Department through the City Clerk's Office when application for a license to operate a
child care facility is made. The floor plan shall indicate dimensions of all areas to be utilized for child care purposes.
4713 Occupant Load. The occupant load of child care facilities shall not be less than thirty five (35) square feet of usable floor space per occupant.
Note: This is intended to include all occupants present, regardless of relationship to caregiver.
4714 Smoke Alarms.
A. Smoke Alarms. Single and multiple-station smoke alarms shall be installed in all child care facilities in accordance with the requirements of this
section. Except as otherwise specified herein, the requirements of the Uniform Fire Code and the Uniform Building Code for single and multiplestation
smoke alarms shall apply.
Single and multiple-station smoke alarms shall be installed in each story of a child care facility. In buildings with upper floors or basements,
detectors shall be placed in each story at the top and bottom of the stairways and at no greater spacing than thirty feet (30') on center throughout
the corridors of all floors. Single and multiple-station smoke alarms shall also be installed in each lounge, in recreation rooms, and in sleeping
rooms.
Exceptions To A:
1. Facilities housing only clients six (6) years of age or older, if no sleeping facilities are provided.
2. Facilities housed in only one room.
B. In family child care homes and group child care homes at least one smoke alarm per building shall be powered by house AC electrical current.
The AC powered alarm shall also have a battery. Additional required smoke alarms may be powered by batteries alone.
Exception To B: Family child care homes and group child care homes in existence before the adoption of this chapter may use battery powered
smoke alarms in all required areas.
4715 Receptacle Covers. In all child care facilities, receptacle covers shall be provided on all electrical outlets not in immediate use.
4716 Inspection And Tests Of Fire Protection Equipment.
A. The operator of a child care facility is responsible for maintaining in working order all required fire and life safety equipment, systems and
facilities. A record of all required inspections, tests and repairs shall be kept on the premises available for inspection by the City Clerk, or the Fire
Chief, or a person designated by the Fire Chief.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 234/503
B. The following inspections or tests are required to be conducted or caused to be conducted monthly by the operator of a child care facility where
such equipment is installed:
1. Manual fire alarm system test.
2. Testing of all battery operated and all hard wired smoke alarms.
3. Visual inspection of all portable fire extinguishers.
4. Inspection of emergency lighting.
C. The following items are required to be completed or caused to be completed at an interval not exceeding six (6) months by the operator of a
child care facility where such equipment is installed:
1. Replacement of the batteries in all battery operated smoke alarms with fresh, fully charged batteries.
2. Replacement of the batteries in all flashlights using replaceable battery cells with fresh, fully charged batteries.
D. Fire extinguishing systems installed in commercial cooking equipment hoods and ducts shall be serviced at least every six (6) months or after
activation of the system by an individual or company qualified to inspect said systems.
E. Portable fire extinguishers shall be inspected annually in accordance with National Fire Protection Association Standard 10 by an individual or
company qualified to inspect and service portable fire extinguishers.
F. Hydrostatic testing of portable fire extinguishers shall be performed at the intervals required by National Fire Protection Association Standard 10.
Exception To F And G: Extinguishers having nonrefillable, disposable containers are exempt.
Note: A sample record keeping document for items B and C above will be made available for child care operators at the City Clerk's Office. The
required service tags for items D, E and F above will suffice for the recordkeeping purposes of item A above.
4717 Inspection. To ensure that facilities are in compliance with the requirements of this chapter, child care facility premises shall be inspected as
often as is necessary. The City Clerk or a person designated by the City Clerk shall inspect a family or group child care home before granting a
license to operate a child care facility, and the Fire Chief or a person designated by the Fire Chief shall inspect all child care centers.
(1952 Code § 7-01-64; amd. 2019 Code)
Amendment Adding Chapter 48 Of The IFC
5-12-64: AMENDMENT ADDING CHAPTER 48, CHILD CARE FACILITIES COMING INTO EXISTENCE AFTER JANUARY 1,
2003:
Add chapter 48:
4801 Scope. All owners and operators of child care facilities that were licensed and approved in accordance with the requirements of this chapter
after January 1, 2003 shall comply with the Boise City Fire Department requirements for child care facilities hereinafter stated in this chapter. Other
regulations of the International Fire Code, the International Building Code, and the Boise City Code which are not mentioned in this chapter also
apply to the extent that such regulations are not in conflict with the requirements in this chapter.
4802 Definitions. For the purposes of this article the following terms, phrases, words, and derivations thereof shall have the meaning given herein.
The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
4802.1 Basement. A basement is any floor level below the first story in a building, except that a floor level in a building having only one floor level
shall be classified as a basement unless such floor qualifies as a first story as defined herein.
4802.2 Child Care Facility. Unless exempt under title 3, chapter 6 of the Boise City Code, a child care facility is any home or place where nonmedical
care, protection, and supervision, is regularly provided to children under thirteen (13) years of age for periods less than twenty four (24) hours per
day. There are three (3) types of child care facilities:
1. Family child care home is a child care facility which provides care for six (6) or fewer children of any age in a residential building governed by
the International Residential Code as set forth in IBC section 101.2. New family child care homes are regulated by this chapter and the
requirements of the International Residential Code in so far as that Code is either specifically referenced in this chapter; and/or is not specifically
superseded or exempted in this chapter.
2. Group child care home is a child care facility which provides care for seven (7) to twelve (12) children of any age in a residential building
governed by the International Residential Code as set forth in IBC section 101.2. New group child care homes are regulated by this chapter and
the requirements of the International Residential Code in so far as that Code is either specifically referenced in this chapter; and/or is not
specifically superseded or exempted in this chapter.
3. Commercial child care center is a child care facility which provides care for more than twelve (12) children, or which is in a building which is not
governed by the International Residential Code as set forth in IBC section 101.2. Further, the requirements of the International Building Code and
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 235/503
the International Fire Code shall also apply.
4802.3 Grade. Adjacent ground elevation is the lowest point of elevation of the finished surface of the ground, paving, or sidewalk within the area
between the building and the property line or, when the property line is more than five feet (5') from the building, between the building and a line five
feet (5') from the building.
4802.4 Occupant Load. Occupant load for new family child care homes and new group child care homes shall not be less than thirty five (35) square
feet of useable floor space per person included in the calculation. All persons, regardless of their relationship to the caregiver shall be included in the
occupant load.
4802.5 Story. A story is that portion of a building between the upper surface of any floor and the upper surface of the floor above, except that the
topmost story shall be that portion of a building included between the upper surface of the topmost floor and the ceiling or roof above. If the finished
floor level directly above a useable or unused under floor space is more than six feet (6') above grade for more than fifty percent (50%) of the total
perimeter or is more than twelve feet (12') above grade at any point, such useable or unused under floor space shall be considered a story.
4802.6 Story, First. The first story is the lowest story in a building which qualifies as a story. Except that a floor level in a building having only one
floor level shall be classified as a first story provided such floor level is not more than four feet (4') below grade for more than fifty percent (50%) of
the total perimeter, or not more than eight feet (8') below grade at any point.
4802.7 Usable Floor Space. Usable floor space shall include all floor area exclusive of kitchens, closets, utility rooms, furnace rooms, storage rooms,
or any other similar area not normally occupied by children.
4803 License And Inspection. To ensure that child care facilities are in compliance with the requirements of this chapter, each premises shall be
inspected as often as is deemed necessary by the Code official or the City Clerk. The City Clerk shall inspect, or cause to be inspected, all family or
group child care homes before granting a license to operate a child care facility. The Code official shall inspect, or shall cause to have inspected, all
other child care facilities before the City Clerk grants a license to operate a childcare facility. See Boise City Code title 3, chapter 6 for license
requirements.
4804 Areas Allowed To Be Used For Child Care In Family And Group Child Care Homes.
4804.1 Rooms used for child care purposes shall not be located above the first story.
Exception to 4804.1: In buildings equipped throughout with an approved automatic fire sprinkler system, rooms used for child care purposes may
be located on the second story provided there are at least two (2) exits for the exclusive use of the child care occupancy directly to the exterior.
4804.2 Rooms used for child care purposes shall not be more than one floor level below ground level.
4804.3 Basements over one thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet used for child care purposes shall be provided with an approved automatic
fire sprinkler system.
4804.4 Basements used for child care purposes shall conform to the provisions of the International Building Code.
4805 Doors. In addition to those requirements for doors and landings contained in the International Building Code, the International Fire Code, and
Boise City Code, as adopted and amended by Boise City, the requirements in this section shall also apply to family and group child care homes.
4805.1 Closet Doors. Every closet door latch shall be such that children can open the door from inside the closet.
4805.2 Bathroom Doors. Every bathroom door lock shall permit opening of the locked door from outside in the event of an emergency. The opening
device shall be readily accessible to the staff.
4806 Emergency Lighting.
4806.1 In child care facilities with an occupant load of less than fifty (50), at least one flashlight shall be immediately available for each member of
the staff.
4806.2 In addition to the requirements of the International Building Code, the International Fire Code, and Boise City Code as adopted and amended
by Boise City, child care facilities with an occupant load of fifty (50) or more shall be provided with emergency lighting in the following areas:
1. In all interior stairs and corridors.
2. In all portions of buildings that are interior or windowless.
Exception: Administrative areas, mechanical rooms, and storage rooms.
4807 Required Exits. Exits in child care facilities shall conform to the requirements of the International Building Code, the International Fire Code,
and Boise City Code as adopted and amended by Boise City.
Exception 1: In family child care homes and group child care homes, a sliding door is acceptable as a second exit provided there also exists a
primary entry/exit door meeting the International Building Code and International Fire Code requirements for dwellings.
Exception 2: In family child care homes and group child care homes, occupants may exit through a kitchen as a second means of egress provided
there also exists a primary entry/exit door meeting the International Building Code and International Fire Code requirements for dwellings.
4808 Floor Plan. A floor plan shall be submitted to the Fire Department through the City Clerk's Office at time of license application.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 236/503
4809 Receptacle Covers. All electrical outlets not in immediate use shall be provided with receptacle covers.
4810 Smoke Alarms. Single and multiple station smoke alarms shall be installed in all child care facilities in accordance with the requirements of this
section. Except as otherwise specified herein, the requirements of the International Fire Code and the International Building Code for single and
multiple station smoke alarms shall apply.
4810.1 Single and multiple station smoke alarms shall be installed in each story of a child care facility. In buildings with upper floors or basements,
detectors shall be placed in each story at the top and bottom of the stairways and at no greater spacing than thirty feet (30') on center throughout the
corridors of all floors. Single and multiple station smoke alarms shall also be installed in each lounge, recreation room, and sleeping room.
Exception 1: Facilities housing only clients six (6) years of age or older, if no sleeping facilities are provided.
Exception 2: Facilities housed in only one room.
4810.1.1 At least one smoke alarm required by this section shall be powered by an unswitched house AC electrical circuit. The AC powered smoke
alarm shall also contain a battery. Additional smoke alarms may be powered by batteries alone.
4811 Inspection, Testing, And Maintenance Of Fire Protection Equipment. Child care facility operators shall maintain in working order all fire and life
safety equipment, systems, and facilities. In addition to the requirements of the International Fire Code, inspections, tests and maintenance shall be
performed in accordance with this section.
4811.1 Where such equipment is installed, child care facility operators shall cause to have the following items done on a monthly interval:
1. Testing of all battery operated and all hard wired smoke alarms for sound output by activating the test button. Where a test button is not
provided, tests shall be conducted in accordance with manufacturers' guidelines.
2. A visual inspection of all fire extinguishers. This inspection shall include, but not be limited to, ensuring that units are fully charged, sealed,
mounted in their proper location, and free of obvious damage.
3. Testing battery and lamp operation of emergency lighting by activating the test switch or button.
4811.2 Where such equipment is provided, child care facility operators shall cause to have the following items done at an interval not to exceed six
(6) months:
1. Replace the batteries of all battery powered smoke alarms with fresh, fully charged batteries.
2. Replace the batteries in all flashlights equipped with replaceable batteries with fresh, fully charged batteries.
4811.3 A record of all required inspections, tests, and repairs shall be kept on the premises and be made available at the time of license inspection.
A sample recordkeeping form for items 4811.1 and 4811.2 is available from the City Clerk. The inspection tag and/or the inspection report from a
contractor qualified to perform such work shall satisfy the requirements of this section for fire extinguishers, fire alarm systems, and cooking hood
extinguishing systems inspections, tests, and service.
4811.4 Fire extinguishers, fire alarm systems, and fire suppression systems shall all be inspected and maintained in accordance with the
requirements of the International Fire Code and the appropriate testing standard.
(1952 Code § 7-01-65)
Adoption And Amendments To Appendices Of The IFC
5-12-65: ADOPTION OF AND AMENDMENTS TO APPENDICES:
The following appendices of the International Fire Code, 2006 edition, are adopted and amended as follows:
1. Appendix A, Board of Appeals.
2. Appendix B, Fire Flow Requirements for Buildings.
3. Appendix C, Fire Hydrant Locations And Distributions.
4. Appendix D, Fire Apparatus Access Roads, with the following amendments:
D103.2 Add sentence at end as follows:
Nor shall access roadways exceed a two percent (2%) grade for the first eighty feet (80') at the grade transition. Turnarounds shall not exceed
two percent (2%) grade.
5. Appendix E, Hazard Categories.
6. Appendix F, Hazard Ranking.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 237/503
7. Appendix G, Cryogenic Fluids-Weight and Volume Equivalents.
(Ord. 16-17, 5-9-2017)
Amendment Adding Chapter 49 Of The IFC
5-12-66: AMENDMENT ADDING CHAPTER 49, WILDLAND URBAN INTERFACE CODE:
4901 Scope. Upon the effective date hereof, the requirements contained herein shall be applicable to all new structures and additions constructed within
the Boise City Wildland Urban Interface (WUI) Zones as illustrated by Attachment 69-A. Design and construction of new structures within the WUI Zones
shall comply with all the provisions of this chapter along with the current provisions contained within the International Fire Code, International Building
Code and the Boise City Development Code as adopted and periodically amended or updated. Should any provision within this chapter conflict with any
other provision of the Boise City Code, then this chapter shall control.
4902 Wildland Urban Interface Zone Designations. The Wildland Urban Interface Zones shall be depicted on maps available for inspection by the public.
Zone A shall depict foothills fire hazard areas. Zone B shall depict valley, desert and other occluded fire hazard areas. These maps are generalized
depictions of the WUI Zone boundaries. The Code official shall have final authority in determining which lots shall be included within each zone. The
reevaluation and review of the WUI Zones shall be conducted every three (3) years or more frequently as deemed appropriate by the Boise City Council.
4903 Authority Of Code Official. The Chief of the Boise City Fire Department or his/her designee (hereinafter "Code official") is hereby authorized to
enforce the provisions of this Code. The Code official is empowered to render interpretations of this Code and to adopt policies and procedures in order to
effectuate the implementation and enforcement of the Code provisions contained herein. Such interpretations, policies and procedures shall be in
accordance with the intent and purpose of this chapter.
4904 Violation And Penalty.
A. Criminal Penalties. Any person, firm or corporation found guilty of violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and,
upon conviction, may be punished by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), by imprisonment for not more than one hundred
eighty (180) days, or by both. Each day, or any portion thereof, a violation of this chapter occurs or continues shall constitute a separate offense, and
upon conviction thereof may be punished as provided above.
B. Civil Penalties. Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this chapter may be assessed civil penalties in an amount of not more
than two hundred dollars ($200.00) for a first offense and not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each subsequent offense. Each day, or
any portion thereof, a violation of this chapter occurs or continues shall constitute a separate violation and a civil penalty may be assessed as
provided above. The notice of violation shall state what violation(s) has occurred and state when and to whom the civil penalty must be paid. Failure
to pay the assessed civil penalty may result in legal or other action by Boise City and the violator may incur reasonable collection costs.
4905 Appeal. Any person, firm or corporation aggrieved by any action or decision of the Code official arising out of the enforcement of this chapter may
appeal first to the Fire Code Board of Appeals, and then to the Boise City Council. Such appeal shall be made in writing and must be filed with the City
Clerk within ten (10) calendar days after the action or decision which is the subject of the appeal. This appeal provision does not apply to criminal
enforcement actions arising from the provisions of this Code.
4906 Special Building Construction Regulations. Buildings and structures in WUI Zones A and B shall be constructed in accordance with the International
Fire Code, International Building Code, the Boise City Code and this chapter.
Exceptions:
1. Detached accessory structures not exceeding two hundred (200) square feet in floor area.
2. In WUI Zone B, this chapter, with exception of roof coverings and repair of roof coverings, is only applicable to outer perimeter structures abutting
undeveloped property.
4907 General. Buildings and structures hereafter constructed, modified or relocated into or within the WUI Zones shall meet the construction requirements
in accordance with this chapter. Fire resistant construction shall be in accordance with sections 4908 through 4918.
4908 Roof Covering. Roofs shall have a Class A roof covering or a Class A roof assembly. For roof coverings where the profile allows a space between
the roof covering and roof decking, the space at the eave ends shall be firestopped to preclude entry of flames or embers, or have one layer of seventy
two (72) pound mineral surfaced, nonperforated cap sheathing complying with ASTM D 3909 installed over the combustible decking.
4909 Replacement Or Repair Of Roof Coverings. Roof coverings on buildings or structures in existence prior to the adoption of this Code that are replaced
or have fifty percent (50%) or more replaced in a twelve (12) month period shall be replaced with a roof covering as required for new construction based
on the type of ignition resistant construction specified in accordance with section 4908.
4910 Replacement Or Repair Of Siding. Siding coverings on buildings or structures in existence prior to the adoption of this Code that are replaced or
have fifty percent (50%) or more replaced in a twelve (12) month period shall be replaced with a siding material as required for new construction based on
the type of ignition resistant construction specified in accordance with section 4912.
4911 Protection Of Eaves. Eaves and soffits shall be protected on the exposed underside by materials approved for a minimum of one hour fire resistance
rated construction, one inch (1") (25.4 mm) nominal fire retardant treated lumber or three-fourths inch (3/4") (19 mm) nominal fire retardant treated
plywood, identified for exterior use and meeting the requirements of section 2303.2 of the International Building Code. Fascias are required and shall be
protected on the backside by materials approved for a minimum of one hour fire resistance rated construction or two inch (2") (51 mm) nominal dimension
lumber.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 238/503
4912 Exterior Walls. Exterior walls of buildings or structures shall be constructed with one of the following methods:
1. Materials approved for a minimum of one hour fire resistance rated construction on the exterior side.
2. Approved noncombustible materials.
3. Heavy timber or log wall construction.
4. Fire retardant treated wood on the exterior side. The fire retardant treated wood shall be labeled for exterior use and meet the requirements of
section 2303.2 of the International Building Code.
Such material shall extend from the top of the foundation to the underside of the roof sheathing.
4913 Unenclosed Underfloor Protection. Buildings or structures shall have all underfloor areas enclosed to the ground with exterior walls in accordance
with section 4912.
Exception: Complete enclosure may be omitted where the underside of all exposed floors and all exposed structural columns, beams and supporting
walls are protected as required for exterior one hour fire resistance rated construction or heavy timber construction.
4914 Appendages And Projections. Unenclosed accessory structures attached to buildings with habitable spaces and projections, such as decks, shall be
a minimum of one hour fire resistance rated construction, heavy timber construction or constructed of approved noncombustible materials or fire retardant
treated wood identified for exterior use and meeting the requirements of section 2303.2 of the International Building Code.
When the attached structure is located and constructed so that the structure or any portion thereof projects over a descending slope surface greater
than ten percent (10%), the area below the structure shall have all underfloor areas enclosed to within six inches (6") (152 mm) of the ground, with
exterior wall construction in accordance with section 4912.
4915 Exterior Glazing. Exterior windows, window walls, glazed doors, windows within exterior doors and skylights shall be tempered glass, multilayered
glazed panels, glass block or have a fire protection rating of not less than twenty (20) minutes.
4916 Exterior Doors. Exterior doors shall be approved noncombustible construction, solid core wood not less than one and three-fourths inches (13/4")
thick (45 mm), or have a fire protection rating of not less than twenty (20) minutes. Windows within doors and glazed doors shall be in accordance with
section 4915.
Exception: Vehicle access doors.
4917 Vents. Attic ventilation openings, foundation or underfloor vents, or other ventilation openings in vertical exterior walls and vents through roofs shall
not exceed one hundred forty four (144) square inches (0.0929 m2) each. Such vents shall be covered with noncombustible corrosion resistant mesh with
openings not to exceed one-fourth inch (1/4") (6.4 mm), or shall be designed and approved to prevent flame or ember penetration into the structure.
Attic ventilation openings shall not be located in soffits, in eave overhangs, between rafters at eaves, or in other overhang areas. Gable end and
dormer vents shall be located at least ten feet (10') (3048 mm) from property lines. Underfloor ventilation openings shall be located as close to grade
as practical.
4918 Detached Accessory Structures. Detached accessory structures greater than two hundred (200) square feet in floor area located less than fifty feet
(50') (15 240 mm) from a building containing habitable space shall have exterior walls constructed with materials approved for a minimum of one hour fire
resistance rated construction, heavy timber, log wall construction or constructed with approved noncombustible materials on the exterior side.
When the detached structure is located and constructed so that the structure or any portion thereof projects over a descending slope surface greater
than ten percent (10%), the area below the structure shall have all underfloor areas enclosed to within six inches (6") (152 mm) of the ground, with
exterior wall construction in accordance with section 4912 or underfloor protection in accordance with section 4913.
Exception: The enclosure may be omitted where the underside of all exposed floors and all exposed structural columns, beams and supporting walls
are protected as required for exterior one hour fire resistance rated construction or heavy timber construction. See section 4908 for roof
requirements.
4919 Emergency Vehicle Access And Fire Sprinkler System Requirements. Emergency vehicle access shall be provided in all designated WUI Zones in
accordance with the provisions of the International Fire Code, the Boise City Code and this chapter.
Any multi-family dwelling with more than two (2) dwelling units located within WUI Zone A shall require approved fire sprinkler systems in dwelling
structures if:
(a) The development is located more than one and one-half (11/2) miles from any fire station, or
(b) The development is located in an area where the response time from the nearest fire station is greater than four (4) minutes.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 239/503
Fire sprinkler systems shall be required in WUI Zone A for all new multi-family dwellings with more than two (2) dwelling units with a floor area in
excess of five thousand (5,000) gross square feet.
4920 Defensible Space.
Definition - Defensible Space: An area either natural or manmade, where material capable of allowing a fire to spread unchecked has been treated,
cleared or modified to slow the rate and intensity of an advancing wildfire and to create an area for fire suppression operations to occur.
All newly constructed structures in Zones A and B shall be protected by a thirty foot (30') defensible space from undeveloped land. Defensible space
may consist of the following, in order of preferred priority: a) a modified fire resistive perimeter area within a common lot or roadway outside of
individual lots lines; and/or b) a fire resistive landscaped yard area within individual lot lines in accordance with National Fire Protection Association
(NFPA) Standard 1144, "Standard for Reducing Structure Ignition Hazards From Wildland Fire". The maximum building envelope for development
sites must be identified on each parcel to provide adequate access around the structure for fire protection, and to provide a fire break.
The defensible space shall include a landscape plan and a description of maintenance responsibilities for the property providing the defensible
space. Those responsibilities shall be included in the CC&Rs for the property.
Landscaping within defensible space shall have the characteristics of fire resistive vegetation described as follows:
1. Growth with little or no accumulation of dead vegetation (either on the ground or standing upright).
2. Nonresinous plants (willow, poplar or tulip trees).
3. Low volume of total vegetation (for example, a grass area as opposed to a forest or shrub covered land).
4. Plants with high live fuel moisture (plants that contain a large amount of water in comparison to their dry weight).
5. Drought tolerant plants (deeply rooted plants with thick, heavy leaves).
6. Stands without ladder fuels (plants without small, fine branches and limbs between the ground and the canopy of overtopping shrubs and trees).
7. Plants requiring little maintenance (slow growing plants that, when maintained, require little care).
8. Plants with woody stems and branches that require prolonged heating to ignite.
In Zone B, when there is an approved phasing plan for expansion of the project beyond the perimeter currently being constructed, the temporary
creation of one hundred feet (100') of defensible space may be substituted for the nonroofing related standards of this Code, subject to approval of
the Fire official.
4921 Fire Safety Plan. Prior to preliminary plat approval, a fire safety plan shall be filed with any subdivision or planned unit development within Zone A or
with any perimeter subdivision or planned unit development in Zone B that requires compliance with this Code. The plan shall be based on a site specific
wildfire risk assessment that includes considerations of project size, location, topography, aspect, flammable vegetation, climatic conditions and fire
history. The plan shall address water supply, access, building ignition and fire resistive factors, fire protection systems and equipment, defensible space
and vegetation management. Developments with less than five (5) dwellings are not required to file a fire safety plan.
The fire safety plan shall be retained by the Code official.
(1952 Code § 7-01-69)
Chapter 13
PUBLIC SAFETY EMERGENCY RESPONSE COST RECOVERY
5-13-1: PURPOSE AND AUTHORITY TO ESTABLISH A MITIGATION COSTS SCHEDULE AND RECOVERY PROCEDURE:
A. Purpose: In order to protect the City from extraordinary expenses resulting from the utilization of City resources in response to certain public safety or
fire emergency incidents, this chapter authorizes the imposition of charges to recover costs incurred by the City in responding to such incidents.
B. Mitigation Cost Schedule: The City shall initiate mitigation costs for the delivery of emergency services by the Fire Department for personnel, supplies
and equipment to the scene of emergency incidents by authorizing the recovery of such costs in the amounts set forth in a duly adopted fee schedule,
as amended, for the services of the Fire Department. The rate of mitigation costs shall be based on actual average costs of the services and that which
is usual, customary and reasonable (UCR) as shown in a duly adopted fee schedule or related Fire Department document.
C. Charges And Billing: The mitigation cost shall be charged or billed to the responsible party. In some circumstances, a responsible party may be charged
or billed directly or, where representing an add-on cost of the claim for damages of the vehicles, property and/or injuries, mitigation costs may be
charged or billed to the insurance coverage of the owner of a vehicle, owner of property, or other responsible parties where an authorized agent of the
City, County, State, or a court of competent jurisdiction, determines the owner, owners and/or responsible party or parties is/are at fault, allocating all or
some of such costs jointly and severally.
D. Necessary Rules, Regulations: The Fire Department may promulgate rules or regulations and from time to time may amend, revoke or add to rules and
regulations, not inconsistent with this chapter, as the Fire Chief may deem necessary or expedient in respect to billing for these mitigation costs or the
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 240/503
collection thereof. (Ord. 9-17, 3-21-2017)
5-13-2: DEFINITIONS:
Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meanings of the terms used in this chapter shall be as follows:
FALSE ALARM: Any automated or manual device designed to request or summon emergency assistance which, in the absence of an actual need for
emergency assistance, the device is activated maliciously or due to a malfunctioning or improperly maintained or operated fire alarm or fire protection
system. The determination that there was no actual need for emergency assistance shall be made by the most senior ranking fire personnel responding to
a false alarm. A false alarm shall not be deemed to have occurred if caused by: a) an act of God, such as earthquakes, tornadoes, floods or other
extraordinary circumstances determined by the Fire Chief, or his or her respective designee, to be clearly beyond the control of the alarm user; b) it
originates from a motor vehicle alarm system; or c) has not occurred more frequently than once per address in a calendar year, whether it is a residence or
a commercial building, unless the false alarm response is the result of a failure to notify the system monitoring company or Ada County Dispatch when
working on or testing fire protection equipment system, or when work in any capacity in a building which shall constitute a false alarm in the first instance.
HAZARDOUS MATERIAL INCIDENT OR EMERGENCY: Any occurrence, incident, activity, accident or emergency where a release of hazardous
materials occurs or is reasonably imminent and where the Fire Chief or his or her designee has so declared such activity, accident or emergency a
hazardous material incident or emergency.
HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCE OR HAZARDOUS MATERIALS: Those elements, substances, wastes or byproducts, including, but not limited to, combustible
liquid, flammable gas, explosives, flammables, poisons, organic peroxides, oxidizers, pyrophorics, unstable reactive matter, water reactive matter,
petroleum products, antifreeze, polychlorinated biphenyls and asbestos, which are potentially harmful to the environment or human or animal life, or which
pose an unreasonable or imminent risk to life, health or safety of persons or property, or to the ecological balance of the environment as determined by the
Fire Chief or the senior fire official of the City in charge at the scene. The term includes any "hazardous substance" defined in the Hazardous Substance
Emergency Response Act as set forth in Idaho Code title 39, chapter 71.
ILLEGAL FIRE: A fire caused or set or determined to have been caused or set in violation of a Federal, State or local law, and shall include an arson fire
and a fire set in violation of a "no burning" ban or order. An illegal fire does not include an accidental and unintended fire or fire caused by an act of God,
i.e., a lightning storm, but does include a fire resulting from grossly negligent or reckless conduct, as well as an intentionally set fire.
MITIGATION COSTS: Those costs for services incurred by the City in connection with a response to a public safety or fire emergency incident, including,
but not limited to, the actual labor and material costs of the City (including, without limitation, employee wages, fringe benefits, administrative overhead,
costs of equipment, costs of equipment operation, costs of materials, costs of transportation, costs of material disposal and costs of contracted labor)
whether or not the services are provided by the City or by a third party on behalf of the City; service charges and interest; attorney fees, litigation costs,
and any costs, charges, fines or penalties to the City imposed by any court or State or Federal governmental entities.
PUBLIC SAFETY OR FIRE EMERGENCY INCIDENT: A. A false alarm;
B. A hazardous material incident or emergency;
C. An illegal fire;
D. Rescue emergency; or
E. A utility line failure.
RELEASE: Any actual or threatened spilling, leaking, pumping, pouring, emitting, emptying, discharging, injecting, leaching, dumping or disposing into the
environment, including, but not limited to, the air, soil, groundwater and surface water.
RESCUE EMERGENCY: A public safety or fire emergency incident resulting from a person or persons knowingly entering any area that has been closed
to the public by competent authority for any reason, where such closure is posted by sign, barricade or other device, and an emergency response, such as
a search for or rescue of such person, results from the entry. For example, a rescue emergency would arise when the Boise River is flowing at a cubic foot
per second level such that an authorized State, County or City official declares the river closed to floating or rafting, the entry points are signed or
otherwise posted as closed, and a person ignores the closure and a search and/or rescue results from the entry.
RESPONSIBLE: To cause, either through negligence, recklessness or intentional act, a public safety or fire emergency incident.
RESPONSIBLE PARTY: Any individual, firm, corporation, association, partnership, commercial entity, consortium, joint venture, government entity or any
other legal entity responsible for a public safety or fire emergency incident, or any owner, tenant, occupant or party in control of real and personal property
from which, onto which, or related to which there is a public safety or fire emergency incident and, unless not permitted by law, includes their heirs,
estates, successors and assigns.
UTILITY LINE FAILURE: The interruption of any transmission or service line, cable, conduit, pipeline, wire or the like used to provide, collect or transport
electricity, natural gas, communication or electronic signals (including, but not limited to, telephone, computer, cable television and stereo signals or
electronic impulses), water or sewage. (Ord. 9-17, 3-21-2017)
5-13-3: BILLING AND COLLECTION OF MITIGATION COSTS:
A. Authority To Recover: The City may recover all mitigation costs in connection with a public safety or fire emergency incident from any or all responsible
parties jointly or severally. The Fire Chief or Police Chief, or his or her designee, shall, consistent with a duly adopted fee schedule, as amended,
determine the total mitigation costs and shall, in consultation with other City personnel involved in responding to a public safety or fire emergency
incident, determine whether to assess any, all or part of such costs against any of the responsible parties.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 241/503
B. Factors Considered: In making such determination, the following nonexclusive list of factors shall be considered, although no single factor or absence
thereof will be determinative of whether mitigation costs are assessable:
1. The total mitigation costs;
2. The risk the public safety or fire emergency incident imposed on the City, its residents and their property;
3. Whether there was any injury or damage to person or property;
4. Whether the public safety or fire emergency incident required evacuation;
5. The extent the public safety or fire emergency incident required an unusual or extraordinary use of City personnel and equipment; and
6. Whether there was any damage to the environment.
C. Allocation: After consideration of the factors in subsection B of this section, the Fire Chief or Police Chief, or his or her designee, may allocate mitigation
costs among and between any responsible parties, including allocating all or some of such costs jointly and severally against more than one
responsible party, regardless of whether a responsible party has any other legal liability.
D. Nonassessment: If the Fire Chief or Police Chief, or his or her designee, determines not to assess all or a portion of mitigation costs against a
responsible party, such determination shall not in any way limit, reduce or extinguish the liability of the responsible party to any other parties.
E. Invoice; Failure To Pay: After determining to assess mitigation costs against a responsible party, the Fire Chief or Police Chief, or his or her designee,
shall mail an itemized invoice to the responsible party at its last known address. Such invoice shall be due and payable within thirty (30) days of the
date of mailing and, as permitted by Idaho Code section 28-22-104(1) or other applicable section, any amounts unpaid after such date shall bear a late
payment fee equal to one percent (1%) per month, or fraction thereof, that the amount due and any previously imposed late payment fee remains
unpaid. If a responsible party shall appeal the claim of mitigation costs by requesting a hearing, such costs, if upheld, in whole or in part, shall be due
and payable thirty (30) days from the date of determination of the appeal and any late payment fees shall apply thereafter. (Ord. 9-17, 3-21-2017)
5-13-4: HEARING PROCEDURE:
A. Request For Modification: Any responsible party who receives an invoice for mitigation costs shall have an opportunity to meet with the Fire Chief,
Police Chief or his or her designee to request a modification of mitigation costs. The responsible party shall request in writing such meeting within ten
(10) calendar days of the date of mailing of the invoice assessing the mitigation costs. If after meeting with the Fire Chief, Police Chief or his or her
designee, the responsible party is still not satisfied, he or she may request a hearing before a Hearing Officer. Any responsible party aggrieved by the
determination of being a responsible party and/or the assessment of mitigation costs who desires a hearing before a Hearing Officer must first meet
with the Fire Chief, Police Chief or his or her designee as provided above before requesting a hearing on the same.
B. Appeal: Any responsible party aggrieved by the determination of being a responsible party and/or the assessment of mitigation costs who desires a
hearing shall submit the request in writing to the City Clerk within thirty (30) calendar days of the date of mailing of the itemized invoice. Upon receipt of
the written request for hearing, the City Clerk shall, within ten (10) days or sooner if deemed necessary by the Fire Chief or Police Chief, present the
itemized invoice of mitigation costs to the Hearing Officer for consideration. The Hearing Officer shall fix a time, date and place for hearing the
determination of being a responsible party and/or the assessment of mitigation costs and/or any protests or objections thereto. Appointment of and
proceedings before the Hearing Officer shall be consistent with title 3, chapter 1, article A of this Code to the extent such are not inconsistent with this
chapter. A request for hearing shall not prevent the City from pursuing the claim by means of other lawful process, including small claims or civil
litigation. (1952 Code § 7-02-04)
5-13-5: OTHER REMEDIES:
In addition to the remedy set forth above, the City shall be entitled to pursue any other remedy or may institute any appropriate action or proceeding in a
court of competent jurisdiction as permitted by law to collect mitigation costs from a responsible party. (1952 Code § 7-02-05)
5-13-6: NO LIMITATION OF LIABILITY:
The recovery of mitigation costs pursuant hereto does not limit the liability of a responsible party under applicable local, State or Federal law. (1952 Code
§ 7-02-06)
Chapter 14
LOST, ABANDONED, UNCLAIMED PERSONAL PROPERTY
5-14-1: CUSTODY OF LOST OR ABANDONED PERSONAL PROPERTY:
Any lost or abandoned personal property found upon property belonging to the City shall be transferred to the Police Department for retention and
disposition. The Police Department shall retain all lost, abandoned and/or other unclaimed property in accordance with Idaho Code section 55-403. (Ord.
26-14, 7-15-2014)
5-14-2: DISPOSITION OF LOST, ABANDONED AND/OR UNCLAIMED PERSONAL PROPERTY:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 242/503
All lost, abandoned and/or otherwise unclaimed personal property within the possession of the Police Department shall be disposed of in accordance with
Idaho Code section 55-403. (Ord. 26-14, 7-15-2014)
Chapter 15
DISCRIMINATION PROHIBITED
5-15-1: PURPOSE AND DECLARATION OF POLICY:
A. Purpose: In order to ensure that all persons, regardless of sexual orientation and/or gender identity/expression enjoy the full benefits of citizenship and
are afforded equal opportunities for employment, housing, commercial property and the use of public accommodations, the City has determined that
discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation and gender identity/expression must be addressed, and appropriate legislation be enacted.
B. Rights Of Individuals: It is hereby declared that every individual in the City has the right to work and earn wages through gainful employment, has the
right to seek housing, and has the right to enjoy public accommodation and hospitality.
C. Public Policy: It is hereby declared to be the public policy of the City to foster the employment of all individuals in accordance with their abilities. Every
individual has the right to work and earn wages through gainful employment. Discriminatory employment practices are detrimental because they
impede the social and economic progress of a City by preventing all of the City citizens from contributing to the cultural, spiritual, social and commercial
life of the community. The contributions of all the citizens of the City are essential to the City's growth, vitality and prosperity.
D. Intent: It is the intent of this chapter that all persons be treated fairly and equally, and it is the express intent of this chapter to guarantee fair and equal
treatment under the law to all people in the City. The denial of fair and equal treatment under the law due to sexual orientation or gender
identity/expression is detrimental to the health, safety and welfare of the City citizens and damages a City's economic well being.
E. Police Power: This chapter shall be deemed an exercise of the police power of the City for the protection of the public welfare, prosperity, health and
peace of the City, its residents and the community.
F. Supplement To Law: The prohibitions against discriminatory acts as provided for in this chapter are intended to supplement State and Federal Civil
Rights Law prohibiting discrimination in the areas of employment, public accommodations and housing. For complaints alleging discrimination on a
basis proscribed under State or Federal law (e.g., race, color, religious creed, ancestry, age, sex, national origin and/or disability) the complainant is
advised of his or her right to file a report alleging a violation of Idaho Code section 18-7301 et seq., and/or his or her right to file a complaint with the
Idaho Commission on Human Rights and/or the Federal Equal Employment Opportunity Commission pursuant to title VII of the Civil Rights Act of
1964, as amended, the Fair Housing Act of 1968, as amended, or the Americans With Disabilities Act of 1990, as amended. (1952 Code § 6-02-01)
5-15-2: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and phrases used in this chapter shall have the following meanings unless a different meaning clearly appears from the context:
DENY: Any act which, directly or indirectly, by any person or his agent or employee, results or is intended or calculated to result in whole or in part in any
discrimination, distinction, restriction or unequal treatment or representation. It also includes, but is not limited to, the requiring of a person to pay a larger
sum than the uniform rates charged other persons, or the refusing or withholding from persons the admission, patronage, custom, presence, frequenting,
dwelling, staying or lodging in any place of public resort, accommodation, assemblage or amusement, except for conditions and limitations established by
law and applicable alike to all persons, regardless of sexual orientation and/or gender identity/expression.
DISCRIMINATION: Any direct or indirect exclusion, distinction, segregation, limitation, refusal, denial or other differentiation in the treatment of a person
because of a person's actual or perceived sexual orientation or gender identity or because of a person's association with any such person. Discrimination
shall not be interpreted to require or to grant or accord any preferential treatment to any person because of that person's sexual orientation or gender
identity/expression.
FULL ENJOYMENT OF: To include, but not be limited to, the right to use, rent or purchase real property, any service, commodity or article of personal
property offered or sold by any person or establishment to the public, and the admission of any person to accommodations, advantages, facilities or
privileges of any place of public resort, accommodation, assemblage or amusement, without acts directly or indirectly causing persons of any particular
sexual orientation and/or gender identity/expression to be treated as not welcome, accepted, desired or solicited.
GENDER EXPRESSION/IDENTITY: A gender related identity, appearance, expression or behavior of an individual, regardless of a person's assigned sex
at birth.
HOUSING ACCOMMODATION: A building or portion of a building, whether constructed or to be constructed, that is or will be used as the home, domicile,
residence or sleeping quarters of its occupants.
PERSON: Any natural person, firm, corporation, partnership or other organization, association or group of persons however arranged.
PLACE OF PUBLIC RESORT, ACCOMMODATION, ASSEMBLAGE OR AMUSEMENT: Includes, but is not limited to, any public place, licensed or
unlicensed, kept for gain, hire or reward, or where charges are made for admission, service, occupancy or use of any property or facilities, whether
conducted for the entertainment, housing or lodging of transient guests, or for the benefit, use or accommodation of those seeking health, recreation or
rest, or for the sale of goods and merchandise, or for the rendering of personal services, or for public conveyance or transportation on land, water or in the
air, including the stations and terminals thereof, and the garaging of vehicles, or where food or beverages of any kind are sold for consumption on the
premises, or where public amusement, entertainment, sports or recreation of any kind is offered, with or without charge, or where medical service or care
is made available, or where the public gathers, congregates, or assembles for amusement, recreation or public purposes, or public halls, public elevators
and public washrooms of buildings and structures occupied by two (2) or more tenants, or by the owner and one or more tenants, or any public library or
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 243/503
any educational institution wholly or partially supported by public funds, or schools of special instruction, or nursery schools, or daycare centers or
children's camps; nothing herein contained shall be construed to include, or apply to, any institute, bona fide club or place of accommodation, which is by
its nature distinctly private; provided, that where public use is permitted, that use shall be covered by this section; nor shall anything herein contained apply
to any educational facility operated or maintained by a bona fide religious or sectarian institution.
SEXUAL ORIENTATION: Actual or perceived homosexuality, heterosexuality and/or bisexuality. (1952 Code § 6-02-02)
5-15-3: PROHIBITED DISCRIMINATORY ACTS:
The following acts are prohibited and shall constitute a misdemeanor:
A. To deny to any other person because of sexual orientation and/or gender identity/expression the right to work: 1) by failing or refusing to hire; 2) by
discharging; 3) by barring from employment; 4) by discriminating against such person in compensation or in other terms or conditions of employment;
or 5) otherwise discriminating against an individual with respect to employment.
B. To deny to or to discriminate against any person because of sexual orientation and/or gender identity/expression the full enjoyment of any of the
accommodations, advantages, facilities or privileges of any place of public resort, accommodation, assemblage or amusement.
C. To deny to or discriminate against any other person because of sexual orientation and/or gender identity/expression in the sale, purchase, lease or
rental of any housing accommodation, or to otherwise discriminate in the terms and conditions, maintenance, improvement or repair of any housing
accommodation. (1952 Code § 6-02-03)
5-15-4: EXCEPTIONS:
A. Notwithstanding any other provision herein, nothing in this chapter is intended to alter or abridge other rights, protections or privileges secured under
State and/or Federal law. This chapter shall be construed and applied in a manner consistent with First Amendment jurisprudence regarding the
freedom of speech and exercise of religion.
B. This chapter does not apply to:
1. Religious corporations, associations, educational institutions or societies.
2. An expressive association whose employment of a person protected by this chapter would significantly burden the association's rights of expressive
association under Boy Scouts of America v. Dale, 530 U.S. 640 (2000).
3. The United States government, any of its departments or agencies or any corporation wholly owned by it; or the State of Idaho or any of its
departments, agencies or political subdivisions, except the City.
C. This chapter shall not apply: 1) to the rental of a housing accommodation in a building which contains housing accommodations for not more than two
(2) families living independently of each other, if the lessor or a member of his family resides in one of the housing accommodations; or 2) to the rental
of a room or rooms in a single-family residential housing accommodation by an individual if he or a member of his family resides therein. (1952 Code
§ 6-02-04)
5-15-5: UNLAWFUL INTIMIDATION, RETALIATION AND INTERFERENCE:
It shall be unlawful for any person to discriminate against, harass, threaten, harm, damage or otherwise penalize another person for opposing an unlawful
practice, for filing a complaint, for assisting or participating in any manner in the investigation, or in mediation concerning this chapter. (1952 Code § 6-02-
06)
5-15-6: PRIVATE RIGHT OF ACTION:
There is no private right of action that is created by this chapter or money damages available to any person based on this chapter. (1952 Code § 6-02-07)
5-15-7: PENALTY:
A. Misdemeanor: A violation of this chapter is a misdemeanor, subject to penalty as provided in section 1-4-1 of this Code.
B. Reduction To Infraction: A Prosecutor may reduce the violation to an infraction, punishable as provided in section 1-4-2 of this Code, if the defendant
engages in corrective actions, which may include, but are not limited to, the following: sensitivity training for the defendant and/or the defendant's
employees; the defendant's agreement to adopt and pursue a policy of nondiscrimination in its practices; and the defendant's agreement to not engage
in discriminatory practices in the future. The charge shall be filed as a misdemeanor violation and may only be reduced upon motion of the prosecutor.
There shall be no right to a trial by jury for an infraction citation or complaint. (1952 Code § 6-02-05; amd. 2019 Code)
C. Time Limit To File Complaint: A complaint filed under the provisions of this chapter must be filed within one hundred eighty (180) days of the alleged
discriminatory conduct.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 244/503
D. False Reporting: Any person who falsely reports a violation of this chapter may be charged with the crime of false reporting, section 5-2-9 of this title.
(1952 Code § 6-02-05)
Title 6
MOTOR VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
Chapter 1
DEFINITIONS
6-1-1: DEFINITIONS OF WORDS AND PHRASES:
Except for the following words or terms used in this title, which shall have the meanings herein ascribed to them, all words and phrases used in this title
shall be as defined in Idaho Code title 49, chapter 1:
ABANDONED OR UNIDENTIFIED VEHICLE: Any vehicle which is left, or which is parked upon any street, alley or public property for a period of seventy
two (72) hours or longer within any part of the City, and the owner of which vehicle cannot be found, located or determined, or the owner of which refuses
to remove such vehicle from such street, alley or public property upon notice, oral or written, given by the Judge or by any member of the Police
Department.
ALLEY OR ALLEYWAY: A minor public way providing secondary access at back or side of property for vehicle or pedestrian traffic.
AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLE: Vehicles operated by any fire department, fire district, nonprofit fire protection corporation, publicly or privately
owned fire protection or fire patrol organization, police, sheriff or other law enforcement agency, ambulances and like emergency vehicles authorized by
the Chief of Police to mount and use a siren and light of the type approved by the Chief of Police.
BICYCLE: Every vehicle having two (2) tandem wheels or two (2) parallel wheels and one forward wheel, any two (2) of which are not less than twelve
inches (12") in diameter, propelled exclusively by human power upon which any person may ride, except scooters and similar devices.
BOISE RIVER GREENBELT (GREENBELT): The paved or improved pathways and connecting trails and the twenty feet (20') of publicly owned
greenspace on either side, including picnic tables, barbeque stands, benches and other improvements and fixtures connecting Boise Parks along the
Boise River and maintained by the Department of Parks and Recreation and delineated generally in the publication known as the map, and/or specifically
in the Inventory of Park Properties at the Office of the Director. Greenbelt does not include any private property which may lie within twenty feet (20') of the
paved or improved pathways and connecting trails.
CITY: Boise City, Idaho, or the area within the City limits of Boise City, Idaho.
COMMERCIAL VEHICLE: Every vehicle designed, maintained or used primarily for the transportation of property or persons for hire, compensation or
profit.
COMMON AREAS: The areas of a facility, complex, apartment unit, hotel, motel or the like that are open either to the general public or persons with the
permission of the owner or agent of the owner of the area. This definition would include, but not be limited to, the following: swimming pools, restaurants,
patios, hot tubs, saunas, laundry rooms, meeting rooms, lobbies, lounges, bars and other areas within the facility that are either constructed or designed
for use in this manner.
CROSSWALK: A. That part of a street included within the connections of the lateral lines of the sidewalks at intersections measured from the curbs or in
the absence of curbs from the edges of the traversable roadway.
B. Any portion of a street distinctly indicated for pedestrian crossing by lines or other traffic control devices.
DRIVER: Every person who drives or is in actual physical control of a vehicle.
ELECTRIC POWER-ASSISTED BICYCLE (E-BIKE): A vehicle having two (2) tandem wheels or two (2) parallel wheels and one forward wheel, any two
(2) of which are not less than twelve inches (12") in diameter, that is designed to be operated by human power with the assistance of an electric motor that
has a power output of not more than seven hundred fifty (750) watts that: a) is incapable of propelling the vehicle at a speed of more than twenty (20)
miles per hour; and b) disengages or ceases to function when the vehicle's brakes are applied. An E-bike is not a motor vehicle for purposes of this
chapter.
EMERGENCY: Any occurrence or set of circumstances involving actual or imminent physical trauma or property damage demanding immediate attention.
EMERGENCY VEHICLE: A motor vehicle belonging to a fire department, firefighting association or fire district, an ambulance, or a motor vehicle
belonging to a Federal, State, County or Municipal law enforcement agency.
GROSS WEIGHT: The weight of a vehicle without load, plus the weight of any load thereon.
INTERSECTION: The area embraced within the prolongation or connection of the lateral curb lines, or, if none, then the lateral boundary lines of the
intersecting highways or the area within which vehicles traveling on different highways may come into conflict.
LANED ROADWAY: A roadway which is divided into two (2) or more clearly marked lanes for vehicular traffic.
LOADING ZONE: A space or section of a street which has been set aside for the exclusive purpose of loading and unloading persons, supplies and
merchandise.
LOUD AMPLIFICATION DEVICE: Any equipment designed or used for sound production, reproduction or amplification, including, but not limited to, any
radio, television, phonograph, musical instrument, stereo, tape player, compact disc player, loud speaker, public address (PA) system, sound amplifier or
comparable sound broadcasting device.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 245/503
MOTOR VEHICLE: The term "motor vehicle" shall mean every vehicle which is self-propelled, and for the purpose of titling and registration meets Federal
Motor Vehicle Safety Standards as defined in section 49-107, Idaho Code. Motor vehicle does not include vehicles moved solely by human power, electric
personal assistive mobility devices and motorized wheelchairs or other such vehicles that are specifically exempt from titling or registration requirements
under title 49, Idaho Code.
MOTORCYCLE: Every motor vehicle having a saddle for the use of the rider and designed to travel on not more than three (3) wheels in contact with the
ground, but excluding a tractor.
OFFICIAL TIME STANDARD: The standard time or daylight saving time as may be in current use in the City.
OFFICIAL TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES: All signs, signals, markings and devices placed or erected by authority of the City or official having jurisdiction,
for the purpose of regulating, warning or guiding traffic.
OPERATOR: Every person who shall operate a vehicle upon any street in the City.
PARK OR PARKING: The standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, other than temporarily for the purpose of and while actively engaged in loading
or unloading goods, merchandise or persons.
PARKING METER ZONE: Any and all areas or streets established by authority of the City or official having jurisdiction, as those areas within or upon
which the parking of vehicles shall be controlled and inspected with the aid of timing devices and meters.
PARKING METERS: A mechanical device which is so adjusted as to show the length of time of parking upon the streets in the City.
PARKING SERVICES OFFICE OR PARKING SERVICES: Refers to a division of the Boise City Department of Finance and Administration, or such other
administrative arrangements as the City may establish, and all designated representatives thereof.
PEDESTRIAN: Any person who is afoot, including infants in a carriage being pushed or pulled by a person.
PERSON: Any individual, association, organization or entity having a legally recognized existence, whether public or private.
PLACE OF RESIDENCE: Any building or portion thereof adapted or used and intended for the overnight accommodation of persons. In the event the
building is used for multiple individual units (i.e., apartment, condominium, hotel, motel, duplex, triplex, etc.) each individual unit shall be considered a
separate residence for the purposes of this title.
PLAINLY AUDIBLE: Sound for which the information content is clearly communicated to the listener, including, but not limited to, understandable spoken
speech, comprehension of whether a voice is raised or normal, comprehensible musical rhythms, melody or instrumentation, and the source of which is
identifiable to the listener.
PRIVATE ROAD DRIVEWAY: Every way or place in private ownership and used for vehicular travel only by the owner or by those having express or
implied permission from the owner.
RESTRICTED PARKING DISTRICT: The area of the City so designated for the purpose of providing special regulations for the control of parking and
traffic.
RIGHT-OF-WAY: The right of one vehicle or pedestrian to proceed in a lawful manner in preference to another vehicle or pedestrian approaching under
such circumstances of direction, speed and proximity as to give rise to danger of collision unless one grants precedence to the other.
ROADWAY: That portion of a highway improved, designed or ordinarily used for vehicular travel, exclusive of the berm or shoulder. In the event a highway
includes two (2) or more separate roadways, the word "roadway" applies separately but not to all such roadways collectively.
SCHOOL BUS: Every motor vehicle owned by a public or governmental agency and operated for the transportation of children to or from school, or
privately owned and operated for compensation for the transportation of children to and from school.
SIDEWALK: That portion of a street between the curb lines, or lateral lines defining vehicular traffic and the adjacent property lines, and intended for
pedestrian travel.
STAND OR STANDING: The halting of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, other than for the purpose of and while actually engaged in receiving or
discharging passengers.
STOLEN VEHICLE: Any vehicle, whether located upon private or public property, which the Police Department has reasonable grounds to believe that the
owner thereof has been, or is, unlawfully deprived of possession.
STOP: The complete cessation of movement.
STOP OR STOPPING: When prohibited, shall mean any halting, even momentarily if a vehicle, whether occupied or not, except when necessary to avoid
conflict with or in compliance with the direction of a police officer or traffic control sign or signal.
STREET OR HIGHWAY: Shall be used interchangeably and shall mean the entire width between the boundary lines of every way or place open to the
public, as a matter of right for public vehicular travel, but not to include alleys.
THROUGH STREET: Every street or portion thereof on which vehicular traffic is given preferential right-of-way, and at the entrances to which vehicular
traffic from intersecting roadways is required by law to yield the right-of-way to vehicles on such through streets.
TRAFFIC: Either persons or vehicles while using any street or sidewalk for the purpose of travel.
TRAFFIC CONTROL SIGNAL: Any device, whether manually, electrically or mechanically operated, by which traffic is alternately directed to stop and
proceed.
TRUCK: A. General: Every motor vehicle designed, used or maintained primarily for the transportation of property;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 246/503
B. Pickup Truck: Every motor vehicle eight thousand (8,000) pounds gross weight or less which is designed, used or maintained primarily for the
transportation of property;
C. Truck Camper: Any structure designed, used or maintained primarily to be loaded on or affixed to a motor vehicle to provide a mobile dwelling,
sleeping place, office or commercial space; and
D. Truck Tractor: Every motor vehicle designed and used primarily for drawing other vehicles.
VEHICLE: Every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a street, except devices used exclusively
upon stationary rails or tracks.
WRECKED VEHICLE: Any vehicle damaged by accidental or other cause and left unattended upon any street alley or public property. (1952 Code § 10-
01-01; amd. Ord. 35-17, 12-19-2017; 2019 Code)
Chapter 2
ADMINISTRATION
6-2-1: DUTY OF POLICE DEPARTMENT:
It shall be the duty of the Police Department, in addition to all other duties outlined in this Code, to enforce the street traffic regulations of this City and all of
the State vehicle laws applicable to street traffic in this City, to make arrests for traffic violations, to investigate accidents and to cooperate with the City
Traffic Engineer and other officers of the City in the administration of the traffic laws and in developing ways and means to improve traffic conditions, and
to carry out those duties specially imposed upon said department by the traffic provisions of this title. (1952 Code § 10-02-01; amd. 2019 Code)
Chapter 3
ENFORCEMENT
6-3-1: AUTHORITY OF POLICE AND FIRE DEPARTMENT OFFICIALS:
Officers of the Police Department or such officers as are assigned by the Chief of Police are hereby authorized to direct all traffic by voice, hand or signal
in conformance with traffic laws; provided, that in the event of fire or other emergency or to expedite traffic or to safeguard pedestrians, officers of the
Police Department may direct traffic as conditions may require notwithstanding the provisions of the traffic laws. Officers of the Fire Department, when at
the scene of a fire, may direct or assist the police in directing traffic thereat or in the immediate vicinity. (1952 Code § 10-03-01)
6-3-2: PERSONS PROPELLING PUSH CARTS OR RIDING ANIMALS TO OBEY TRAFFIC REGULATIONS:
Every person propelling any push cart or riding an animal upon a roadway, and every person driving any animal drawn vehicle, shall be subject to the
provisions of this title, except those which by their very nature can have no application. (1952 Code § 10-03-03)
6-3-3: AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLES:
A. Privileges: The driver of an authorized emergency vehicle, when responding to an emergency call or when in the pursuit of an actual or suspected
violator of law or when responding to but not upon returning from such alarm, may exercise the privileges set forth in this section, subject to the
conditions herein stated, as well as those privileges set forth in Idaho Code. (1952 Code § 10-03-04; amd. 2019 Code)
B. Authority Of Driver: The driver of an authorized emergency vehicle may:
1. Park or stand, irrespective of the provisions of this title;
2. Proceed past a red or stop signal or stop sign, but only after slowing down as may be necessary for safe operation;
3. Exceed the maximum speed limits;
4. Disregard regulations governing direction of the movement of traffic or turning in specified directions.
C. Applicability Of Exemptions: The exemptions herein granted to an authorized emergency vehicle shall apply only when the driver of any said vehicle
while in motion sounds audible signals by bell, siren or exhaust whistle, as may be reasonably necessary, and when the vehicle is equipped with at
least one lighted lamp displaying a red or blue light visible under normal atmospheric conditions from a distance of five hundred feet (500') to the front
of such vehicle, except that an authorized emergency vehicle operated as police vehicle need not be equipped with or display a red or blue light visible
from in front of the vehicle.
D. Regard For Safety Required: The foregoing provisions shall not relieve the driver of any authorized emergency vehicle from the duty to drive with due
regard for the safety of all persons, nor shall such provisions protect the driver from the consequences of his reckless disregard for the safety of others.
(1952 Code § 10-03-04)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 247/503
6-3-4: COMPLIANCE WITH STATE LAW:
The provisions of Idaho Code title 49, chapter 10, and all amendments thereof, shall be applicable to and shall apply to this City, and it shall be unlawful
and punishable as herein provided to violate any provisions thereof within the corporate limits. (1952 Code § 10-03-11; amd. 2019 Code)
6-3-5: PENALTY:
Unless another penalty is specifically provided in this title or in any chapter thereof for the violation of any specific provision of a chapter of said title, any
person violating any of the provisions of, or doing any act forbidden by, or failing to perform any act required in this title, shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be subject to penalty as provided in section 1-4-1 of this Code. (1952 Code § 10-03-02; amd. 2019 Code)
Chapter 4
MISCELLANEOUS TRAFFIC RULES
6-4-1: INTERFERENCE WITH VEHICLES:
It shall be unlawful for any person, not the owner thereof, to tamper, meddle or interfere with any vehicle, or start or attempt to start the machinery thereof,
or puncture or otherwise mutilate the tires, scratch, mark or otherwise deface the body or apparatus thereof, or take or remove from the vehicle any part or
portion of the machinery, equipment or other portion thereof, or throw any stones, rock, glass or other missile at any vehicle, or the occupants thereof.
(1952 Code § 10-16-01)
6-4-2: TRAFFIC HAZARDS:
Any hedge, shrubbery, fence, wall or other sight obstruction of any nature, except buildings, and except trees, as defined by and conforming to title 7,
chapter 3 of this Code, over three feet (3') in height from the existing centerline road elevation, existing, growing, placed or installed within a "vision
triangle", the boundaries of the "vision triangle" being formed by measuring from the intersection of the edges of the roadway or the intersection of the
edge of the roadway and railroad and a railroad property line to points forty feet (40') along the edges of the roadways or the edge of the roadway and the
railroad property line and then connecting the two (2) points with a straight line, is hereby deemed to be a traffic hazard and is prohibited. It shall be
unlawful for either the owner or the person in possession of any premises to permit such traffic hazard to exist. (1952 Code § 10-16-02)
6-4-3: DRIVING ACROSS WET PAINTED TRAFFIC LINES:
It shall be unlawful to drive across any painted traffic control markings while the paint is still set and traffic cones indicating such are in place. (1952 Code
§ 10-16-03)
6-4-4: EMERGENCY TRAFFIC CONTROL PLAN:
In the event of an electrical power blackout and/or the malfunction of an individual or number of signalized intersections, traffic through the inoperative
signalized intersections shall perform as a four-way stop. (1952 Code § 10-16-04)
6-4-5: AIR COMPRESSION BRAKES PROHIBITED:
A. Use Of Air Compression Brakes Prohibited: The use of air compression brakes (also known as "jake brakes") by motor vehicles, as defined in section 6-
1-1 of this title, within the City limits is hereby prohibited and shall be unlawful, except under emergency circumstances where the use of air
compression brakes is necessary to prevent an accident or injury to persons or property.
B. Fire Vehicles Exempt: Motor vehicles owned and operated by a Fire Department are specifically exempted from the prohibitions of this section.
C. Penalty: Any person who violates any provision of this section shall be deemed guilty of an infraction and, upon judgment thereof, shall be subject to the
fixed penalty for moving traffic infractions set by the Idaho Infraction Rule 9(b)(5). (1952 Code § 10-22-01)
Chapter 5
TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES
6-5-1: PEDESTRIAN CONTROL SIGNALS:
Whenever special pedestrian control signals exhibiting a walking person, a flashing upraised hand or a steady upraised hand are in place, such signals
shall indicate as follows:
A. Walking Person: Pedestrians facing such signals may proceed across the roadway in the direction of the signal, but shall yield the right-of-way to
vehicles lawfully within the intersection at the time the signal is first shown.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 248/503
B. Flashing Upraised Hand: Pedestrians facing such signals may not enter the roadway in the direction of the indication, but any pedestrian who has
partially completed crossing at the time the signal displays shall proceed to a sidewalk or safety island.
C. Steady Upraised Hand: No pedestrian shall enter the roadway in the direction of such signal. (Ord. 32-13, 8-27-2013)
Chapter 6
SPEED REGULATIONS
6-6-1: STATE SPEED LAWS APPLICABLE:
The State traffic laws regulating the speed of vehicles shall be applicable upon all streets within this City, except as this chapter, as authorized by State
law, hereby declares and determines regulations shall be applicable upon specified streets or in certain areas, in which event it shall be unlawful for any
person to drive a vehicle at a speed in excess of any speed so declared in this chapter when signs are in place giving notice hereof. (1952 Code § 10-05-
01)
6-6-2: PRIMA FACIE SPEED LIMITS:
Except when a special hazard exists that requires lower speed for compliance with this chapter, the limits specified in this section or established as
hereinafter authorized shall be lawful speeds, and any speed in excess of the limits specified shall be prima facie evidence that such speed is not
reasonable or prudent, and that it is unlawful. (1952 Code § 10-05-03; amd. 2019 Code)
A. Ten (10) miles per hour in any alley.
B. Fifteen (15) miles per hour in any public park.
C. Twenty (20) miles per hour when passing any school building or when crossing any marked school zone, such zone to extend one hundred fifty feet
(150'), unless otherwise posted, in either direction from any marked school crossing when appropriate signs giving notice thereof are erected, and any
of the following exist:
1. A school speed limit sign with flashing lights attached and the words "when flashing" included and the lights are activated; or
2. A school speed limit sign with "when children are present" included thereon, and there is a child or children present.
a. "When children are present" shall be defined to mean whenever one or more children are on the roadway, sidewalk, pathway, road shoulder, in
front of school buildings, or on adjacent school grounds. This definition applies to children present on the same side of the street as the school
building, as well as across the street from the school building in any direction within the marked school zone, and is not restricted to school days or
hours.
3. A school speed limit sign with "7:00 A.M. to 4:30 P.M." included thereon.
4. On streets where the maximum speed limit is twenty (20) miles per hour, a school zone will be identified by a sign stating "school". (1952 Code § 10-
05-03)
D. Thirty (30) miles per hour upon through streets when "Stop" or "Yield" signs are in place. (1952 Code § 10-05-03; amd. 2019 Code)
E. Twenty (20) miles per hour upon all other streets in the City. (1952 Code § 10-05-03)
6-6-3: MINIMUM SPEED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a motor vehicle at such a slow speed as to impede or block the normal and reasonable movement of traffic at
the point of operation thereof, except when a reduced speed is necessary for safe operation or in compliance with any law, rule or regulation. (1952 Code
§ 10-05-05)
6-6-4: SPEEDING WITHIN SCHOOL ZONE:
No person shall operate a vehicle on a highway in a marked school zone in excess of the speed limit as established in subsection 6-6-2C of this chapter.
Any person that violates this section shall be assessed a penalty as provided in section 1-4-2 of this Code, excluding court costs and fees. An infraction is
a civil public offense, not constituting a crime, which is punishable only by a penalty and for which no period of incarceration may be imposed. There is no
right to a trial by jury of a citation or complaint for an infraction and such trials shall be held before the court without a jury. (1952 Code § 10-05-06)
Chapter 7
STOP AND YIELD INTERSECTIONS
6-7-1: STOP SIGNS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 249/503
A. Stop Required: Except when directed to proceed by a police officer or traffic control signal, every driver of a vehicle approaching a stop intersection
indicated by a stop sign shall stop:
1. At a clearly marked limit line, but if there is no limit line; then
2. Before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection, but if there is no crosswalk; then
3. At the point nearest the intersecting roadway where the driver has a view of approaching traffic on the intersecting roadway before entering such
roadway.
B. Yielding Right-Of-Way: After having stopped, the driver shall yield the right-of-way to any vehicle in the intersection or which is approaching on another
roadway so closely as to constitute an immediate hazard during the time when such driver is moving across or within the intersection or junction of
roadways. (1952 Code § 10-09-04)
6-7-2: YIELD SIGNS:
A. Requirements: The driver of a vehicle approaching a yield sign shall slow down to a speed reasonable for existing conditions and, if required for safety
to stop, shall stop at a clearly marked limit line, but if there is no limit line then before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection, but if
there is no crosswalk then at the point nearest the intersecting roadway where the driver has a view of approaching traffic on the intersecting roadway
before entering such roadway.
B. Yielding Right-Of-Way: After slowing or stopping, the driver shall yield the right-of-way to any vehicle in the intersection or approaching on another
street so closely as to constitute an immediate hazard during the time such driver is moving across or within the intersection; provided, however, that if
such a driver is involved in a collision with a vehicle in the intersection, after driving past a yield sign without stopping, such collision shall be deemed
prima facie evidence of his failure to yield. (1952 Code § 10-09-05)
6-7-3: EMERGING AND ENTERING ALLEY, DRIVEWAY OR BUILDING:
A. Yielding Right-Of-Way: The driver of a vehicle emerging from any alley, driveway or building onto any street shall stop such vehicle prior to driving upon
or onto the sidewalk or sidewalk area extending across such alleyway or driveway, and shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian or vehicle
approaching upon said street.
B. Driver Turning Left: The driver of a vehicle turning left entering an alley, driveway or building shall yield the right-of-way to any vehicle approaching from
the opposite direction which is so close as to constitute an immediate hazard. (1952 Code § 10-09-06)
Chapter 8
DRIVING RULES AND REGULATIONS
6-8-1: RIGHT-OF-WAY AT INTERSECTIONS:
A. Vehicle On Left To Yield Right-Of-Way: When two (2) vehicles enter or approach an unmarked or uncontrolled intersection from different streets at
approximately the same time, the driver of the vehicle on the left shall yield the right-of-way to the vehicle on the right, except that when two (2)
vehicles approach an unmarked or uncontrolled intersection where one highway ends when it meets a second highway not ending at that point of
convergence from different directions at approximately the same time, the driver of the vehicle on the highway ending at the intersection shall yield the
right-of-way to the other vehicle.
B. Vehicle Turning Left: The driver of any vehicle turning left at an intersection shall yield the right-of-way to any vehicle approaching from the opposite
direction which is in the intersection or so close thereto as to constitute a hazard.
C. Yield To Bicycle: The driver of a vehicle within an intersection intending to turn to the left shall yield the right-of-way to a bicycle approaching from the
opposite direction which is within the intersection or so close thereto as to constitute an immediate hazard.
D. Vehicle And Bicycle Traveling Same Direction: When a motor vehicle and a bicycle are traveling in the same direction on any highway, street or road,
the operator of the motor vehicle overtaking such bicycle traveling on the right side of the roadway shall not turn to the right in front of the bicycle at an
intersection, alley or driveway until such vehicle has overtaken the bicycle and has sufficient clearance to safely turn without requiring the bicyclist to
brake or take evasive action to avoid a collision with the vehicle. (1952 Code § 10-10-01)
6-8-2: RIGHT-OF-WAY FOR VEHICLES ENTERING ROADWAY AND LEAVING CURB:
The driver of any vehicle entering a street or highway at a point other than a street or highway intersection or entering traffic on a roadway from a parked
or angle parked position on such street or highway, shall look out for and yield the right-of-way to other vehicles on such roadway. (1952 Code § 10-10-02)
6-8-3: OPERATING ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLES IN CITY:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 250/503
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate an all-terrain vehicle (ATV) within the City limits on any public street or highway, including controlled access
highways, or upon any public property or private property open to the public, unless the vehicle is actively being used for snow removal purposes or for an
agricultural, horticultural, dairy or livestock growing or feeding purpose. All other uses are strictly prohibited and a driver cited under this section shall be
subject to an infraction violation, subject to penalty as provided in section 1-4-2 of this Code. (1952 Code § 10-10-10; amd. 2019 Code)
6-8-4: DRIVING OR PARKING ON SIDEWALKS OR PARKWAYS:
No vehicle shall drive or park upon any "sidewalk" or "parkway", as defined by section 7-3B-1 of this Code; provided, that vehicles may cross sidewalks or
parkways at authorized curb cuts and at alleys. (1952 Code § 10-10-12)
6-8-5: NEGLIGENT DRIVING:
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a motor vehicle in a negligent manner over and along the highways, streets or alleys of this City. For the
purpose of this section, to "operate in a negligent manner" shall be construed to mean the operation of a motor vehicle under any of the following
conditions:
A. Speed Contest: The engaging in any motor vehicle speed contest or exhibition of speed.
B. Excessive Acceleration: Excessive, unreasonable, rapid acceleration of a motor vehicle.
C. Less Than Full Control: The operation of a motor vehicle where the operator has less than full control of the speed and direction of movement of the
vehicle. The collision by a vehicle with any stationary object shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of this section. (1952 Code § 10-10-13)
6-8-6: HARASSMENT OF BICYCLISTS AND PEDESTRIANS PROHIBITED:
It shall be a misdemeanor, subject to penalty as provided in section 1-4-1 of this Code, for any person, maliciously and with the specific intent to intimidate
or harass or cause another person to crash, stumble or fall because that other person is walking along the roadway or operating a bicycle along the
roadway, to: (1952 Code § 10-10-14; amd. 2019 Code)
A. Threatening: Threaten, by word or act, to cause physical injury to the pedestrian or bicyclist; or
B. Throwing Object: Throw or otherwise expel any object at or in the direction of the pedestrian or bicyclist. (1952 Code § 10-10-14)
6-8-7: OPENING AND CLOSING VEHICLE DOORS:
No person shall open the door of a motor vehicle on the side available to moving traffic unless and until it is reasonably safe to do so, nor shall any person
leave a door open on the side of a motor vehicle available to moving traffic for a period of time longer than necessary to load or unload passengers. (1952
Code § 10-10-16)
6-8-8: OPERATING MOTORIZED VEHICLES ON BIKE LANES AND BIKE PATHS:
No person shall drive a motorized vehicle upon any officially marked bike lane, bike path, foot path or other separate right-of-way specifically set aside for
use by pedestrians or nonmotorized vehicles, except at an intersection or when entering or leaving a roadway at a driveway, private road or alley. Prior to
crossing a nonmotorized right-of-way, the motorist shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian or nonmotorized vehicle operating thereon. This section
shall not apply to authorized emergency vehicles meeting the conditions specified in Idaho Code section 49-123(2)(b) or section 6-1-1 of this title, or
authorized maintenance and construction vehicles while actually engaged in work upon a roadway or nonmotorized right-of-way. (1952 Code § 10-10-17)
6-8-9: USE OF PRIVATE PROPERTY AS PUBLIC ROADWAY OR THROUGHWAY STREET:
A. Prohibition: It shall be unlawful for the operator of any motor vehicle to drive upon or use any private driveway, private property or parking lot as a
throughway to bypass an intersection controlled by a stop sign or traffic control signal.
B. Prima Facie Evidence Of Violation: It shall be prima facie evidence of bypassing an intersection in violation of subsection A of this section for an
operator of a motor vehicle to enter private property from a highway and immediately thereafter exit private property without coming to a complete stop
before re-entering a highway.
C. Penalty: Any violation of subsection A of this section shall be an infraction with a fixed penalty for moving traffic infractions set by the Idaho Infraction
Rule 9(b)(5). (1952 Code § 10-10-18)
Chapter 9
TURNING MOVEMENTS
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 251/503
6-9-1: U-TURNS:
No U-turn, or turn reversing the direction of travel, shall be made at any location where "No U-Turn" signs are erected, nor at any intersection at which
there is a traffic signal, nor at any place other than at an intersection, nor unless there be sufficient space to make such turn without backing. (1952 Code
§ 10-13-04)
Chapter 10
PARKING
ARTICLE A. PARKING REGULATIONS
6-10A-1: LEGAL AUTHORITY:
Idaho Code sections 50-302, 50-314 and 49-208 authorize the City to regulate, limit and control traffic and parking within its boundaries. (Ord. 41-17, 12-
19-2017, eff. 2-1-2018)
6-10A-2: PURPOSE:
The purpose of the regulations and standards established within this article is to ensure adequate on-street parking is provided and maintained throughout
the City. These regulations are intended to relieve congestion, provide for the safe and orderly movement of traffic throughout the City, protect the integrity
of neighborhoods which are experiencing heavy concentrations of vehicles parking from persons coming from outside of these areas through the use of
residential and special parking districts permit systems, reduce air and noise pollution, promote business and industry through providing adequate parking,
and balance the needs of construction companies staging necessary vehicles, equipment and apparatus at construction sites with the needs of the general
public and business for the use of on-street parking spaces through a temporary use permit system. (Ord. 41-17, 12-19-2017, eff. 2-1-2018)
6-10A-3: SCOPE:
This article sets forth policies, standards, requirements and procedures applicable to standing, stopping and parking within the City, including, but not
limited to, temporary use parking permits, and residential and special parking district permits. (Ord. 57-15, 12-1-2015)
6-10A-4: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this article, the following terms, phrases, words, and derivations shall have the meanings given herein. When not inconsistent with the
context, words used in the present tense include the future tense, words in the plural number include the singular number, and words in the singular
number include the plural number. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory. Words used throughout this article, but not defined
herein, shall have their plain, ordinary, and common meaning. Words in any gender shall apply to the feminine, masculine and neuter genders.
ADA: All Federal Statutes and regulations pertaining to the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990, including, but not limited to, the ADA Amendments Act
of 2008 and all other amendments and implementing regulations thereto.
ACCESSIBLE PARKING SPACE: A parking space which is specifically marked and signed as reserved for a person with a disability who has and displays
an accessible parking placard or plates issued by the Idaho Department of Transportation pursuant to Idaho Code section 49-410.
ALLEY: A public way of limited use intended only to provide access to the rear or side of lots or buildings.
BIKE LANE: The portion of a roadway designated for preferential or exclusive use by bicycles and E-bikes that is distinguished by a painted strip and other
pavement markings from that portion of the roadway to be used by motor vehicles.
BIKE PATH: A physically separated route which is set aside and designated primarily for use by bicycles, E-bikes, and pedestrians, including but not
limited to the Greenbelt. As used herein, this term includes both the paved surface and a minimum of two feet (2') on either side of the pavement's edge.
BIKE PATH APPROACH: The area where a transition is made between a roadway, parking lot, sidewalk or other facility and a bike path. This area is
generally identified by wooden bollards, pavement markings and a parking prohibition.
BIKE/PEDESTRIAN CURB RAMP: A break in a curb designated to facilitate movement by the operator of a bicycle or an E-bike, pedestrian or person with
a disability from a street or parking lot to a sidewalk or bicycle facility.
BLOCK FACE: The side of a City block between two (2) other streets or other geographic boundaries.
BOISE CITY ACCESSIBLE PARKING COMMITTEE: The committee established under title 2, chapter 13 of this Code, which is empowered to provide
information and recommendations to the Parking Services Office relating to issues of accessible on-street parking.
BOISE RIVER GREENBELT (GREENBELT): The paved or improved pathways and connecting trails and the twenty feet (20') of publicly owned
greenspace on either side, including picnic tables, barbeque stands, benches and other improvements and fixtures connecting Boise Parks along the
Boise River and maintained by the Department of Parks and Recreation and delineated generally in the publication known as the map, and/or specifically
in the Inventory of Park Properties at the Office of the Director. Greenbelt does not include any private property which may lie within twenty feet (20') of the
paved or improved pathways and connecting trails.
CITY: The City of Boise City, Idaho.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 252/503
CITY CLERK'S OFFICE: The Office of the City Clerk of the City or its designee.
CITY PARK: Any and all lands, buildings, reserves, sports complexes, swimming pools, golf courses, trails, the Boise River Greenbelt, and other places
that are owned, operated or maintained by the City, and are delineated generally in the publication known as the Department of Parks and Recreation
Map, or specifically in the Inventory of Park Properties at the Office of the Director of the Department of Parks and Recreation for the City.
CITY PARKING FACILITY: A parking lot or parking structure owned, leased or operated by the City.
COMMERCIAL VEHICLE: A vehicle used to transport goods, passengers or be otherwise operated for the benefit or profit of an individual or business.
DEMAND-BASED, TIME-LIMITED PARKING: Days and hours of parking enforcement which are variable and set by the Director, considering the location,
time of day, maximum parking time allowed, and the capacities of available on-street parking in order to maximize target utilization.
DIRECTOR: The Director of the Department of Finance and Administration or his designee, who must be an employee of the City.
DRIVER: A person who drives, operates or is in actual physical control of a vehicle. The term "operator" is interchangeable with the term "driver".
ELECTRIC POWER-ASSISTED BICYCLE (E-BIKE): A vehicle having two (2) tandem wheels or two (2) parallel wheels and one forward wheel, any two
(2) of which are not less than twelve inches (12") in diameter, that is designed to be operated by human power with the assistance of an electric motor that
has a power output of not more than seven hundred fifty (750) watts that: a) is incapable of propelling the vehicle at a speed of more than twenty (20)
miles per hour; and b) disengages or ceases to function when the vehicle's brakes are applied. An E-bike is not a motor vehicle for purposes of this
chapter.
FLOATING CURB: A concrete curb, asphalt curb, or painted pavement marking that acts as the side boundary between the roadway and the adjacent
bicycle lane or other pathway.
FLOATING ON-STREET PARKING SPACES: Parking spaces that are parallel and adjacent to a floating curb.
HIGHWAY: The entire width between the boundary lines of every public way for vehicular travel use, with jurisdiction extending to the adjacent property
line, including sidewalks, shoulders, berms and rights-of-way not intended for motorized traffic. The term "street" is interchangeable with highway.
MOTOR VEHICLE: Every vehicle which is self-propelled and for the purpose of titling and registration meets Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standards as
defined in section 49-107, Idaho Code. Motor vehicle does not include vehicles moved solely by human power, electric personal assistive mobility devices
and motorized wheelchairs or other such vehicles that are specifically exempt from titling or registration requirements under title 49, Idaho Code.
OBSTRUCTION: Any obstacle, person, or thing impeding or rendering dangerous travel upon and along a street, alley or sidewalk.
OPERATOR: See definition of driver. "Driver" and "operator" are interchangeable terms.
PARK OR PARKING: The stopping or standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, other than temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged
in loading or unloading property or passengers.
PARKING SERVICES OFFICE: The Boise City Parking Services Office, or its designee.
PERMIT: A privilege that allows its holder to access certain parking spaces and locations, which form includes, but is not limited to, a printed pass, a
sticker, an RFID chip, or an electronic privilege associated with a specific vehicle license plate.
PERSON: Any individual, partnership, association, corporation, or organization of any kind, or any governmental entity, including the State of Idaho and
every political subdivision thereof.
PERSON WITH A MOBILITY DISABILITY: Any of the following persons: a) a person who is physically unable to walk two hundred feet (200') or more
without the assistance of another person or without the aid of a cane, walker, crutches, braces, prosthetic device, or wheelchair; or b) a person who is
physically unable to walk two hundred feet (200') or more without great difficulty or discomfort due to neurological, orthopedic, respiratory, cardiac, arthritic
impairment, blindness, or the loss of function or absence of a limb.
RESIDENTIAL PARKING DISTRICT: A geographical area of residential streets which are designated by resolution of the Boise City Council for the
purpose of managing parking issues specific to such area. Residents and businesses located within such designated area may apply for and, if qualified,
receive permits which exempt their associated vehicle(s) from the parking time restrictions otherwise enforced in such area.
ROADWAY: The portion of a highway improved, designed or ordinarily used for vehicular travel, exclusive of sidewalks, shoulders, berms and rights-ofway.
SAFETY ZONE: The area or space officially set apart within a highway for the exclusive use of pedestrians and which is protected or is so plainly visible at
all times while set apart as a safety zone.
SIDEWALK: The portion of a street between the curb lines, or the lateral lines of a roadway, and the adjacent property lines intended for use by
pedestrians.
SPECIAL PARKING DISTRICT: A subset of a residential parking district which utilizes separate parking permits and has stricter parking limitations than
the rest of the residential parking district.
STOPPING OR STANDING: The complete cessation of movement of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, except when necessary to avoid conflict with
other traffic or in compliance with the directions of law enforcement, authorized personnel representing an entity with jurisdiction, or an official traffic control
device.
STREET: See definition of highway. "Street" and "highway" are interchangeable terms.
TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICE: Any marker, sign, signal or other manually, electrically or mechanically operated device placed or erected by authority of a
public body or official having jurisdiction, for the purpose of regulating, warning or guiding traffic.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 253/503
VEHICLE: Every vessel in, upon, or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a highway, excepting devices used
exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks. (Ord. 37-18, 9-25-2018)
6-10A-5: DEMAND-BASED TIME-LIMITED PARKING AREAS:
The Director is authorized to set and adjust the days and hours of operation and enforcement of all demand-based time-limited parking areas in the City.
All demand-based time-limited parking areas shall be clearly posted with signs that describe either the maximum length of parking for a twenty four (24)
hour period, or the days and times parking is time limited. (Ord. 41-17, 12-19-2017, eff. 2-1-2018)
6-10A-6: STOPPING, STANDING OR PARKING PROHIBITED IN SPECIFIED PLACES:
Except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic, or to comply with the law, the directions of a law enforcement officer or authorized personnel
representing an entity with jurisdiction, or an official traffic control device, no person shall:
A. Stop, stand or park a vehicle:
1. On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge or curb of a street;
2. On a sidewalk;
3. Within an intersection;
4. On a crosswalk;
5. On a bike lane or bike path;
6. Within twenty feet (20') of a bike path approach;
7. Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb or within thirty feet (30') of points on the curb immediately opposite the ends of a safety zone, unless a
different length is indicated by signs or markings;
8. Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when doing so would obstruct traffic;
9. Upon any bridge or other elevated structure upon a highway or within a highway tunnel;
10. On any railroad track;
11. At any place where a traffic-control device prohibits or limits such stopping, standing or parking;
12. On the same block face after the expiration of the posted time limit on a traffic control device during the remainder of that calendar day;
13. Along any yellow or red painted curb; or
14. Along any blue painted curb without a valid accessible parking placard or plates.
B. Stop, stand or park a vehicle, unless driver occupied, except momentarily to pick up or discharge a passenger:
1. In front of a public or private driveway;
2. Within fifteen feet (15') of a fire hydrant;
3. Within twenty feet (20') of a crosswalk or a bike/pedestrian curb ramp, except at an intersection where a traffic control signal is in operation, or in a
parking meter zone;
4. Within thirty feet (30') upon the approach to any flashing signal, stop sign, yield sign or traffic control signal located at the side of a roadway;
5. Within twenty feet (20') of the driveway entrance to any fire station, and on the side of a street opposite the entrance to any fire station within seventy
five feet (75') of said entrance when properly sign-posted; or
6. At any place where traffic-control devices prohibit such stopping, standing or parking.
C. Park a vehicle, whether occupied or not, except temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading merchandise or
passengers:
1. Within fifty feet (50') of the nearest rail of a railroad crossing; or
2. At any place where traffic-control devices prohibit such parking. (Ord. 41-17, 12-19-2017, eff. 2-1-2018)
6-10A-7: STANDING OR PARKING CLOSE TO CURB:
A. Two-Way Streets: Except as otherwise provided in this article, every vehicle stopped or parked upon a two-way street shall be stopped or parked with
the right-hand wheels of the vehicle parallel to and within eighteen inches (18") of the right-hand curb or as close as practicable to the right edge of the
right-hand shoulder.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 254/503
B. One-Way Streets: On one-way streets, every vehicle shall stop or park parallel to the curb or edge of the roadway in the direction of authorized traffic
movement, with its right-hand wheels within eighteen inches (18") of the right-hand curb, or as close as practicable to the right edge of the right-hand
shoulder, or with its left-hand wheels within eighteen inches (18") of the left-hand curb, or as close as practicable to the left edge of the left-hand
shoulder.
C. Floating Parking Spaces: For purposes of floating on-street parking spaces, the standing or parking standards set forth in subsections A and B of this
section shall apply to the floating curb.
D. Exception: Vehicles standing or parking in authorized and marked accessible on-street parking spaces may park further than eighteen inches (18") from
the curb to accommodate vehicle lifts and ramps so long as the vehicle is within the painted parking space lines. (Ord. 37-18, 9-25-2018)
6-10A-8: ANGLE PARKING:
On those streets which have been signed or marked for angle parking, no person shall park or stand a vehicle other than at the angle to the curb or edge
of the roadway indicated by such markings. (Ord. 57-15, 12-1-2015; amd. Ord. 41-17, 12-19-2017, eff. 2-1-2018)
6-10A-9: PARKING NOT TO OBSTRUCT FLOW OF TRAFFIC:
No person shall stop, park or leave standing any vehicle, whether attended or unattended, upon a highway in such a manner or under such conditions as
to leave less than twelve feet (12') of the roadway unobstructed. (Ord. 57-15, 12-1-2015; amd. Ord. 41-17, 12-19-2017, eff. 2-1-2018)
6-10A-10: PARKING IN ALLEYS:
No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle within an alley except during the necessary, active, and expeditious loading or unloading of merchandise,
supplies or materials. Such loading or unloading shall not exceed twenty (20) minutes. If the stopping, standing, or parking of a vehicle within an alley
would prevent the passage of an emergency vehicle or blocks the driveway or entrance to any abutting property, the vehicle shall remain attended at all
times. In addition to the issuance of a notice of parking violation, violations of this section may result in the immediate impound of a vehicle that impedes
safe passage or poses a threat to public safety. (Ord. 41-17, 12-19-2017, eff. 2-1-2018)
6-10A-11: EXTENDED PARKING PROHIBITED:
No person shall park a vehicle upon any street, alley or public property for a period of seventy two (72) hours or longer unless specifically allowed by
permit. (Ord. 57-15, 12-1-2015; amd. Ord. 41-17, 12-19-2017, eff. 2-1-2018)
6-10A-12: PARKING TRAILERS, CONTAINERS, DROP BOXES AND OTHER NONVEHICULAR ITEMS IN ON STREET PARKING
SPACES:
Unless specifically allowed by permit issued by the Ada County Highway District or other entity with jurisdiction, no person shall stop, stand, park or
deposit a trailer, shipping container, storage container, drop box or any other nonvehicular item in an on street parking space: (Ord. 57-15, 12-1-2015;
amd. Ord. 41-17, 12-19-2017, eff. 2-1-2018)
A. Longer Than Seventy Two Hours: For a period longer than seventy two (72) consecutive hours; (Ord. 41-17, 12-19-2017, eff. 2-1-2018)
B. Dangerous To Traffic: In a manner that impedes or renders dangerous the movement of vehicular or pedestrian traffic; or
C. Reflective Devices: Between sunset and sunrise without reflective devices attached on the edge or side of the nonvehicular item nearest the center of
the street. The reflective device must be visible for a distance of two hundred feet (200') from either direction from the trailer, container, drop box or
other nonvehicular item. (Ord. 57-15, 12-1-2015; amd. Ord. 41-17, 12-19-2017, eff. 2-1-2018)
6-10A-13: PARKING OF OVERWEIGHT COMMERCIAL VEHICLES IN RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS PROHIBITED:
No person shall park any commercial vehicle having a gross weight capacity in excess of eight thousand (8,000) pounds, whether attended or unattended,
upon the streets of any residential district within the City for a period in excess of two (2) hours, except:
A. Loading, Unloading: For the purpose of loading or unloading passengers, materials or merchandise;
B. Construction Projects: For any purpose incident to any lawful construction project located within the immediate vicinity of the parked commercial
vehicle; or
C. Commercial Operations: For any purpose incident to a lawful commercial operation located in any residential district within the immediate vicinity of the
parked commercial vehicle. (Ord. 57-15, 12-1-2015; amd. Ord. 41-17, 12-19-2017, eff. 2-1-2018)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 255/503
6-10A-14: PARKING WITHIN CITY PARKS:
A. Prohibitions: No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle within a City park:
1. In any location other than the established or designated parking area;
2. In any place or manner not in compliance with authorized signs;
3. Beyond the City parks' hours of operation, except by permit in designated areas;
4. Upon the grass or turf, except wheelchairs or by permit in designated areas;
5. In any place or manner that blocks or reroutes or redirects the regular flow of vehicular, pedestrian or bicycle traffic;
6. Outside the designated stall lines or markings for a single parking space, or in a manner that utilizes more than a single parking space;
7. In any area that is posted closed to the public;
8. Beyond the posted parking time limits, except by permit in designated areas.
B. Time Limited Parking: All vehicles which stop, stand or park within a City park with posted parking time limits must be removed from the boundaries of
such City park at the expiration of the posted time limit for parking, for the remainder of that calendar day. (Ord. 57-15, 12-1-2015; amd. Ord. 41-17, 12-
19-2017, eff. 2-1-2018)
6-10A-15: REQUIREMENTS FOR LEAVING A MOTOR VEHICLE UNATTENDED:
No person having control or charge of a motor vehicle shall allow such vehicle to stop, stand, or park on any street unattended without stopping the motor
of the vehicle and setting the parking brakes thereon. (Ord. 41-17, 12-19-2017, eff. 2-1-2018)
6-10A-16: ACCESSIBLE PARKING:
A. Issuance Of Plates: Issuance of accessible parking placards or license plates is governed by Idaho Code section 49-410 and administered by the Idaho
Department of Transportation.
B. Accessible Parking Committee: The Boise City Accessible Parking Committee shall serve in an advisory capacity to the Parking Services Office to
provide information and recommendations relating to the need for additional accessible parking spaces and the relocation, repair or modification of
existing accessible parking spaces. The Boise City Accessible Parking Committee shall also accept, analyze and provide recommendations to the
Parking Services Office regarding applications for additional accessible on-street parking spaces.
C. On-Street Accessible Parking Requirements:
1. The Parking Services Office, upon the advice of the Boise City Accessible Parking Committee, may establish requirements for accessible parking
zones and spaces within the City pursuant to Idaho Code section 49-213(d). The Parking Services Office shall determine the minimum number and
placement of accessible parking spaces for each City block controlled with parking meters.
2. All designations of accessible parking spaces and marking thereof, shall be done in conformance with the requirements of all Federal, State and
local laws and the regulations and provisions of this article.
3. In addition to the accessible parking requirements set forth in Idaho Code section 49-213, the following requirements are applicable to all on-street
accessible parking spaces:
a. There shall be at least one accessible parking space for every thirty (30) parking spaces Citywide which is controlled by an on-street parking meter
or otherwise in conformance with the Americans with Disabilities Act.
(1) Accessible parking spaces shall be parallel with the sidewalk where parallel parking is required, or at an angle to the sidewalk where angle
parking is required.
(2) In angle parking spaces, the accessible parking space shall be at least fourteen feet (14') in width or as required by the ADA, whichever is
wider.
4. All accessible parking spaces shall be located on the shortest route to curb cuts and ramps for wheelchair and other mobility aid devices.
5. All accessible parking spaces shall be free from obstructions and shall be located in areas where persons exiting the vehicle shall exit onto a flat,
hard surface.
6. For each designated accessible parking space, there shall be a sign posted immediately adjacent thereto, which is visible from each accessible
parking space, is at least sixty inches (60") above the ground, and contains the international accessible symbol as shown in Idaho Code section 49-
410(3).
D. Applications For On-Street Accessible Parking: Persons may file applications for the designation of new accessible parking spaces or for the relocation,
repair or modification of existing accessible parking spaces with the Parking Services Office, which shall review such applications with the Boise City
Accessible Parking Committee in such form and manner as prescribed. The Parking Services Office upon its own volition may originate applications for
the designation, relocation, repair or modification of accessible parking spaces.
1. The written application for designation, relocation, repair or modification of accessible parking spaces shall include, at a minimum, the following:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 256/503
a. The name, address and phone number of the applicant;
b. A clear description of the location or specific parking space for which the application is being filed;
c. An explanation detailing what action the applicant would recommend regarding the location or condition of the specific parking space in question;
d. Any other relevant information required by the Parking Services Office;
e. A statement signed and sworn by the applicant, under penalty of perjury, that all information submitted is true and correct to the best of his
knowledge.
2. Upon the receipt of an application, the Boise City Accessible Parking Committee shall analyze and provide recommendations to the Parking
Services Office regarding such application for final disposition and order. The Parking Services Office shall consider the Boise City Accessible
Parking Committee's recommendation, and may, to the extent necessary, complete its own analysis and investigation of the application in the
process of deciding whether to grant or deny the application.
3. All denied applications for the designation, relocation, repair or modification of on-street accessible parking spaces may be reviewed following the
review process detailed in section 6-10B-12 of this chapter.
E. Designation Of On-Street Accessible Parking Spaces: The Parking Services Office is not obliged to accept or follow the recommendations of the Boise
City Accessible Parking Committee in making a final determination of the appropriateness of all applications from persons requesting the designation,
relocation, repair or modification of on-street accessible parking spaces. All granted applications shall follow the accessible parking space requirements
in subsection C of this section and any other applicable Federal, State or City Code.
F. Accessible Parking Unlawful Acts: Only a permitted and authorized person with a disability, who has a valid accessible parking placard or plates, may
park in an accessible parking space. The following unauthorized uses and behaviors are unlawful under this article:
1. Unauthorized use of an accessible parking space. No vehicle shall stop, stand or park in a designated accessible parking space unless either the
driver or a passenger has been issued a disabled parking permit placard, temporary card or special license plates which are clearly displayed on the
vehicle, except in the limited circumstance to momentarily stop to pick up or discharge a person with a disability from such vehicle.
2. Blocking access to an accessible parking space. It is unlawful for any person to park a vehicle either in a manner which prevents or reasonably could
restrict a person with a disability from entering or exiting his vehicle; or in a manner that would prevent a person with a disability from being able to
park a vehicle in the designated accessible parking space; or in a manner that blocks access to a curb cut or ramp.
3. Unauthorized use of an accessible parking placard or plates. It is unlawful for either a holder of an accessible parking placard or plates to allow
another person to misuse such accessible parking privileges or for any person who is not authorized by the Idaho Department of Transportation to
use an accessible parking placard or plates.
G. Enforcement: Law enforcement officials and their designees as authorized by the City shall enforce the accessible parking provisions and are
empowered, using reasonable discretion, to check personal identification to determine if the user of an accessible parking placard or plates is
authorized. (Ord. 41-17, 12-19-2017, eff. 2-1-2018)
6-10A-17: CITY PARKING FACILITIES:
A. Authority Of Parking Services Office: The Parking Services Office is hereby authorized and directed to designate and mark the parking spaces within all
City parking facilities. The Parking Services Office is also authorized to determine whether an hourly, daily, weekly, monthly or annual rate of use shall
be set on City parking facility parking spaces.
B. City Parking Facility Rates: A person using a City parking facility parking space shall pay a fee for such use. The fees for use of City parking facility
parking spaces shall be established by the City Council and listed on the most current City Clerk fee schedule.
C. Collection Of Fees: City parking facility parking fees shall be collected through the use of parking meters, a collection box system, by attendants, or any
other method as directed by the Parking Services Office.
D. City Parking Facilities Unlawful Acts: It shall be unlawful in all City parking facilities for any person to:
1. Stop, stand or park a vehicle in a parking space without paying the requisite parking fee;
2. Stop, stand or park along any yellow painted curb or area, except momentarily to pick up or discharge passengers while the vehicle is driver
occupied;
3. Stop, stand or park in any restricted or reserved parking space as posted, unless the vehicle is specifically permitted to use such parking space;
4. Stop, stand or park a vehicle beyond the designated stall lines for any parking space;
5. Stop, stand or park in an area which is not a designated parking space as shown with designated stall lines; or
6. Fail to comply with any of the terms, conditions or restrictions placed on the issuance and use of a City parking facilities parking permit pursuant to
this article and article B of this chapter. (Ord. 57-15, 12-1-2015; amd. Ord. 41-17, 12-19-2017, eff. 2-1-2018)
E. Towing And Impounding Of Vehicles In City Parking Facilities: Except where specifically allowed, no person shall park a vehicle for more than seventy
two (72) consecutive hours in a City parking facility. The Parking Services Office or the Boise Police Department has the right to tow and impound any
vehicle found parked in a City parking facility in violation of this provision. (Ord. 41-17, 12-19-2017, eff. 2-1-2018)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 257/503
6-10A-18: PARKING PERMIT APPLICATIONS AND REQUIREMENTS:
A. All parking permits regulated under this article shall be issued, maintained, and renewed by the Parking Services Office.
B. In addition to the parking permit application information set forth in subsection 6-10B-7B of this chapter, every application for a parking permit regulated
by this article shall contain the specific application information and permit requirements set forth within this article.
C. A nonrefundable application fee in an amount established by the Boise City Council and listed on the most current City Clerk fee schedule shall
accompany every application for a parking permit.
D. All parking permits issued under this article shall be displayed in full and unobstructed view within the vehicle. (Ord. 41-17, 12-19-2017, eff. 2-1-2018)
6-10A-19: CONSTRUCTION TEMPORARY USE PARKING PERMITS SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS:
A. Information Required: In addition to the parking permit application and requirements set forth in section 6-10B-7 of this chapter, all applicants for
temporary use parking permits shall also provide the following information:
1. Current contact information for the construction site foreman or his designee;
2. A detailed description of the construction project, including but not necessarily limited to, the project location, type of project, and the anticipated date
of completion for project; and
3. A specific list identifying all the equipment, apparatus and vehicles to be used as part of the construction project which will be parked upon or
otherwise obstructing the street.
B. Authority Of Permit Holder: The holder of a temporary use permit is entitled to place dumpsters, vehicles, or other apparatus for construction-related
purposes, as specified in the permit application, upon on-street parking spaces.
C. Highway District Permit: Every applicant for a temporary use permit shall obtain an Ada County Highway District issued right-of-way permit or other
necessary permits prior to applying for a temporary use parking permit under this article.
D. Extension Of Temporary Use Permits: Temporary use permit holders shall be granted a thirty (30) days' grace period for projects which exceed the
original expiration date of the permit, if the applicant applies for and obtains such extension and pays all additional fees listed on the most current City
Clerk's fee schedule by or before the expiration date of the original permit.
E. Refunds:
1. Metered Parking Spaces: All temporary use permit fees paid for metered parking spaces are non-refundable.
2. Non-Metered Parking Spaces: Applicants for non-metered parking space temporary use permits must estimate the completion date of the project
prior to receiving a permit. The fee assessed shall be for the estimated duration of the project. Upon completion of the project and relinquishment of
the temporary use permit, the Parking Services Office shall refund fifty percent (50%) of the fee for any unused permit time to the applicant. No
refunds are given for extension payments.
F. Use Of Parking Spaces Under A Temporary Use Permit: A temporary use permit holder may not use the permitted parking space(s) other than for the
authorized purpose stated on the permit application.
1. Limitation Of Allowed Space: The Parking Services Office is authorized to limit the amount of space available to a construction project to minimize
the impact of construction on the general public, non-related businesses, and others who may require access into such area. The Parking Services
Office may establish an area for use by the contractor and sub-contractors of the project.
2. Temporary Removal Of Parking Signs, Meters And Markings: If within the construction area there are signs or meters that need to be temporarily
removed during the project, the contractor is required to contact the Parking Services Office at least twenty four (24) hours in advance of that need.
The Parking Services Office shall remove all affected signage, meters or other City parking equipment and store such items until reinstallation is
required.
3. Sidewalk Replacement: In the case of sidewalk renovations, the contractor shall reinstall all sign and meter posts and re-paint any parking space
markings on the street removed or damaged as a result of the contractor's project. The replacement of both the posts and the parking space
markings must meet the Parking Services Office requirements and specifications. In the case of new streetscaping in which sidewalks are being
installed, the contractor shall erect the posts for parking signs and meters. If the contractor fails to comply with these requirements, the City shall
send a written notice to the address on the temporary use permit application for the contractor demanding compliance within ten (10) business days.
The contractor must either complete the work as detailed in the City's demand letter or respond in writing to the City requesting an informal review on
the matter within ten (10) business days. If the contractor neither completes the work nor requests an informal review within the ten (10) business
day period from receipt of the City's demand letter, the City may have the work completed and charge the contractor for the actual costs and fees
incurred for completing the work.
G. Temporary Use Permit Unlawful Acts: It shall be unlawful for any person to:
1. Place equipment, materials, dumpsters, or other apparatus in an on-street parking space without first obtaining a temporary use permit from the
Parking Services Office;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 258/503
2. Place equipment, materials, dumpsters, or other apparatus in an on-street parking space without first securing any staging or delivery area with use
of temporary fencing or barricades, which identify such area as a part of the temporary use zone and restrict access by the public; or
3. Fail to comply with any of the terms, conditions, or restrictions placed on the issuance and use of a temporary use permit pursuant to this article and
article B of this chapter. (Ord. 41-17, 12-19-2017, eff. 2-1-2018)
6-10A-20: CREATION OF RESIDENTIAL AND SPECIAL PARKING DISTRICTS:
A. Determination: Through resident recommendation or its own volition, the Parking Services Office may determine which areas, if any, of the City should
be designated as either Residential Parking District (RPD) or Special Parking District (SPD) permit parking zones.
B. Public Hearing: The Parking Services Office shall conduct a public hearing concerning any proposed designation of an RPD or SPD. The public hearing
shall be held only after notice thereof has been published in a newspaper of general circulation throughout the City and written notification has been
distributed to all properties in the affected area at least ten (10) days prior to the date set for the hearing.
C. Recommendation To City Council: After hearing and considering public input, the Parking Services Office may submit a written recommendation to the
Boise City Council specifying the proposed area for RPD or SPD designation and the reasons for such designation.
D. Ratification Of City Council: Upon ratification of the recommendation, the Boise City Council shall direct the Parking Services Office to erect signs
indicating that the designated area is an RPD or SPD permit zone and the time limits for parking.
E. Determinations: The Parking Services Office shall determine for all RPD and SPD permit zones:
1. The days of the week that the zone shall be in effect, and the hours of enforcement for the zone;
2. The design and proper posting requirement for all RPD and SPD permit zone signs;
3. The specific requirements for the parking permits used within RPD and SPD permit zones; and
4. The specific locations, if any, within an RPD or SPD permit zone in which parking must be further restricted to maintain public safety or previous
commitments, such as, but not limited to, loading zones or no parking zones.
F. Review: Applicants for the creation of an RPD or an SPD who are denied by the Parking Services Office, may request an informal review of the denial
following the review procedure set forth in section 6-10B-12 of this chapter. (Ord. 41-17, 12-19-2017, eff. 2-1-2018)
6-10A-21: RESIDENTIAL AND SPECIAL PARKING DISTRICT PERMITS; SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS:
A. Residency: In addition to the minimum parking permit application and requirements set forth in section 6-10B-7 of this chapter, all applicants for RPD or
SPD parking permits shall also provide written proof of the applicant's residency within the applicable RPD or SPD zone, which may include
documented proof that the applicant's vehicle is registered to a residence within the RPD or SPD zone.
B. Bona Fide Visitor Permits: The Parking Services Office is hereby authorized and directed to create provisions for the issuance of temporary parking
permits for bona fide visitors of residents within an RPD or SPD.
C. Authority To Regulate: In order to maintain the integrity of the neighborhoods and properly manage RPD and SPD zones, the Parking Services Office
may:
1. Limit the number of RPD or SPD parking permits issued per household;
2. Limit the number of temporary visitor parking permits issued per household;
3. Limit the total number of parking permits issued within an entire RPD or SPD zone;
4. Charge a fee for RPD, SPD or visitor parking permits before their issuance; and (Ord. 57-15, 12-1-2015; amd. Ord. 41-17, 12-19-2017, eff. 2-1-2018)
5. Require RPD, SPD or visitor permits to contain information which the Parking Services Office deems necessary. (Ord. 41-17, 12-19-2017, eff. 2-1-
2018)
D. Nonrefundable Fees: Any RPD, SPD or visitor's parking permit fees that are established by the City Council and listed on the most current City Clerk
fee schedule shall accompany the application and are nonrefundable.
E. Display; Nontransferable: All issued RPD, SPD or visitor parking permits shall be displayed as directed by the Parking Services Office and clearly
visible at all times when parking pursuant to an RPD, SPD or visitor's parking permit. All RPD and SPD parking permits are specifically assigned to the
vehicle listed on the permit application and are nontransferable, except by express written permission of the Parking Services Office.
F. Term; Renewal: All RPD and SPD parking permits shall be issued for a one year period and shall automatically expire at the end of such period. RPD
and SPD parking permit holders must follow the permit renewal process as developed and implemented by the Parking Services Office.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 259/503
G. Holders Exempt: Holders of valid accessible parking placards or plates are exempt from RPD and SPD parking permit requirements. (Ord. 57-15, 12-1-
2015; amd. Ord. 41-17, 12-19-2017, eff. 2-1-2018)
6-10A-22: USE OF RESIDENTIAL AND SPECIAL PARKING DISTRICT PERMITS:
A. Zones Created: The designation of an RPD or SPD shall allow the Parking Services Office to create zones for use by special groups with permits and
shall limit the length of time that vehicles without such permits shall be allowed to park within such RPD or SPD.
B. Parking Authorized With Permit: Any authorized vehicle with a valid and properly displayed RPD, SPD or visitor's permit for such RPD or SPD is entitled
to park within the RPD or SPD to which the permit applies, without regard to the posted parking time limitations.
C. Applicability Of Permit: A parking permit for an RPD or SPD is specific to the RPD or SPD for which it is issued. An RPD, SPD or visitor's parking permit
shall not authorize the holder thereof to park beyond the posted time limits in any RPD or SPD other than that to which the permit applies.
D. Surrender Upon Suspension Or Revocation: Upon written notification suspending or revoking an RPD, SPD or visitor's permit, the permittee shall
immediately surrender the permit to the Parking Services Office.
E. Specific Limitations Of Parking Within A Residential Or Special Parking District: In addition to the qualifications, requirements and other standards set
forth in this article which apply to both RPDs and SPDs, the following limitations and restrictions are specific to each type of district:
1. Residential Parking District Specific Use Limitations: Every vehicle parked within an RPD which properly displays a current RPD permit or visitor's
permit must be parked within two (2) blocks of the residence listed on the permit application. The RPD permit code on the vehicle must correspond
with the decal code displayed on the posted RPD signs. All vehicles without a valid RPD permit or visitor's permit which stop, stand or park within an
RPD must be removed from that block face at the expiration of the posted time limit for parking for the remainder of that calendar day.
2. Special Parking District Specific Use Limitations: Businesses within an SPD shall be limited to the set number of SPD parking permits available. All
vehicles without a valid SPD permit or visitor's permit which stop, stand or park within an SPD must be removed from the boundaries of the SPD at
the expiration of the posted time limit for parking, for the remainder of that calendar day. (Ord. 41-17, 12-19-2017, eff. 2-1-2018)
6-10A-23: RESIDENTIAL AND SPECIAL PARKING DISTRICT UNLAWFUL ACTS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to:
A. Park a vehicle without a properly displayed and valid RPD, SPD or visitor's permit past the expiration of the posted time limits for that RPD or SPD
zone;
B. Fail to remove a nonpermitted vehicle from the same block face in an RPD zone at the expiration of the posted parking time limits for the remainder of
that calendar day;
C. Fail to remove a nonpermitted vehicle from the boundaries of an SPD zone at the expiration of the posted parking time limits for the remainder of that
calendar day; (Ord. 57-15, 12-1-2015; amd. Ord. 41-17, 12-19-2017, eff. 2-1-2018)
D. Fail to park within two (2) blocks of the residence listed on the permit application of the vehicle displaying an RPD zone permit or visitor's permit; (Ord.
41-17, 12-19-2017, eff. 2-1-2018)
E. Park a vehicle with an RPD, SPD or visitor's permit past the posted parking time limits in any other RPD or SPD zone to which the vehicle's permit does
not apply; or
F. Fail to comply with any of the terms, conditions or restrictions placed on the issuance and use of an RPD, SPD or visitor's permit pursuant to this article
and article B of this chapter. (Ord. 57-15, 12-1-2015; amd. Ord. 41-17, 12-19-2017, eff. 2-1-2018)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 11-19 - PARKBOI E-PERMIT . Go to new ordinance.
6-10A-24: PARKBOI E-PERMIT APPLICATION, REQUIREMENTS AND SUNSET DATE:
A. A ParkBOI E-permit is an on-street parking program that converts one hour time-limited parking areas to all day parking in the downtown corridor, the
boundaries of which are kept on file in the City Clerk's Office and available during business hours for viewing by the public. All ParkBOI E-permits shall
be issued, maintained, and renewed by the City Clerk's Office.
B. Parking spaces available under the ParkBOI E-Permit Program are limited and not guaranteed. The ParkBOI E-permit additionally entitles permittees to
use the Elder Street lot and shuttle to City Center Plaza, located at 777 W. Main Street, Boise, for no additional cost.
C. ParkBOI E-Permit Program shall be awarded through a periodic application lottery system, administered by the City Clerk's Office. In addition to the
parking permit application information set forth in subsection 6-10B-7B of this chapter, every application for a ParkBOI E-permit shall contain proof that
the applicant works within the boundaries of the downtown corridor.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 260/503
D. A nonrefundable application fee shall accompany every application for a ParkBOI E-permit. Permittees are thereafter charged a monthly fee. The
application and monthly fees are in an amount established by the Boise City Council and listed on the most current City Clerk fee schedule.
E. The ParkBOI E-permit number shall be the vehicle license plate number provided in the permit application and shall be non-transferable to any other
vehicle. Only motor vehicles with ParkBOI E-permits may park in a one hour time limit parking area for a longer period under this program.
F. The ParkBOI E-Permit Program and all parking permits issued thereunder shall expire on February 1, 2019. (Ord. 41-17, 12-19-2017, eff. 2-1-2018)
6-10A-25: DENIAL, SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF PARKING PERMITS:
Failure to comply with the standards, requirements and qualifications established by the Parking Services Office shall be the basis for the denial,
suspension, or revocation of any parking permit regulated under this article. The denial, suspension or revocation of any parking permit under this article
and any review thereof, is governed by section 6-10B-12 of this chapter. (Ord. 41-17, 12-19-2017, eff. 2-1-2018)
6-10A-26: NOTICE OF PARKING VIOLATIONS AND PROCEDURES:
A. Upon observing any vehicle stopped, standing or parked in violation to the provision of this article, the provisions of article B of this chapter, or of the
provisions specified in section 6-8-4 of this title, the Parking Services Office or the Boise Police Department is authorized to serve a notice of parking
violation (which is also referred to in this article as a "parking citation"), by any one or more of the following means:
1. By securing a notice of parking violation to the vehicle;
2. By personally serving the operator or owner of the vehicle with a notice of parking violation;
3. By personally serving a passenger of the vehicle with a notice of parking violation in the presence of the owner or operator of the vehicle; or
4. By mailing, via United States Postal Service first class mail, a notice of parking violation to the vehicle's owner at the address maintained in motor
vehicle registration records.
B. Every notice of parking violation shall include the following, if applicable to the observed violation:
1. The date and time at which the violation was observed;
2. The location where the violation occurred, including if relevant, the parking meter number;
3. The license plate number and make of the vehicle observed to be in violation;
4. The Code section violated and a brief description of the violation;
5. The fine amount;
6. Instructions explaining how the registered owner or operator of the vehicle in violation may pay the fine associated with the violation; and
7. A statement describing the process by which the operator or registered owner of the vehicle in violation may contest the violation indicated on the
notice of parking violation.
C. A separate notice of parking violation may be served for each violation, including cumulative violations for each time period exceeded.
D. One copy or an automated record of each notice of parking violation shall be filed with the Parking Services Office.
E. Each person served with a notice of parking violation shall, within ten (10) business days from the date on the notice of parking violation, or if notice is
served by mail, within ten (10) business days from the date of posting to the address of the vehicle's registered owner:
1. Pay the corresponding parking fine amount on the City Clerk fee schedule;
2. Pay the corresponding parking fine amount, plus any applicable fees, using an on-line payment system authorized by the Parking Services Office; or
3. Submit to the Parking Services Office a request for reconsideration of the violation indicated on the notice of parking violation; or
4. Notify the City Clerk's Office of the intention to contest the parking violation citation in the Fourth District Magistrate Court.
F. A request for reconsideration is an informal process where a person who received a notice of parking violation may submit a written challenge to the
validity of a parking violation and ask for reconsideration of the citation by the Director. The Director shall issue a decision within ten (10) business days
of the receipt of the request for reconsideration and the decision shall become effective immediately. The registered owner or operator may contest the
citation in the Fourth District Magistrate Court following the procedures set forth in this article regardless of a request for reconsideration.
G. Failure of an operator or owner to either pay the parking fine or to request reconsideration of the parking violation within ten (10) business days from the
date on the notice of parking violation, or if notice is served by mail, within ten (10) business days from the date of posting notice to the address of the
vehicle's registered owner, shall result in an additional administrative fee in an amount as established by the City Council and listed on the most current
City Clerk fee schedule.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 261/503
H. From the date of notice of parking violation, all unpaid violations shall have an additional administrative fee in an amount as established by the City
Council and listed on the most current City Clerk fee schedule assessed every six (6) months to defray the on-going administrative and personnel costs
and mailing expenses arising from the overdue fines. Vehicles that accrue unpaid parking violation fines on one or more citations and administrative
fees may be subject to additional penalties set forth under article C of this chapter. (Ord. 41-17, 12-19-2017, eff. 2-1-2018)
6-10A-27: PENALTY:
A. Infraction: Any registered owner or operator of a vehicle who violates any provision of this article shall be deemed guilty of an infraction, and upon
conviction shall be punishable by civil infraction penalty as established by the Boise City Council and listed on the most current City Clerk fee schedule.
(Ord. 41-17, 12-19-2017, eff. 2-1-2018)
B. Temporary Use Permit Violations: In the case of temporary use permit violations, the operator or registered owner of a vehicle or other apparatus,
equipment or nonvehicular items parked in violation of this provision shall be guilty of an infraction, which shall be assessed per violation, per parking
space, per day. Second or subsequent offenses within a calendar year shall be assessed at an enhanced fee rate. The penalty for the infraction and
any enhanced penalty fee rates shall be established by the City Council and listed on the most current City Clerk fee schedule. (Ord. 57-15, 12-1-2015;
amd. Ord. 41-17, 12-19-2017, eff. 2-1-2018)
6-10A-28: PROCEDURES TO CONTEST PARKING VIOLATIONS; PARKING CITATION DELINQUENCY AND COLLECTION:
A. Time Limit For Required Action: In order to contest a parking citation in the Fourth District Magistrate Court, a registered owner or operator must within
thirty (30) days of receipt of the parking citation:
1. Provide written notice to the Parking Services Office of his intent to contest a parking citation; and
2. Accept service of complaint and summons in person at the Parking Services Office.
Failure to strictly comply with these requirements prohibits the registered owner or operator from contesting his parking citation in court.
B. Separate Offense: Each calendar day on which a violation to any provision of this article occurs or continues shall constitute a separate offense, unless
otherwise specified herein.
C. Delinquent Parking Citations: A parking citation shall be deemed delinquent if:
1. The registered owner or operator fails to either pay or contest a parking citation in court within thirty (30) days from the date of its original date of
issuance;
2. The registered owner fails to either pay or contest a parking citation within thirty (30) days from the date of posting notice of the citation by U.S. first
class mail to the address of the vehicle's registered owner; or
3. The registered owner or operator fails to accept service of the summons within thirty (30) days of his written notice to contest the parking citation in
court.
The City may utilize all available collection methods to recoup fines and fees owed on all delinquent parking citations. Nothing herein alters the
assessment of fees associated with failure to pay the parking citation within the time frames dictated within this article. (Ord. 41-17, 12-19-2017, eff.
2-1-2018)
ARTICLE B. PARKING METERS AND RELATED REGULATIONS
6-10B-1: LEGAL AUTHORITY:
Idaho Code sections 50-302, 50-314 and 49-208 authorize the City to regulate, limit and control traffic and parking within its boundaries. Additionally, Idaho
Code section 40-1415(8) specifically grants the City the authority to place, care for and remove parking meters within its boundaries, to regulate the use of
such parking meters, to enforce such regulations, and to keep all revenues received therefrom. (Ord. 56-15, 12-1-2015)
6-10B-2: PURPOSE:
The purpose of the regulations and standards established within this article is to ensure adequate on-street parking is provided and maintained throughout
the City. Parking meters, demand-based parking fees and the use of special parking permits are intended to relieve congestion, provide adequate turnover
of on-street parking spaces and reduce meter re-plugging, provide for the safe and orderly movement of traffic throughout the City, promote business and
industry through adequate customer parking, allow for the use of special parking permits for business purposes, and protect the City and surrounding
areas from air pollution by encouraging the use of zero emission vehicles. (Ord. 41-17, 12-19-2017, eff. 2-1-2018)
6-10B-3: SCOPE:
This article sets forth policies, standards, requirements and procedures applicable to parking meters, as well as the issuance, regulation, enforcement,
renewal, suspension and revocation of parking permits which exempt holders from parking meter fees. (Ord. 56-15, 12-1-2015)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 262/503
6-10B-4: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this article, the following terms, phrases, words, and derivations shall have the meaning given herein. When not inconsistent with the
context, words used in the present tense include the future tense, words in the plural number include the singular number, and words in the singular
number include the plural number. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory. Words used throughout this article, but not defined
herein, shall have their plain, ordinary, and common meaning. Words in any gender shall apply to the feminine, masculine and neuter genders.
ACCESSIBLE PARKING SPACE: A parking space which is specifically marked and signed as reserved for a person with a disability who has and displays
an accessible parking placard or plates issued by the Idaho Department of Transportation pursuant to Idaho Code section 49-410.
ALLEY: A public way of limited use intended only to provide access to the rear or side of lots or buildings.
CITY: The City of Boise City, Idaho.
CITY CLERK'S OFFICE: The Office of the City Clerk of the City or its designee.
DELIVERY VEHICLE: A vehicle which is used by a bona fide business for the distribution of goods or merchandise and which displays advertising or
lettering at least two inches (2") in height identifying such business on the exterior of the vehicle.
DEMAND-BASED PARKING: Days, hours, and parking meter fees that are variable and set by the Director considering the location, day of the week, time
of day, maximum parking time allowed, and the capacities of available parking meters, in order to maximize target utilization.
DIRECTOR: The Director of the Department of Finance and Administration or his designee, who must be an employee of the City.
HIGHWAY: The entire width between the boundary lines of every public way for vehicular travel use, with jurisdiction extending to the adjacent property
line, including sidewalks, shoulders, berms and rights-of-way not intended for motorized traffic. The term "street" is interchangeable with the term
"highway".
METER HOOD: A device issued pursuant to this article for use in conjunction with a meter use permit to cover a parking meter while the parking meter
space is being utilized.
OPERATOR: A person who drives, operates or is in actual physical control of a vehicle.
PARK OR PARKING: The stopping or standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, other than temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged
in loading or unloading property or passengers.
PARKING METER: Any mechanical, electro-mechanical, electronic, digital or telephonic device or system which is either indicated by signage or physically
installed on or in the curb, sidewalk, or public right-of-way that regulates parking in a designated parking meter space.
PARKING METER SPACE: The area on or adjacent to the roadway in which to stop, stand, or park a vehicle that is controlled by a parking meter device or
system or designated by lines or other markings.
PARKING SERVICES OFFICE: The Boise City Parking Services Office, or its designee.
PARKING SESSION: The period of time purchased for parking in a parking meter space.
PARKING SPACE: The area on or adjacent to the roadway in which to stop, stand, or park a vehicle that is designated by lines or other markings.
PERMIT: A privilege that allows its holder to access certain parking spaces and locations, which form includes, but is not limited to, a printed pass, a
sticker, an RFID chip, or an electronic privilege associated with a specific vehicle license plate.
PERSON: Any individual, partnership, association, corporation, or organization of any kind, or any governmental entity, including the State of Idaho and
every political subdivision thereof.
PURCHASED TIME: The amount of parking session time paid for by using a parking meter, during which time a vehicle may be lawfully parked in the
designated parking meter space including the initial twenty (20) minutes of parking time available at no charge.
RE-FEED OR RE-PLUG A PARKING METER: Depositing additional payment in a parking meter for the purpose of parking longer than the maximum
allowable time of continuous parking by a single vehicle.
ROADWAY: That portion of a highway improved, designed or ordinarily used for vehicular travel, exclusive of sidewalks, shoulders, berms and rights-ofway.
STOPPING OR STANDING: The complete cessation of movement of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, except when necessary to avoid conflict with
other traffic or in compliance with the directions of law enforcement, authorized personnel representing an entity with jurisdiction, or an official traffic control
device.
STREET: See definition of highway. "Street" and "highway" are interchangeable terms.
TARGET UTILIZATION: The percentage of parking meter space usage and turnover during hours of operation for the most effective on-street parking
management.
VEHICLE: Every device in, upon, or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a highway, excepting devices used
exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks.
ZERO EMISSION VEHICLE: A vehicle that does not directly produce any atmospheric emission or pollution. (Ord. 41-17, 12-19-2017, eff. 2-1-2018)
6-10B-5: PARKING METER FEES, SETTING RATES AND PAYMENT FORMS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 263/503
A. Free Twenty Minute Parking: The initial twenty (20) minutes of a parking session for any single vehicle shall be free of charge by using the "20 minutes
free" button or function on the parking meter.
B. Hourly Rates:
1. The City Council shall establish the maximum and minimum hourly fees for parking meters in the City and such fees shall be listed on the most
current City Clerk fee schedule.
2. To achieve maximum target utilization, all parking meter fees may be adjusted by the Parking Services Office within the set maximum and minimum
hourly fees as established by the City Council. (Ord. 56-15, 12-1-2015)
3. All parking meters shall accept only proper forms of payment which shall include, but not be limited to, legal United States coins, credit cards, or
debit cards. (Ord. 41-17, 12-19-2017, eff. 2-1-2018)
6-10B-6: DAYS AND HOURS OF PARKING METER OPERATION AND ENFORCEMENT:
A. Each parking meter shall be posted with the days and hours of operation and enforcement.
B. Except on the holidays set forth below, the City Council authorizes the Director to set and adjust the days and hours for parking meter enforcement in
the City by resolution approved by City Council.
C. Use of parking meter spaces on the following holidays shall be free of charge:
New Year's Day (January 1)
Martin Luther King, Jr. Day (third Monday of January)
Washington's Birthday/Presidents' Day (third Monday of February)
Memorial Day (last Monday in May)
Independence Day (July 4)
Labor Day (first Monday in September)
Veterans Day (November 11)
Thanksgiving Day (fourth Thursday in November)
Christmas Day (December 25) (Ord. 41-17, 12-19-2017, eff. 2-1-2018)
6-10B-7: PARKING PERMIT APPLICATIONS AND REQUIREMENTS:
A. Scope Of Office Authority: All parking permits and meter hoods regulated by this article and article A of this chapter, shall be issued, maintained and
renewed by the Parking Services Office.
B. Application: All parking permit and meter hood applications may be obtained from the Parking Services Office and shall include, at minimum the
following information:
1. The name, address and other current contact information for the applicant;
2. The make, model and year of the vehicle for which the permit is sought; and
3. A statement signed and sworn by the applicant, under penalty of perjury, that all information submitted is complete, true and accurate to the best of
his knowledge.
C. Additional Information: Additional application information may be required for particular parking permits as set forth in this article or article A of this
chapter.
D. Nonrefundable Fee: A nonrefundable application fee in an amount established by the City Council and listed on the most current City Clerk fee
schedule shall accompany every application for a parking permit or meter hood.
E. Display: All parking permits issued under this article or article A of this chapter, shall be clearly displayed in full and unobstructed view as directed by
the Parking Services Office. (Ord. 56-15, 12-1-2015)
6-10B-8: ZERO EMISSION VEHICLE PERMIT; SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS:
A. Vehicle Inspection: In addition to the general parking permit application and requirements set forth in section 6-10B-7 of this article, all applicants for a
zero emission vehicle permit shall submit the vehicle to inspection by the Parking Services Office, prior to the issuance of such permit.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 264/503
B. Vehicle Specific; Nontransferable: Zero emission vehicle permits are vehicle specific and nontransferable.
C. Entitlement Of Permit Holder: The holder of a zero emission vehicle permit is entitled to park without paying for purchased time at a parking meter
space. (Ord. 56-15, 12-1-2015)
6-10B-9: DELIVERY PERMITS, METER USE PERMITS AND METER HOODS; SPECIFIC REGULATIONS AND APPLICATION
REQUIREMENTS:
A. Additional Application Requirements: In addition to the general parking permit application and requirements set forth in section 6-10B-7 of this article, all
applicants for a delivery permit, meter use permit and meter hood shall provide a detailed description of the purpose or use for which the delivery or
meter use permit is sought; and submit the vehicle, for which the permit is being sought, to inspection by the Parking Services Office to ensure that the
vehicle's appearance and proposed use, purpose or operation complies with the standards established by the Parking Services Office.
B. When Parking Permitted: The holder of a delivery permit, meter use permit or meter hood is entitled to park without paying for purchased time at a
parking meter space, but only while the vehicle is actually being used for the purpose for which such permit or meter hood is issued.
C. Delivery Permits; Specific Regulations:
1. All applicants for a delivery permit shall submit a separate application to the Parking Services Office for each delivery vehicle.
2. A delivery permit authorizes the permitted vehicle to park in a parking meter space for up to one hour while the vehicle's operator is present and
actively engaged in loading or unloading goods or merchandise.
3. A delivery permit shall not be used to park in a parking meter space within two (2) City blocks of the residence or place of business of the person
who applied for and was issued the permit.
4. A delivery permit shall not be used at parking meter spaces where the maximum allowable time of continuous parking by a single vehicle is less than
one hour.
D. Meter Use Permits; Specific Regulations:
1. A meter use permit may be issued for any one of the following time frames:
a. One year;
b. One calendar month;
c. One week;
d. One day.
2. A single application for a meter use permit can identify up to five (5) vehicles that may park pursuant to the meter use permit, once it is issued.
3. Only vehicles identified within the application for a meter use permit are authorized to park using such permit.
4. Meter use permits shall not be used at parking meter spaces where the maximum allowable time of continuous parking by a single vehicle is less
than one hour.
E. Meter Hood; Specific Requirements:
1. Upon application for a daily, weekly or monthly meter use permit, the applicant may also request a meter hood for a parking meter.
2. When in use, a meter hood shall be locked onto the parking meter, thereby entitling the applicant to park one of the vehicles identified on the meter
use permit application in the parking meter space assigned to the parking meter on which the meter hood is locked.
3. A vehicle parked in a hooded parking meter space must also display a valid meter use permit that is clearly visible from outside the vehicle. (Ord. 56-
15, 12-1-2015)
6-10B-10: UNLAWFUL ACTS:
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to:
1. Park in a parking meter space without using the associated parking meter to pay for purchased time.
2. Park in a parking meter space for longer than the purchased time, or fail to vacate a parking meter space at or before expiration of the purchased
time.
3. Continue to park in a parking meter space longer than the maximum allowable time of continuous parking by a single vehicle after having already
been cited for an "expired parking meter" violation.
4. Re-feed (or "re-plug") a parking meter.
5. Park a vehicle in a parking meter space with any portion of the vehicle extending across the painted lines or markings designating the boundary of a
single parking meter space.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 265/503
6. Park more than one vehicle in a single parking meter space.
7. Park in a parking meter space that is officially marked as restricted or reserved under the Parking Services Office's authority or that is blocked by an
official traffic control device or sign, or that is covered by a meter hood unless specifically permitted to do so.
8. Park in a parking meter space contrary to the lawful use of a permit.
9. Use, or allow to be used, a zero emission vehicle permit to park a vehicle other than the vehicle for which the permit was issued in a parking meter
space without paying for purchased time.
10. Use, or allow to be used, any delivery permit, meter use permit or meter hood to park a vehicle which is not identified on the application for the
issued permit without paying for purchased time.
11. Fail to comply with the terms, conditions, or restrictions placed on the issuance and use of a delivery permit, meter use permit, or meter hood
issued pursuant to this article. (Ord. 41-17, 12-19-2017, eff. 2-1-2018)
6-10B-11: NOTICE OF PARKING VIOLATION, PROCEDURES AND PENALTIES:
A. Procedure: The notice of and procedure for handling parking violations under this article is set forth in section 6-10A-26 et seq., of this chapter. (Ord.
41-17, 12-19-2017, eff. 2-1-2018)
B. Fines: The fines for parking violations set forth in this article are established by the City Council and listed on the most current City Clerk parking fees
schedule.
C. Responsibility: If any vehicle is observed stopped, standing or parked in violation of any provision of this article and the identity of the operator cannot
be determined, the vehicle's owner, or the person in whose name the vehicle is registered, or the person who is the named lessee in a lease or rental
agreement, is responsible for all violations involving such vehicle. (Ord. 56-15, 12-1-2015)
6-10B-12: DENIAL, SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF PERMITS:
A. Grounds: A permittee or an operator using a parking permit or meter hood issued pursuant to this article or article A of this chapter, may be subject to
denial, suspension or revocation of the permit or meter hood for any of the following reasons:
1. A permittee or operator, while operating a vehicle with a parking permit or meter hood, violates one or more parking provisions;
2. The permittee obtained his permit by fraud or misrepresentation;
3. The eligibility criteria for the permit are no longer met;
4. The permit is being or has been exercised contrary to its terms or conditions by the permittee or an operator;
5. The permittee or applicant fails to pay any applicable fee imposed pursuant to this article or the pertinent permit chapter; or
6. The permittee is operating under such permit in such a manner as to be detrimental to the public health, safety and welfare. (Ord. 56-15, 12-1-2015)
B. Accessible Parking Space; Residential, Special Parking District: Accessible parking space, and residential and special parking district designation
applications, as set forth in sections 6-10A-16 and 6-10A-20 of this chapter shall also be governed by the review process set forth in section 6-10B-17
et seq., of this article. (Ord. 41-17, 12-19-2017, eff. 2-1-2018)
6-10B-13: NOTICE OF DENIAL, REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION:
A. Notice: If an applicant for a parking permit governed by this article or article A of this chapter, is denied or such permit is suspended or revoked, a letter
will be sent by registered or certified mail to the applicant or permittee's address on file with the Parking Services Office. (Ord. 56-15, 12-1-2015)
B. Content: Every notice of denial, suspension or revocation shall include a statement or description explaining: (Ord. 41-17, 12-19-2017, eff. 2-1-2018)
1. The proposed decision or action, and if for suspension or revocation, the effective date of the proposed decision or action, which date shall not be
less than ten (10) business days after the date of the notice; and for suspension, the time period for the suspension, which shall be no longer than six
(6) months;
2. The reasons why the application is denied or the permit is suspended or revoked;
3. The applicant or permittee has the opportunity to request an informal review, an administrative review hearing by the Director, and a review hearing
by a Hearing Officer to contest the proposed decision or action; and
4. If the applicant or permittee fails to request an informal review within ten (10) business days of the date of the notice, the permittee or applicant
waives his opportunity to contest the proposed decision or action, and the action shall become final on the notice's effective date. (Ord. 56-15, 12-1-
2015)
6-10B-14: STAY OF SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 266/503
A. Effective Date: Absent an emergency as set forth in section 6-10B-15 of this article, the effective date of a proposed suspension or revocation shall be
not less than ten (10) business days after the date of the notice, unless otherwise mutually agreed to between the Parking Services Office and the
permittee. (Ord. 41-17, 12-19-2017, eff. 2-1-2018)
B. Decision Effective Immediately: The decision of the Parking Services Office to deny or not renew a permit shall result in no stay and the decision shall
become effective immediately. (Ord. 56-15, 12-1-2015)
6-10B-15: EMERGENCY SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION:
A. Permitted: Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, when, in the opinion of the Parking Services Office, there is a clear and immediate threat
to the health, safety or welfare of the public, there shall be no stay of the suspension or revocation. The Parking Services Office shall prepare a written
notice of suspension or revocation that includes a statement of the decision or action, an explanation of the reasons for the decision or action, the Code
section relied upon for the decision or action and an explanation of the permittee's rights to request an administrative review hearing from the Director
and a review hearing by a Hearing Officer.
B. Request For Review: The permittee shall have the right to request an administrative review hearing within ten (10) days of the emergency suspension
or revocation. (Ord. 56-15, 12-1-2015)
6-10B-16: WAITING PERIOD BEFORE BECOMING ELIGIBLE TO REAPPLY AFTER REVOCATION:
A permittee whose permit was revoked may not reapply for a new permit until one year has elapsed from the date of notice of the revocation, the informal
review, the written decision in an administrative review or the written decision following a hearing before a Hearing Officer, whichever is latest; such waiting
period shall also apply to any applicant who is a partnership, association or corporation that includes a previously revoked permittee who is holding a ten
percent (10%) or more interest in the partnership, association or corporation. A permittee's failure to accept, acknowledge, or receive notice shall not
invalidate the waiting period. (Ord. 41-17, 12-19-2017, eff. 2-1-2018)
6-10B-17: REQUEST FOR INFORMAL REVIEW BY PARKING SERVICES OFFICE:
A. Time Limit For Request: Upon receipt of a notice of denial, suspension, or revocation, an applicant or permittee may request an informal review by the
Parking Services Office within ten (10) business days after the date the decision is mailed or otherwise delivered to the applicant or permittee. (Ord. 41-
17, 12-19-2017, eff. 2-1-2018)
B. Information Required: A request for an informal review shall contain the following information:
1. The name of applicant or permittee;
2. If an existing permit, the City applicant or permit number; and
3. The reasons for which the review is requested set forth with specificity. (Ord. 56-15, 12-1-2015)
6-10B-18: INFORMAL REVIEW:
A. Review Requirements: If the Parking Services Office receives a request for an informal review, the Parking Services Office shall:
1. Review the decision or action and any information submitted by a permittee or an applicant; and
2. Communicate with the permittee or applicant if additional documentation or clarification is required.
B. Requests Beyond Time Limit: The Parking Services Office shall not consider any request for informal review that is not received within ten (10) business
days of the date of the notice of denial, suspension or revocation.
C. Permittee Failure To Respond: If the permittee fails to respond to communication requests, the decision or action shall become effective at twelve
o'clock (12:00) midnight on the effective date of the notice.
D. Burden Of Proof: The applicant or permittee has the burden of proof and must establish that the decision or action of the Parking Services Office was
arbitrary or capricious.
E. Informal Review: The review shall be conducted informally. The Parking Services Office shall review the decision or action and the reasons therefor with
the applicant or permittee. The applicant or permittee, in person or through his attorney, may present any evidence showing reason why the decision or
action was arbitrary or capricious.
F. Decision Time Limit: The Parking Services Office's decision with respect to a request for informal review will be issued within seven (7) business days of
the receipt of the informal review request or upon receipt of additional documentation or clarification as requested.
G. Prohibited Review Official: The informal review shall not be conducted by the individual in the Parking Services Office who issued the notice of denial,
suspension or revocation. (Ord. 56-15, 12-1-2015)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 267/503
6-10B-19: REQUEST FOR ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW BY THE DIRECTOR:
A. Permitted: If the applicant or permittee fails to obtain the relief requested in the informal review, the applicant or permittee may request an administrative
review hearing by the Director.
B. Time Limit For Request: A request for an administrative review must occur within seven (7) business days of the mailing or hand delivery of the final
decision of the informal review to the applicant or permittee.
C. Information Required: A request for an administrative review shall contain the following information:
1. The name of applicant or permittee;
2. If an existing permittee, the City applicant or permit number;
3. The reasons for which the review is requested set forth with specificity;
4. The applicant's or permittee's intent to be represented by legal counsel;
5. The remedy requested; and
6. The applicant's or permittee's availability for a hearing within the next seven (7) to fifteen (15) business days. (Ord. 56-15, 12-1-2015)
6-10B-20: ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW HEARING BY DIRECTOR:
A. Review Requirements: If the Director receives a request for an administrative review hearing, the Director shall:
1. Schedule a date for the hearing not more than fifteen (15) business days and not less than seven (7) business days after the Director receives the
request;
2. Notify the permittee or applicant of the date, time and location of the hearing; and
3. State in the notice that the applicant or permittee must appear at and participate in the hearing in order to contest the denial, nonrenewal or the
proposed suspension or revocation.
B. Requests Beyond Time Limit: The Director shall not consider any request for review that is not received within seven (7) business days of the date of
the mailing or hand delivery of final resolution of the informal review.
C. Permittee Failure To Appear: If the permittee fails to appear at the hearing, the decision or action shall become effective at twelve o'clock (12:00)
midnight the day following the hearing.
D. Burden Of Proof: The applicant or permittee has the burden of proof and must establish that the decision or action of the Parking Services Office was
arbitrary or capricious.
E. Informal Hearings: The hearings shall be conducted informally. The Director or his designee shall review the decision or action and the reasons therefor
with the applicant or permittee. The applicant or permittee, in person or through his attorney, may present any evidence showing reason why the
decision or action was arbitrary or capricious. The Director shall cause an audio or video recording to be made of the hearing.
F. Default Decision: If an applicant or permittee fails to appear at the administrative review hearing, the Director shall enter a proposed decision of default
upholding the denial, suspension or revocation. The proposed decision of default may be rescinded if, within seven (7) business days of the date of
mailing, the applicant or permittee submits a written explanation for not appearing, which the Director finds substantial and reasonable.
G. Decision; Time Limit: The Director's written decision will be issued within seven (7) business days of the hearing. The Director's decision will include the
reasons for his decision.
H. Effective Date Of Decision: The Director's decision shall become effective ten (10) business days after the date the decision is mailed or hand delivered
to the applicant or permittee. (Ord. 56-15, 12-1-2015)
6-10B-21: REVIEW OF DIRECTOR'S DECISION:
A. Time Limit For Request: A permittee or applicant may request a review of the Director's decision by a Hearing Officer within ten (10) business days of
the effective date of the Director's decision. (Ord. 56-15, 12-1-2015)
B. Information Required; Fee: A request for review of the Director's decision must be filed in writing and must include that information set forth in
subsection 6-10B-17B of this article. In addition, the request for review must be accompanied by a copy of the decision or action that is the subject of
the review, and identify all legal and factual basis of disagreement with the Director's decision. Requests for review must also include the applicant's or
permittee's intent to be represented by legal counsel and include payment in accordance with the current fee schedule. (Ord. 56-15, 12-1-2015; amd.
2019 Code)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 268/503
C. Burden Of Proof: The applicant or permittee has the burden of proof and must establish that the decision or action of the Parking Services Office was
arbitrary or capricious.
D. Default Decision For Failure To Appear: If an applicant or permittee fails to appear at the review hearing, the Hearing Officer shall enter a proposed
decision of default. The proposed decision of default may be rescinded if, within seven (7) business days of the date of mailing, the applicant or
permittee submits a written explanation for not appearing, which the Hearing Officer finds substantial and reasonable. (Ord. 56-15, 12-1-2015)
6-10B-22: AUTHORITY OF HEARING OFFICER:
A. Limitation Of Authority: The Hearing Officer will consider only information that was available to the Director at the time the decision was made. If a party
shows with good cause that there is additional relevant information that was not presented to the Director, the Hearing Officer will remand the request
for administrative review to the Director for reconsideration. No Hearing Officer has the jurisdiction to invalidate any Federal or State Statute,
ordinance, rule or regulation, or court order. The Hearing Officer must defer to the Director's interpretation of statutes, ordinances, rules, regulations or
policy unless the Hearing Officer finds the Director's interpretation to be contrary to the plain meaning of the statute or ordinance or an abuse of
discretion.
B. Regulation Of Proceedings: The Hearing Officer shall have and exercise the power to regulate the proceedings and to do all acts and to take all
measures necessary or proper for the efficient performance of the Hearing Officer's duties under this article. The Hearing Officer shall have all powers
of the City for the hearing of these matters, may issue subpoenas in the name of the City, may rule upon the admissibility of evidence, may put
witnesses under oath and may examine them and may call the parties to the action and examine them upon oath. (Ord. 56-15, 12-1-2015)
6-10B-23: WRITTEN REPORT:
A. Required: The Hearing Officer shall make findings of fact and conclusions of law as appropriate and issue a written report. The order must either affirm
the Director's action or reverse and remand the Director's action for further proceedings. The Hearing Officer does not have authority to modify the
Director's action. The Hearing Officer shall file the report with the Director, along with the recording of the proceedings, transcripts, if any, minutes,
evidence and original exhibits offered or received at the hearing. The Hearing Officer shall transmit a copy of the report to all persons entitled to notice.
The Hearing Officer shall cause an audio or video recording to be made of the hearing.
B. Issuance; Effective Date: The Hearing Officer's report will be issued within fifteen (15) business days of the hearing, and shall become effective three
(3) business days after the date the decision is mailed or hand delivered to the applicant or permittee. Failure of the Hearing Officer to issue a report
within fifteen (15) business days shall not invalidate any suspension or revocation. (Ord. 56-15, 12-1-2015)
6-10B-24: RESPONSIBILITIES OF PERMITTEES:
A. Applicability To Employees, Agents: Every permittee is responsible for ensuring that his respective employees, agents and affiliates are familiar with the
applicable policies, standards, laws and ordinances applicable to the permit issued to him by the City.
B. Surrender: All permits and meter hoods issued pursuant to this article or article A of this chapter, shall remain the property of the City, and shall be
surrendered to the Parking Services Office within seventy two (72) hours of the expiration thereof. Permits and meter hoods which are suspended or
revoked shall be surrendered to the Parking Services Office within seventy two (72) hours of the final disposition of such suspension or revocation.
When permits are suspended or revoked immediately without stay under section 6-10B-15 of this article, the permit or meter hood shall be surrendered
immediately upon demand of the Parking Services Office. (Ord. 56-15, 12-1-2015)
ARTICLE C. PARKING SERVICES AUTHORIZED TOWING
6-10C-1: TOWING AUTHORIZED:
A. Contract For Towing: The City, through its Division of Parking Services, shall contract with a towing company (hereinafter referred to as "towing
company") located within the area of impact of the City, including the City of Garden City, for the purpose of towing vehicles pursuant to this article. The
contract shall designate the maximum tow and per day storage fee allowed to be charged for a tow and subsequent storage pursuant to this article.
B. Authority Of Towing Company: The towing company shall only be authorized to tow a vehicle pursuant to this article upon written request of the Division
of Parking Services.
C. Lien Against Towed Vehicle: Upon performing an authorized tow, the towing company shall have a lien against the towed vehicle for the amount of the
towing fee and storage costs, not to exceed ninety (90) days.
D. Conditions: Parking Services shall only authorize the towing of a vehicle upon confirmation that the registered owner of the vehicle has accumulated
delinquent, unpaid or otherwise unsettled and uncontested parking fines which have remained unpaid for a period of thirty (30) days totaling at least
two hundred dollars ($200.00), or five (5) or more tickets. (1952 Code § 10-21-01)
6-10C-2: NOTICE OF TOW:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 269/503
A. Notice Required: Upon performing a tow, the towing company shall send notice to the registered owner of the towed vehicle at the address on file with
the Department of Transportation. Notice shall be mailed within twenty four (24) hours by first class mail postage prepaid.
B. Content: The notice shall:
1. Inform the owner that the vehicle has been towed pursuant to this article.
2. Identify the vehicle by year, make, model and license plate number.
3. Indicate where the vehicle was removed from and the current location of the vehicle.
4. Describe the requirements for retrieving the vehicle from impound.
5. State that the vehicle can be sold for tow and storage charges, and unpaid parking fines, if not claimed within thirty (30) days from the date of mailing
of the notice.
6. Describe the procedure for obtaining a hearing. (1952 Code § 10-21-02)
6-10C-3: RELEASE OF VEHICLE:
A. Payment Of Outstanding Parking Fines: A vehicle towed pursuant to this article shall only be returned to the owner upon payment in full, by cashier's
check, money order, debit card or credit card, payable to the City, of any outstanding parking fines for which the owner has not previously asked for a
hearing with the Magistrate Court.
B. Payment Of Towing Fee: Prior to the release of the vehicle, the owner shall also be responsible for the towing fee and associated storage costs incurred
by the towing company. The towing fee and storage costs shall be paid directly to the towing company.
C. Proof Of Ownership: The owner must also present proof of ownership of the vehicle, by way of photo identification consistent with the name on the
vehicle registration, to the towing company prior to the release of the vehicle to the owner. (1952 Code § 10-21-03)
6-10C-4: HEARING:
A. Request For Hearing: An owner who disputes the appropriateness of the towing and impoundment of the vehicle may request a hearing with a Hearing
Officer for the City.
B. Time Limit For Filing: The request for hearing must be filed in writing with the Division of Parking Services within thirty (30) working days of the mailing
of the notice of tow or ten (10) working days of the release of the vehicle, whichever occurs first.
C. Scheduled Hearing: A hearing will be scheduled with the Hearing Officer within seventy two (72) hours of receipt of the request for hearing, unless a
longer period is specifically requested by the owner.
D. Authority Of Hearing Officer: The Hearing Officer shall only determine whether the impoundment was proper and whether the associated towing and
storage fees were proper. The Hearing Officer shall not have the authority to determine the appropriateness of the parking infractions which resulted in
the towing of the vehicle.
E. Findings Of Hearing Officer: The findings of the Hearing Officer shall be made in writing at the time of the hearing. If the Hearing Officer finds that the
impoundment and associated fees were appropriate and the fines and towing and storage fees have not been paid, the findings of the Hearing Officer
shall include a notice to the towing company that the fines and fees must be paid before the release of the vehicle to the owner. If the Hearing Officer
finds that the impoundment and associated fees were not appropriate, the findings shall include a notice setting forth an appropriate remedy, up to and
including release of the vehicle to the owner.
F. Decision Final: The decision of the Hearing Officer shall be final. (1952 Code § 10-21-04)
6-10C-5: DISPOSAL OF UNCLAIMED VEHICLES:
If the owner of the vehicle fails to pay the tow and storage fees and the parking fines within thirty (30) days of the mailing of the notice of tow, and has not
requested a hearing pursuant to subsection 6-10C-4B of this article, the tow company may proceed to sell the vehicle at public auction by giving ten (10)
days public notice of the sale by advertising in the official newspaper of the City, which notice shall contain a description of the property to be sold, the time
and place of sale and the terms and conditions of the sale. The proceeds of the sale must be applied to discharge of the lien of tow company and then to
the fines owed to the City. The remainder, if any, must be paid over to the owner of the vehicle. (1952 Code § 10-21-05)
Chapter 11
STOPPING FOR LOADING OR UNLOADING
6-11-1: AUTHORITY TO DESIGNATE CURB LOADING ZONES:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 270/503
A. Authority: The Parking Services Office is hereby authorized to determine the location of curb loading zones and may place and maintain appropriate
signs indicating the same and stating the hours during which the provisions of this article are applicable.
B. Guidelines: In determining the placement of on street loading zone locations, the following guidelines will apply:
1. Loading zones will be twenty five feet (25') to thirty feet (30') or multiples thereof and will be located on the approach side to intersections.
2. Loading zones are warranted based on the following criteria:
a. No alley or off street space is available for loading use.
b. No curb loading space within one hundred feet (100') of proposed zone without crossing a street or alley, except in an area of concentrated
activity.
c. A minimum of ten (10) to fifteen (15) stops per day by pick up and/or delivery per business, or combination of businesses proposing to use the
zone. (1952 Code § 10-12-01)
6-11-2: STANDING IN CURB LOADING ZONES:
No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle for any purpose or period of time other than for the expeditious loading or unloading of passengers, supplies
and merchandise in any place marked as curb loading zone during hours when the provisions applicable to such zones are in effect. In no case shall the
stop for loading and unloading exceed thirty (30) minutes for trucks or ten (10) minutes for passenger vehicles. (1952 Code § 10-12-02)
Chapter 12
PEDESTRIANS
6-12-1: PEDESTRIANS SUBJECT TO TRAFFIC CONTROL SIGNALS:
Pedestrians shall be subject to traffic control signals as declared in chapter 5 of this title, but in all other places pedestrians shall be granted those rights,
and be subject to the restrictions, stated in this chapter. (1952 Code § 10-06-01)
6-12-2: PEDESTRIANS' RIGHT-OF-WAY IN CROSSWALKS:
A. Driver To Yield Right-Of-Way: When traffic control signals are not in place or not in operation, the driver of a vehicle shall yield the right-of-way, slowing
down or stopping if need be to so yield, to a pedestrian crossing the roadway within a crosswalk when the pedestrian is upon the half of the roadway
upon which the vehicle is traveling, or when the pedestrian is approaching so closely from the opposite half of the roadway as to be in danger.
B. Pedestrian To Yield Right-Of-Way: Every pedestrian crossing a roadway at any point other than within a marked crosswalk or within an unmarked
crosswalk at an intersection shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles upon the roadway.
C. Sudden Movement By Pedestrian: No pedestrian shall suddenly leave a curb or other place of safety and walk or run into the path of a vehicle which is
so close that it is impossible for the driver to yield.
D. Pedestrian In Crosswalk: At any crosswalk designated and posted as a "Stop for Pedestrian in Crosswalk", the driver of a vehicle shall stop, to a
pedestrian crossing the roadway within the crosswalk, until the crosswalk is unoccupied.
E. Overtaking In Crosswalk: Whenever any vehicle is stopped at a marked crosswalk or at any unmarked crosswalk at any intersection to permit a
pedestrian to cross the roadway, the driver of any other vehicle approaching from the rear shall not overtake and pass such stopped vehicle. (1952
Code § 10-06-03)
6-12-3: PEDESTRIAN OVERPASSES:
A. Crossing: At any pedestrian overpass hereinafter described, it shall be unlawful for any pedestrian to cross a roadway within three hundred feet (300')
of either side of the overpass except by crossing the roadway on the overpass:
Pedestrian overpass on Overland Road at the intersection of Sage Street.
B. Prohibited Use: It shall be unlawful for any person to ride any vehicle, motorcycle or bicycle upon a pedestrian overpass. (1952 Code § 10-06-06)
Chapter 13
BICYCLES, E-BIKES, AND E-SCOOTERS
6-13-1: DEFINITIONS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 271/503
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words, and derivations shall have the meaning given herein. When not inconsistent with the
context, words used in the present tense include the future tense, words in the plural number include the singular number, and words in the singular
number include the plural number. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory. Words used throughout this title, but not defined herein,
shall have their plain, ordinary, and common meaning. Words in any gender shall apply to the feminine, masculine, and neuter genders.
ABANDONMENT: A bicycle, E-bike, E-scooter, or any part thereof, that is left or remains unattended or unused in a public place for seventy two (72)
consecutive hours or longer after it is tagged with a notice of intention to abate.
BICYCLE: Every vehicle having two (2) tandem wheels, or two (2) parallel wheels and one forward wheel, any two (2) of which are not less than twelve
inches (12") in diameter, propelled exclusively by human power upon which any person may ride, except scooters and similar devices.
BIKE LANE: A portion of a roadway designated for preferential or exclusive use by bicycles, E-bikes, or E-scooters that is distinguished from that portion of
the roadway to be used by motor vehicles by a painted strip and other pavement markings.
BIKE PATH: A completely separate right-of-way designated primarily for use by bicycles, E-bikes, E-scooters, or pedestrians, including but not limited to
the Greenbelt. Conflicts with pedestrians are kept to a minimum while cross-flows by motor vehicles are discouraged. The term bike path includes both the
paved surface and minimum of two feet (2') on either side.
BIKE PATH APPROACH: That area where a transition is made between a roadway, parking lot, sidewalk or other facility and a bike path. This area is
generally identified by wooden bollards, pavement markings and a parking prohibition.
BIKE/PEDESTRIAN CURB RAMP: A break in a curb designated to facilitate movement by the operator of a bicycle, E-bike, or E-scooter, pedestrian or
person with a disability from a street or parking lot to a sidewalk or bicycle facility.
BIKE ROUTE: Any roadway specifically signed for shared use by bicycles, E-bikes, or E-scooters, and motor vehicles.
BOISE RIVER GREENBELT (GREENBELT): The paved or improved pathways and connecting trails and the twenty feet (20') of publicly owned
greenspace on either side, including picnic tables, barbeque stands, benches and other improvements and fixtures connecting Boise Parks along the
Boise River and maintained by the Department of Parks and Recreation and delineated generally in the publication known as the map, and/or specifically
in the Inventory of Park Properties at the Office of the Director of the Department of Parks and Recreation. Greenbelt does not include any private property
which may lie within twenty feet (20') of the paved or improved pathways and connecting trails.
ELECTRIC POWER-ASSISTED BICYCLE (E-BIKE): A vehicle having two (2) tandem wheels or two (2) parallel wheels and one forward wheel, any two
(2) of which are not less than twelve inches (12") in diameter, that is designed to be operated by human power with the assistance of an electric motor that
has a power output of not more than seven hundred fifty (750) watts that: a) is incapable of propelling the vehicle at a speed of more than twenty (20)
miles per hour; and b) disengages or ceases to function when the vehicle's brakes are applied. An E-bike is not a motor vehicle for purposes of this
chapter.
ELECTRIC POWER-ASSISTED SCOOTER (E-SCOOTER): A two (2) wheeled device that has handlebars, has a floorboard that is designed to be stood
upon when riding, and is powered by an electric motor that has a power output of not more than three hundred (300) watts that: a) is incapable of
propelling the device at a speed of more than fifteen (15) miles per hour; and b) disengages or ceases to function when the device's brakes are applied.
An E-scooter is not a motor vehicle for purposes of this chapter.
FOOTHILLS TRAILS: Paths and trails in the Ridge to Rivers Trail Network that are located entirely and solely on property owned by the City.
OBSTRUCTIVE BICYCLE, E-BIKE, OR E-SCOOTER: Any bicycle, E-bike, E-scooter, or any part thereof, left in a public place that obstructs or impedes
vehicular or pedestrian traffic.
PUBLIC PLACE: Any publicly owned property, including, but not limited to, sidewalks, streets, alleys, parks, and plazas located within the City jurisdictional
limits. (Ord. 38-18, 9-25-2018)
6-13-2: TRAFFIC LAWS APPLY TO PERSONS RIDING BICYCLES, E-BIKES, AND E-SCOOTERS:
A. Requirements: Every person, regardless of age, who operates a bicycle, E-bike, or E-scooter upon a roadway, public parking lot, sidewalk, bike path,
bike lane or other public vehicular right-of-way in the City of Boise City ("City") shall be granted the same rights and shall be subject to the same
responsibilities applicable to a motor vehicle operator by the laws of the State of Idaho, and the provisions of this title not in conflict with and as
authorized under title 49, Idaho Code; except where provisions of those laws and ordinances by their very nature can have no application to bicycles,
E-bikes, or E-scooters, or where portions of this chapter direct otherwise.
B. Exemptions:
1. Any peace officer as defined in Idaho Code section 19-5101(d), operating a bicycle, E-bike, or E-scooter in the course and scope of his official duties
is exempt from the requirements of subsection A of this section, if the bicycle, E-bike, or E-scooter is being operated under any of the following
circumstances:
a. In response to an emergency call.
b. While engaged in rescue operations.
c. In the immediate pursuit of an actual or suspected violator of the law.
2. This subsection does not relieve a peace officer from the duty to operate a bicycle, E-bike, or E-scooter with due regard for the safety of all persons.
(Ord. 28-18, 8-21-2018)
6-13-3: REQUIRED EQUIPMENT:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 272/503
No person shall operate a bicycle, E-bike, or E-scooter without the following equipment:
A. Brakes capable of causing the bicycle, E-bike, or E-scooter to stop within twenty five feet (25') at ten (10) miles per hour on dry, level, clean pavement;
and
B. A bell, the human voice or other audible warning device capable of being heard at a distance of at least one hundred feet (100') away, except that no
bicycle, E-bike, or E-scooter shall be equipped with nor shall any person use upon a bicycle, E-bike, or E-scooter any siren or whistle; and
C. When in use at nighttime, a red reflector on the rear visible from a distance of three hundred feet (300') when directly in front of lawful upper beams of a
motor vehicle, and a forward-facing white light attached either to the bicycle, E-bike, E-scooter, or the operator that is visible from a distance of at least
five hundred feet (500') in front of the bicycle, E-bike, or E-scooter. A bicycle, E-bike, or E-scooter shall be equipped with a front-facing white or yellow
reflector when the operator uses a generator powered light that is unlit when the bicycle, E-bike, or E-scooter is stopped; and
D. All bicycles and E-bikes shall have a permanent seat designed for the bicycle or the E-bike being operated. E-scooters shall not have any attached
seats. (Ord. 28-18, 8-21-2018)
6-13-4: RIDING ON BICYCLES, E-BIKES, OR E-SCOOTERS:
A. No person riding or operating a bicycle or E-bike shall ride other than upon or astride a permanent and regular seat attached thereto.
B. No bicycle or/and E-bike shall be used to carry more persons at one time than the number for which it is designed and equipped.
C. No E-scooter shall be used to carry more than one person at one time.
D. No person shall operate a bicycle, E-bike, or E-scooter that is either too large or too small for such person to operate safely.
E. Every person operating a bicycle, E-bike, or E-scooter shall keep at least one hand on the handlebar at all times, and shall carry nothing that prevents
full control of the bicycle, E-bike, or E-scooter, or obstructs the operator's vision. (Ord. 28-18, 8-21-2018)
6-13-5: CLINGING TO MOTOR VEHICLES:
Persons riding or operating bicycles, E-bikes, or E-scooters shall not attach themselves or such bicycles, E-bikes, or E-scooters to a moving motor vehicle.
This section shall not prohibit attaching a trailer to a bicycle or E-bike that is designed to accommodate such a device. Attaching a trailer to an E-scooter is
prohibited. (Ord. 28-18, 8-21-2018)
6-13-6: RIDING ON ROADWAYS:
A. No person shall operate a bicycle, E-bike, or E-scooter on a roadway against the flow of motorized vehicular traffic, except where permitted by official
signs or pavement markings.
B. Every person operating a bicycle, E-bike, or E-scooter upon a two-way roadway is entitled to use the lane appropriate for the intended destination,
including the right-hand lane and any designated bus lane. The bicycle, E-bike, or E-scooter rider shall proceed in the same direction of travel as other
vehicles authorized to use that lane. On one-way roadways a bicycle, E-bike, or E-scooter may be operated in any existing lane.
C. The operator of a bicycle, E-bike, or E-scooter traveling at a rate of speed that delays a vehicle or vehicles following in the same lane shall be required,
when it is unlawful or unsafe for the following vehicle to pass, to move as far to the right of the traveled roadway, or to the left where the bicycle, E-bike,
or E-scooter is in the left lane of a one-way roadway, as is safe under the conditions then existing; provided, however, that when the operator is within
fifty feet (50') of an intersection, he shall not be required to move to the right or left until he has moved through the intersection.
D. In right turn only lanes where traffic signs or signals indicate a bus, trolley or street car is permitted to go straight rather than turn right, a bicycle, E-bike,
or E-scooter operator shall be permitted to go straight rather than turn right. (Ord. 28-18, 8-21-2018)
6-13-7: USING PROVIDED BIKE LANES AND BIKE PATHS:
A. Wherever a bike lane is present upon a roadway, the operator of a bicycle, E-bike, or E-scooter shall use that lane and shall not use the roadway;
except that the operator shall not be required to use or remain in a bike lane:
1. When the lane is of insufficient width to permit safe bicycle, E-bike, or E-scooter operation; or
2. When the condition of the pavement, or the presence of water, dirt, glass or other foreign objects upon the pavement prevents safe bicycle, E-bike,
or E-scooter operation in the lane; or
3. When moving into position to make a right or left turn; or
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 273/503
4. When an opening car door or other obstruction in an adjacent parking lane requires movement out of the lane.
B. Wherever a bike path has been provided immediately adjacent to a roadway, the operator of a bicycle, E-bike, or E-scooter shall use that path and shall
not use the roadway if official signs or markings so direct; except that the operator of a bicycle, E-bike, or E-scooter shall not be required to use or
remain on a bike path:
1. When the path is of insufficient width to permit safe bicycle, E-bike, or E-scooter operation; or
2. When the condition of the surface, or the presence of water, dirt, glass or other foreign objects upon the surface prevents safe bicycle, E-bike, or Escooter
operation on the path. (Ord. 28-18, 8-21-2018)
6-13-8: FOOTHILLS TRAILS:
No person shall operate, drive, lead, or ride an E-bike or E-scooter on any Foothills Trail unless written authorization is obtained from the City's
Department of Parks and Recreation in accordance with the provisions of the American With Disabilities Act of 1990, 42 USC section 12101 et seq. (Ord.
28-18, 8-21-2018)
6-13-9: RIDING UPON SIDEWALKS AND UPON AND WITHIN CROSSWALKS:
A. A bicycle, E-bike, or E-scooter may be operated upon a sidewalk and upon and within a crosswalk, except where prohibited by official traffic control
devices, or when the number of pedestrians using the sidewalk renders riding on the sidewalk unsafe because of the risk of colliding with pedestrians,
in which case the operator of a bicycle, E-bike, or E-scooter must dismount and walk the bicycle, E-bike, or E-scooter to an area where safe riding may
resume.
B. Any operator of a bicycle, E-bike, or E-scooter riding upon a sidewalk, or across a road way upon and within a crosswalk, shall yield the right-of-way to
any pedestrian and shall give an audible warning before overtaking and passing such pedestrian. The audible warning may be given by the voice or by
a bell or other lawful device capable of giving an audible signal to the person or persons being overtaken and passed.
C. Any operator of a bicycle, E-bike, or E-scooter riding upon a sidewalk, or across a roadway upon and within a crosswalk, shall have all the rights and
duties applicable to a pedestrian under the same circumstances.
D. Any operator of a bicycle, E-bike, or E-scooter riding on the sidewalk shall not suddenly leave a curb or other place of safety and move into the path of
a vehicle that is so close as to constitute an immediate hazard. (Ord. 28-18, 8-21-2018)
6-13-10: PASSING OTHER VEHICLES:
The operator of a bicycle, E-bike, or E-scooter may pass another vehicle upon the right when traveling on a two-way roadway and may pass on the left
when traveling in the left lane of a one-way roadway, but only under conditions permitting such movement in safety. The operator of a bicycle, E-bike, or Escooter
shall not pass between two (2) lanes of motor vehicles proceeding in the same direction. (Ord. 28-18, 8-21-2018)
6-13-11: DISMOUNT NOT REQUIRED WHEN STOPPING:
Whenever a bicycle, E-bike, or E-scooter operator is required to bring the bicycle, E-bike, or E-scooter to a stop in conformance with the official traffic
control devices, the operator shall halt forward motion but shall not be required to dismount or remove his feet from the pedals or the floorboard. (Ord. 28-
18, 8-21-2018)
6-13-12: TURN SIGNALS:
The operator of a bicycle, E-bike, or E-scooter intending to turn shall signal his intent to turn with the appropriate hand and arm signal at least one hundred
feet (100') prior to turning. The hand signal need not be continuous. (Ord. 28-18, 8-21-2018)
6-13-13: RIDING IN GROUPS:
Persons riding bicycles, E-bikes, or E-scooters shall not ride more than two (2) abreast except upon bike paths of twelve feet (12') or more. The operator
of a bicycle, E-bike, or E-scooter operating two (2) abreast upon a roadway, or bike path, shall return to a single file configuration when a vehicle
approaches from behind in the same lane. (Ord. 28-18, 8-21-2018)
6-13-14: BICYCLE, E-BIKE, OR E-SCOOTER PARKING:
Bicycles, E-bikes, or E-scooters shall not be parked in such a manner as to obstruct or impede the movement of pedestrians, motor vehicles or other
bicycles, E-bikes, or E-scooters, or to cause damage to trees, shrubs or other living plants. (Ord. 28-18, 8-21-2018)
6-13-15: USE OF BIKE PATHS AND BIKE LANES BY OTHER NON-MOTORIZED MODES OF TRANSPORTATION:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 274/503
A. No person shall drive, lead or ride a horse or other animal upon a bike lane or bike path.
B. No person shall roller skate, ride or operate a skateboard or gravity-operated or human powered vehicle not classified as a bicycle, E-bike, or E-scooter
upon a bike lane or bike path except in public parks.
C. Pedestrians shall not travel upon a bike path where a separate foot path has been provided or upon a bike lane where a sidewalk is provided.
D. When a pedestrian is traveling upon a bike path or bike lane:
1. The operator of a bicycle, E-bike, or E-scooter approaching the pedestrian from the rear shall be required to give audible warning when overtaking
and passing such pedestrian; and
2. The operator of a bicycle, E-bike, or E-scooter and a pedestrian approaching each other shall each be required to move to and remain upon their
right-hand half of the surface.
E. The operator of a bicycle, E-bike, or E-scooter shall always yield the right-of-way to a pedestrian who has a disability. (Ord. 28-18, 8-21-2018)
6-13-16: GROUP EVENTS:
A race, parade or other group event for bicycles, E-bikes, or E-scooters may be conducted upon public rights-of-way in the City if a permit is obtained.
Permit applications shall be made through the Office of the City Clerk. (Ord. 28-18, 8-21-2018)
6-13-17: UNLAWFUL USE OF BIKE LANES AND BIKE PATHS:
It shall be unlawful for any person without authorization from the local authority having jurisdiction thereof to cut, alter, break, injure, damage or perform
work upon any bike path or bike lane in the City. (Ord. 28-18, 8-21-2018)
6-13-18: RECKLESS OR INATTENTIVE OPERATION:
A person who uses or rides a bicycle, E-bike, or E-scooter on any public or private property open to public use inattentively, or carelessly and heedlessly,
in light of the circumstances then existing, or without due caution and circumspection, or at such speed or in any other manner as to endanger or be likely
to endanger any person or property shall be guilty of reckless or inattentive operation, a misdemeanor and, upon conviction subject to the penalty as
provided in section 1-4-1 of this Code. (Ord. 28-18, 8-21-2018; amd. 2019 Code)
6-13-19: BASIC RULE AND MAXIMUM POSTED SPEED LIMITS:
A person who uses, operates, or rides a bicycle, E-bike, or E-scooter on any public or private property open to public use shall obey all posted maximum
speed limits. Maximum speed limits may vary depending on location and pedestrian traffic levels. It is the responsibility of the operator of a bicycle, E-bike,
or E-scooter to know and obey all applicable maximum speed limits in the area of operation. Notwithstanding any posted maximum speed limit, no person
shall use, operate, or ride a bicycle, E-bike, or E-scooter at a speed greater than is reasonable and prudent under the conditions or circumstances then
existing and having regard to the actual and potential hazards then existing. (Ord. 28-18, 8-21-2018)
6-13-20: BICYCLE, E-BIKE, AND E-SCOOTER LICENSES:
A. The City, as a matter of public policy, recommends that all residents of the City who own a bicycle, E-bike, or E-scooter have such bicycle, E-bike, or Escooter
registered with and tagged by the Boise Police Department or its designated agents. The purpose of such license is to assist the owner, the
Boise Police Department, or other public safety agencies in recovering said bicycle, E-bike, or E-scooter should the bicycle, E-bike, or E-scooter be
stolen or otherwise misplaced.
B. A bicycle, E-bike, or E-scooter may be registered by filing with the Boise Police Department the name and address of the owner together with a
complete description of the bicycle, E-bike, or E-scooter on forms provided by or made available through the Boise Police Department. The fee for said
registration may be established by resolution of the Boise City Council. The registration fee applies for the entire period the license registrant owns the
licensed bicycle. Registration shall be serially numbered and kept on file by the Boise Police Department. Upon such registration, the Boise Police
Department or its designee shall cause an identification tag to be affixed to the registered bicycle, E-bike, or E-scooter which shall be serially numbered
to correspond with the registration number. Such tag shall remain affixed to the bicycle, E-bike, or E-scooter unless removed by the said department for
cause or for re-tagging upon re-registration. (Ord. 28-18, 8-21-2018)
C. Any person who willfully removes, defaces, or destroys any bicycle, E-bike, or E-scooter identification tag issued by the City on a bicycle, E-bike, or Escooter
not owned by the person shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction subject to the penalty as provided in section 1-4-1 of this Code.
(Ord. 28-18, 8-21-2018; amd. 2019 Code)
D. Within ten (10) days after any bicycle, E-bike, or E-scooter registered hereunder shall have changed ownership or have been dismantled or taken out of
operation, the person whose name the bicycle, E-bike, or E-scooter has been registered is encouraged to report such information to the Boise Police
Department. In case of change of ownership, upon payment of the registration fee and production of a bill of sale signed by the previous registered
owner, the registration shall be changed to show the name of the new owner or reregistered with a new number and cancellation of the former.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 275/503
E. Revenue from sale of such registration and licenses shall be used to benefit the bicycle, E-bike, or E-scooter community through safety education and
infrastructure improvements. (Ord. 28-18, 8-21-2018)
6-13-21: NOTICE OF VIOLATION AND PROCEDURES:
A. Upon observing any violation of the provisions of this chapter, the Boise Police Department is authorized to serve a notice of violation, "citation", by
personally serving the person violating the provisions of this chapter with a citation.
B. Every citation shall include the following, if applicable to the observed violation:
1. The date and time when the violation was observed;
2. The location where the violation occurred;
3. The Code section violated and a brief description of the violation;
4. The fine amount;
5. Instructions explaining how the violation may be paid and the fine amount associated with the violation; and
6. A statement describing the process by which the citation may be contested.
C. One copy or an automated record of each citation shall be filed with the City Clerk's Office.
D. Each person served with a citation shall within ten (10) business days from the date on the citation:
1. Pay the corresponding fine amount on the City Clerk's fee schedule;
2. Pay the corresponding fine amount, plus any applicable fees, using an online payment system authorized by the City Clerk's Office; or
3. Appear at the City Clerk's Office to contest the violation through the Clerk's administrative process in order to avoid an administrative fee being
assessed to the citation in addition to the original fine amount.
E. Failure to either pay the fine or appear to contest the violation within ten (10) business days from the date on the citation shall result in an additional
fifteen dollar ($15.00) administrative fee being assessed for each violation to defray the administrative and personnel costs and mailing expenses
arising from such overdue fines. (Ord. 28-18, 8-21-2018)
6-13-22: PENALTIES:
Unless otherwise provided, any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of an infraction and upon conviction shall be
punishable by civil infraction penalty as established by the Boise City Council and listed on the most current City Clerk fee schedule. (Ord. 28-18, 8-21-
2018)
6-13-23: PROCEDURES TO CONTEST VIOLATIONS IN COURT, DELINQUENCY, AND COLLECTION:
A. Contest A Citation: In order to contest a citation in the Fourth District Magistrate Court, the cited individual must within thirty (30) days:
1. Contest the violation through the City Clerk's administrative process; and
2. Accept service of complaint and summons in person at the City Clerk's Office.
Failure to strictly comply with these requirements will prevent the cited individual from contesting their citation in court. Although a citation that is
contested within thirty (30) days at the Clerk's Office may be contested in court, failure to contest the citation at the Clerk's Office within ten (10) days
of the violation will result in the application of the fifteen dollar ($15.00) administrative fee pursuant to subsection 6-13-21E of this chapter.
B. Delinquent Citations: A citation shall be deemed delinquent if:
1. The citation is not paid or contested within thirty (30) days from the date of its original date of issuance; or
2. The cited individual fails to accept service of the summons within thirty (30) days of written notice to contest the citation.
If a citation becomes delinquent, all applicable late fees shall be assessed in addition to the original citation fine amount. The City may utilize all
available collection methods to recoup fines and late fees owed on all delinquent citations. Nothing herein alters the assessment of fees associated
with failure to pay the citation within the time frames dictated within this chapter. (Ord. 28-18, 8-21-2018)
6-13-24: LABELING REQUIREMENT:
On and after July 1, 2019, manufacturers and distributors of E-bikes or E-scooters shall apply a label in legible type, that is permanently affixed in a
prominent location, to each E-bike or E-scooter. The label shall contain the top assisted speed and motor wattage of the E-bike or E-scooter. (Ord. 28-18,
8-21-2018)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 276/503
6-13-25: TAMPERING RESTRICTION:
No person shall knowingly modify an E-bike or E-scooter so as to change its speed capability. (Ord. 28-18, 8-21-2018)
6-13-26: CPSC COMPLIANCE:
An E-bike shall comply with the equipment and manufacturing requirements for bicycles adopted by the United States Consumer Product Safety
Commission (16 CFR part 1512). (Ord. 28-18, 8-21-2018)
6-13-27: REMOVAL OF ABANDONED AND OBSTRUCTIVE BICYCLES, E-BIKES, E-SCOOTERS, OR ANY PART THEREOF
FROM PUBLIC PLACES:
A. Nuisance Declared: The accumulation of abandoned and obstructive bicycles, E-bikes, E-scooters, or any part thereof, in public places promotes urban
blight, invites theft and vandalism, and creates a hazard to the general public's health, safety, and welfare, thereby constituting a public nuisance.
Abandoned and obstructive bicycles, E-bikes, E-scooters, or any part thereof may be abated in accordance with this chapter.
B. Prohibited Behavior: No person shall abandon a bicycle, E-bike, E-scooter, or any part thereof in a public place. No person shall leave an obstructive
bicycle, E-bike, E-scooter, or any part thereof in a public place.
C. Enforcement: In accordance with this chapter, the Boise Police Department, the Boise City Code Compliance Office, or authorized designees are
authorized to mark abandoned or obstructive bicycles, E-bikes, E-scooters, or any part thereof, for abatement and to order the removal and
impoundment of such abandoned or obstructive bicycles, E-bikes, E-scooters, or any part thereof from public places. The provision of this section shall
not apply to stationless bicycle share program devices.
D. Notice Of Intention To Abate Abandoned Bicycle, E-Bike, E-Scooter, Or Any Part Thereof: All notices of intention to abate shall be firmly and
conspicuously affixed to the bicycle, E-bike, E-scooter, or any part thereof. The notice of intention to abate shall contain: the date and time the notice
was posted, the date and time after which the bicycle, E-bike, or any part thereof shall be removed, the contact information and address for the location
where the bicycle, E-bike, E-scooter, or any part thereof shall be impounded, and information on how to request a post-storage administrative review.
E. Notice Of Abatement Of Obstructive Bicycle, E-Bike, E-Scooter, Or Any Part Thereof: All notices of abatement of an obstructive bicycle, E-bike, Escooter,
or any part thereof shall be firmly and conspicuously posted as near as possible to the location from where the obstructive bicycle, E-bike, Escooter,
or part was removed. The notice of abatement shall contain: the date and time the bicycle, E-bike, or part was removed, the reason for the
removal, the contact information and address for the location where the obstructive bicycle, E-bike, E-scooter, or part are impounded, and information
on how to request an administrative review.
F. Abatement Of Abandoned Bicycle, E-Bike, E-Scooter, Or Any Part Thereof: No less than seventy two (72) hours after the posting of a notice of intention
to abate, the City may remove and impound an abandoned bicycle, E-bike, E-scooter, or any part thereof.
G. Immediate Abatement Of Obstructive Bicycle, E-Bike, E-Scooter, Or Any Part Thereof: The City may immediately remove and impound any obstructive
bicycle, E-bike, E-scooter, or part thereof.
H. Storage: All abated abandoned and obstructive bicycles, E-bikes, E-scooters, or part shall be stored and disposed of by the Boise Police Department in
accordance with Idaho Code section 55-403. Reasonable storage fees, in an amount established by the Boise City Council and listed on the most
current fee schedule, may be charged to the owner of the abated bicycle, E-bike, E-scooter, or any part thereof to cover the costs of removal,
impoundment, storage, recordkeeping, and other associated costs. Owners shall be required to pay all storage fees in full prior to the release of abated
bicycles, E-bikes, E-scooters, or part.
I. Post-Storage Administrative Review: Whenever an abandoned or obstructive bicycle, E-bike, E-scooter, or any part thereof, is abated and impounded by
the City, the owner of such property shall be provided with the opportunity for a post-storage administrative review to determine the validity of the
removal and storage of such property. In order for an owner to receive a post-storage administrative review, the owner must request the review in
writing from the City within thirty (30) business days of the posting of the notice of intention to abate or notice of immediate abatement. The City shall
conduct the post-storage review within forty eight (48) hours of the request, excluding weekends and holidays. Failure by the owner to request or to
attend a review shall satisfy the post-storage administrative review for that owner. If it is determined at the review that there was not reasonable cause
to deem the abated bicycle, E-bike, E-scooter, or any part thereof, abandoned or obstructive, the City shall be responsible for payment of all storage
fees.
J. Disposal: Any bicycle, E-bike, E-scooter, or part thereof that is abated and impounded under this chapter and that is not claimed and redeemed by its
owner within the time limits set forth in Idaho Code section 55-403 shall become the property of the City and shall be sold. Proceeds, if any, from the
sale of abated bicycles, E-bikes, E-scooters, or part thereof, shall be applied first to all outstanding storage fees and any expenses related to the sale
of such property. The balance of such proceeds, if any, shall be kept by the Boise Police Department in a separate fund for a period of one year from
the date of sale in accordance with Idaho Code section 55-404. (Ord. 38-18, 9-25-2018)
Chapter 14
SKATEBOARDING REGULATIONS AND PROHIBITIONS
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 277/503
6-14-1: PURPOSE:
It is the intent of the City Council to place reasonable limits on the use for recreation of wheeled apparatuses in congested areas to protect the public
safety and public and private property from damage or liability occasioned as a result of the exercise of that recreational activity. (1952 Code § 10-18-02)
6-14-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter:
ALL WHEELS DOWN ZONE: Designated as the area between the boundaries of west side of 5th to east side of 13th Streets and north side of Myrtle to
south side of State Streets, and also the area from the north side of Myrtle Street between the west side of 8th Street to the north side of W. Fulton Street
and the east side of 9th Street to the north side of Fulton Street, which are not specifically included within the dismount zone.
DISMOUNT ZONE: Designated as the area between the boundaries of south side of Main and north side of Idaho Streets as they lie between west side of
5th and east side of 13th Streets, as well as the area between the boundaries of the south side of Bannock and north side of Front Streets and the east
side of 9th Street and west side of Capitol Boulevard.
WHEELED APPARATUSES: A nonmotorized vehicle or toy consisting of one or more wheels, which are gravity operated or human powered and can
transport persons or property, including but not limited to, inline skates, skateboards and skates. Any apparatus used to assist the physically disabled,
bicycles and carts shall be specifically excluded from this definition. (1952 Code § 10-18-01)
6-14-3: PROHIBITIONS:
A. All Wheels Down Zone: It shall be unlawful for any person in the all wheels down zone:
1. To use any wheeled apparatus when the wheels are not covered and/or constructed of polyurethane or rubber materials; or
2. To use a wheeled apparatus carelessly and heedlessly or without due caution and circumspection, or at a speed or in a manner as to endanger or be
likely to endanger any person or property, which shall include, but not be limited to:
a. Using a skateboard, or similar device, without all of the wheels being in contact with the ground;
b. Using rollerblades, skates or a similar device, without at least one foot being in contact with the ground;
c. To come into contact with buildings, planters, railings, benches, chairs, plants or shrubbery, signs, light poles or any other improvements or fixtures
with the wheeled apparatus.
B. Parking Garages: It shall be unlawful for any person to use any wheeled apparatus in any parking garage without prior written authority of the owner or
owner's agent.
C. Dismount Zone: It shall be unlawful for any person to use any wheeled apparatus in the dismount zone.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 278/503
(1952 Code § 10-18-03)
6-14-4: EXCLUSION:
The prohibitions contained in this chapter shall not apply to law enforcement personnel acting within the scope of their employment. (1952 Code § 10-18-
04)
6-14-5: PENALTY:
Any person found in violation of this chapter shall be guilty of an infraction and, upon conviction, subject to penalty as provided in section 1-4-2 of this
Code. (1952 Code § 10-18-05; amd. 2019 Code)
Chapter 15
MOTORCYCLES
6-15-1: RULES AND REGULATIONS APPLICABLE:
The driver of any motorcycle shall be subject to all the rules and regulations pertaining to vehicles, as defined in this title, and subsections 6-13-15B and C
of this title will apply to the operation of said motorcycles. (1952 Code § 10-15-01)
6-15-2: OFF STREET USE PROHIBITED:
No person shall operate or ride a motorcycle within the City limits except upon a street, alley or private road having access to a street or alley. (1952 Code
§ 10-15-02)
Chapter 16
LOUD AMPLIFICATION DEVICES UPON OR WITHIN VEHICLES
6-16-1: PURPOSE:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 279/503
The purpose of this chapter is the protection of the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the City. It is determined that sound can and does constitute
a hazard to the health, safety, welfare and quality of life of residents of the City. The Mayor and Council, by way of Idaho Code section 50-308 are
empowered to impose reasonable limitations and regulations upon the production of sound to reduce the harmful effects thereof. Now, therefor, it is
hereafter the policy of this City to prevent and regulate sound generated by loud amplification devices which are situated upon or within motor vehicles
wherever it is deemed to be harmful to the health, safety, welfare or quality of life of the citizens of the City, and this chapter shall be liberally construed to
effectuate that purpose. (1952 Code § 10-20-01)
6-16-2: NOISE PROHIBITIONS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or permit the operation of any loud amplification device upon or within a motor vehicle in such a manner that
the sound therefrom is plainly audible upon a public right-of-way or street at a distance of fifty feet (50') or more from the source of such sound. (1952
Code § 10-20-02)
6-16-3: EXEMPTIONS:
The following sounds are exempted from the provisions of this chapter:
A. Sounds caused by any emergency vehicle or personnel when responding to an emergency call or acting in time of emergency.
B. Sounds caused by activities upon any outdoor Municipal, school, religious or publicly owned property or facility; provided, that such activity has been
authorized by the owner of such property or facility or its agent.
C. Sounds caused by parades, fireworks displays or any other event for which a permit for that type of activity is required and has been obtained from the
authorized governmental entity, within such hours as may be imposed as a condition for the issuance of said permit.
D. Sounds caused by locomotives or other railroad equipment.
E. Sounds caused by burglar alarms that are not in violation of this Code.
F. Sounds caused by safety warning devices required by law.
G. Sounds caused by devices approved for use within the confines of the particular zoning designation that the device is located or pursuant to a
conditional use permit (i.e., drive-thru window speakers, car lot PA systems).
H. Sounds emanating from devices used within the common areas of a multi-unit facility whose use has been approved by the owners or management of
the facility. Said use must be in compliance with any regulations imposed by the owners or management of the facility to be exempt under this chapter.
This exemption only applies in relation to other units within the same facility. (1952 Code § 10-20-05)
6-16-4: PROVISIONS ADDITIONAL TO OTHER LAW:
The provisions of this chapter shall be cumulative and nonexclusive and shall not effect any other claim, cause of action or remedy; nor, unless specifically
provided, shall it be deemed to repeal, amend or modify any law, ordinance or regulation relating to noise or sound, but shall be deemed additional to
existing legislation and common law on such subject. (1952 Code § 10-20-04)
6-16-5: ENFORCEMENT:
A. Peace Officer Citation: Any City peace officer or person empowered to enforce this chapter is authorized to issue a uniform citation upon his own
observation of a violation without the necessity of a citizen complainant's signature on said citation. By signing the citation, the officer or person is
certifying that he has reasonable grounds to believe that the person cited committed the offense contrary to law.
B. Citizen Citation: A uniform citation may also be signed by any citizen or person in whose presence an alleged violation of this chapter occurred and be
witnessed by a City peace officer or person empowered to enforce this provision of this chapter, whose name shall be endorsed on the citation. (1952
Code § 10-20-03)
6-16-6: PENALTY:
Any person who shall violate any of the terms or provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of an infraction and shall be subject to penalty as provided in
section 1-4-2 of this Code, excluding court costs and fees. There is no right to a trial by jury of a citation or complaint for an infraction and such trials shall
be held before the court without a jury. (1952 Code § 10-20-06; amd. 2019 Code)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 280/503
Chapter 17
EXCESSIVE EXHAUST AND MUFFLER NOISE
6-17-1: LEGAL AUTHORITY:
Idaho Code section 50-302, and article 12, section 2 of the Idaho Constitution authorize the City to regulate, limit and control motor vehicle noise, smoke
or exhaust within its limits. (Ord. 25-17, 7-25-2017)
6-17-2: PURPOSE:
Disturbing, excessive or offensive motor vehicle noise, smoke or exhaust interferes with a person's right to enjoy life and property and is detrimental to
public health and safety. The purpose of this chapter is to regulate excessive motor vehicle noise, smoke or exhaust within the limits of the City to promote
the public health, comfort and convenience of the City's inhabitants and its visitors. (Ord. 25-17, 7-25-2017)
6-17-3: SCOPE:
This chapter sets forth procedures, policies, standards and requirements applicable to motor vehicle produced excessive noise, smoke or exhaust,
including, but not limited to, decibel limits, muffler systems and other noise suppressing systems and devices. (Ord. 25-17, 7-25-2017)
6-17-4: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and derivations shall have the meaning given herein. When not inconsistent with the
context, words used in the present tense include the future tense, words in the plural number include the singular number, and words in the singular
number include the plural number. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory. Words used throughout this chapter, but not defined
herein, shall have their plain, ordinary, and common meaning. Words in any gender shall apply to the feminine, masculine and neuter genders.
A-WEIGHTED SOUND LEVEL: The sound level measured in decibels ("dBA") using the A-weighted network which is the network that most closely
resembles what the human ear hears.
AMBIENT NOISE LEVEL OR BACKGROUND NOISE: The composite level of existing sound from all sources, excluding the sound being monitored, at a
given location and approximate time at which a comparison with the monitored sound is to be made.
DECIBEL OR DB: A unit for measuring the relative loudness or intensity of sounds.
EXCESSIVE FUMES, SMOKE OR EXHAUST: The opaque discharge of fumes or smoke from a motor vehicle's exhaust emissions within the proximity of
the exhaust outlet for more than ten (10) consecutive seconds under the following circumstances:
A. As dark or darker in shade than that designated as no. 1 of the Ringelmann chart, for vehicles first sold and registered as a new motor vehicle prior
to January 1, 1971; or
B. As dark or darker in shade than that designated as no. 2 of the Ringelmann chart, for vehicles first sold and registered as a new motor vehicle on or
after January 1, 1971.
EXCESSIVE NOISE OR UNUSUAL NOISE: Any sound made by a motor vehicle at any time under any condition of grade, speed, acceleration or
deceleration, which exceeds ninety two (92) decibels, or any lower decibel level fixed by law or rules adopted by the State of Idaho, as measured on an Aweighted
network of a sound level meter from a distance of not less than twenty feet (20') to the side of the motor vehicle.
MOTOR VEHICLE: Every vehicle which is self-propelled, but excludes all vessels which are solely solar or human powered, and electric or motorized
personal assistive mobility devices and wheelchairs.
RINGELMANN CHART: The smoke chart with instructions for use as published by the U.S. Bureau of Mines in May 1967 and as thereafter amended, also
known as Information Circular 7718.
SOUND LEVEL METER: An instrument which meets or exceeds the requirements of a type 1 or type 2 sound level meter as set forth in ANSI S1.4-1983
or its latest revision. (Ord. 25-17, 7-25-2017)
6-17-5: MEASUREMENT OF SOUND LEVEL:
A. Meter: A sound level measurement made pursuant to this chapter shall be measured with a sound level meter using A-weighting and a "slow" response
time, as these terms are used in ANSI S1.1-1994 or its latest revision.
B. Calibration, Adjustment: The sound level meter shall be calibrated and adjusted with an acoustical calibrator of the coupler type to assure meter
accuracy within the tolerances in the ANSI specifications for sound level meters, ANSI S1.4-1983 or its latest revision, or an equivalent instrument and
its specifications. The sound level meter shall be used as provided in the manufacturer's instructions. (Ord. 25-17, 7-25-2017)
6-17-6: MOTOR VEHICLE MUFFLER GENERAL REQUIREMENTS AND PROHIBITIONS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 281/503
A. Muffler Required: Every motor vehicle operated within the City limits shall at all times be equipped with a muffler in good working order and in constant
operation to prevent excessive noise and smoke.
B. Noise Suppressing System: When any motor vehicle was originally equipped with a noise suppressing system or when any motor vehicle is required by
law or regulation of this State or the Federal government to have a noise suppressing system, that system shall be maintained in good working order.
C. Prohibitions: No person or owner shall:
1. Operate or cause or permit to be operated a motor vehicle with a disconnected muffler system.
2. Modify or alter a motor vehicle's muffler system or its operation in any manner, except to conform to the manufacturer's specifications.
3. Operate or cause or permit to be operated a motor vehicle with a muffler cutout, bypass or similar device.
4. Modify the exhaust system of a motor vehicle in a manner which amplifies or increases the noise of the motor vehicle above that emitted by the
muffler originally installed on the motor vehicle by the manufacturer.
5. Operate or cause or permit to be operated any motor vehicle which a reasonable person would know or should have known was originally equipped
or required by any law or regulation of the State or the Federal government to be equipped with a noise suppressing system while any part of that
system is disconnected or while that system or its operation is modified or altered in any manner, except to conform to the manufacturer's
specifications.
6. Operate or cause or permit to be operated a motor vehicle which produces such excessive noise as defined within this chapter. (Ord. 25-17, 7-25-
2017)
6-17-7: EXCESSIVE FUMES, SMOKE OR EXHAUST:
The engine and power mechanism of every motor vehicle shall be equipped and operated to prevent the production and release of excessive fumes,
smoke or exhaust. (Ord. 25-17, 7-25-2017)
6-17-8: EXEMPTIONS:
The prohibitions of this chapter shall not apply to the following:
A. Nonregistered Motor Vehicles On Private Property: Motor vehicles which are not registered with the Idaho Transportation Department because such
motor vehicles are solely being driven on private property not open to the public;
B. Exempt Commercial Vehicles: Commercial vehicles which are exempt from emissions testing pursuant to the Ada County Air Quality Board's most
current version of their rules and regulations; or
C. Antique, Classic Motor Vehicles: Antique motor vehicles, which have been registered with the Idaho Old Timers license plates pursuant to Idaho Code
section 49-406 or with the Idaho Classic plates pursuant to Idaho Code section 49-406A, so long as such motor vehicles are operated and maintained
as collectors' items for use in exhibitions, parades, club activities and similar uses, and not used for business or commercial purposes or as customary
and usual transportation. (Ord. 25-17, 7-25-2017)
6-17-9: PRIMA FACIE EVIDENCE:
A showing that the sound made by a motor vehicle exceeds the maximum allowable decibel level shall be prima facie evidence of the prohibited acts set
forth in subsection 6-17-6C of this chapter. (Ord. 25-17, 7-25-2017)
6-17-10: PENALTY:
Any person found to be in violation of this chapter shall be guilty of an infraction, subject to penalty as provided in section 1-4-2 of this Code, excluding
court costs and fees. There is no right to a trial by jury of a citation or complaint for an infraction. Such trials shall be held before the court without a jury.
(Ord. 25-17, 7-25-2017; amd. 2019 Code)
Title 7
PUBLIC WAYS AND PROPERTY
Chapter 1
CONVEYING IDPR REAL PROPERTY
7-1-1: REAL PROPERTY:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 282/503
A. Applicability: All real property proposed to be sold, exchanged or conveyed by the City, or have the use of the property changed, shall be first subject to
the requirements of this section prior to any act which sells, exchanges or conveys, or changes the use of the subject property owned by the City.
B. Inventory Maintained: The City Clerk shall maintain, in the Office of the City Clerk, an inventory of City property acquired or which has received land and
water conservation funds from the Idaho Department of Parks and Recreation (IDPR) and which is subject to any restrictions imposed by the IDPR and
which is subject to any restrictions imposed by the IDPR with respect to its use or alienation.
C. Conditions: In the event the property contemplated for sale, exchange or conveyance is included on the IDPR inventory list, the following requirements
shall be a condition precedent to any sale, exchange or conveyance:
1. The City shall contact the IDPR to determine the applicable restrictions or requirements in anticipation to sale, exchange or conveyance of the
subject property. The City shall receive the written approval for the sale, exchange or conveyance from the IDPR prior to completion of the sale,
exchange or conveyance.
2. The City Council shall hold a public hearing on the sale, exchange or conveyance. Such public hearing shall be advertised in a newspaper of general
circulation at least fourteen (14) days prior to the date set for the public hearing. Following the public hearing, the City Council shall vote on the
question of whether or not an ordinance shall be prepared in conformity with the requirements of Idaho Code section 50-1403, expressing an intent
to sell, exchange or convey the property.
3. After compliance with the requirements of Idaho Code section 50-1403, the City may proceed with the sale, exchange or conveyance of property.
(1952 Code § 9-23-01)
Chapter 2
TREES
7-2-1: TITLE:
This chapter shall be known as the BOISE TREE ORDINANCE. (1952 Code § 9-16-01)
7-2-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the following meanings:
ANSI A300: The "American National Standard for Tree Care Operations - Tree, Shrub and Other Woody Plant Maintenance - Standard Practices". This is
a document offering basic performance standards for tree pruning, published in 1995 by the American National Standards Institute (ANSI) or the same as
amended from time to time.
ADJACENT PROPERTY OWNER: Any person owning property adjacent to public rights-of-way.
ALTERNATE HOST PLANT: One of two (2) kinds of plants on which a pest must develop to complete its life cycle.
ARBORICULTURE: The cultivation of trees, including planting, pruning, removal or any other action which affects the growth and maintenance of trees.
CITY: The City of Boise City, Idaho.
CITY FORESTER: The City Forester or the City Forester's designee.
CRITICAL ROOT ZONE: The area under a tree extending from the base of a tree in all directions to an imaginary line ten feet (10') outside of the dripline
or as determined at a preliminary site inspection by the City Forester.
DUTCH ELM DISEASE: A disease condition in elm trees caused by fungal organisms known by the scientific names Ophiostoma ulmi or Ophiostoma
novo-ulmi.
ELM TREE: Any species of the genus Ulmus.
HAZARD: Any tree, public or private, with visibly defined structural defects likely to cause failure of all or part of the tree, and be a danger to public safety.
PERMIT: Written approval issued by the City and required for any activity on public trees or within the critical root zone of public trees.
PERSON: Any individual, firm, partnership, corporation, association, company or organization of any kind.
PEST: Any insect, disease or other organism harmful to trees.
PRUNING: The practice of cutting tree limbs according to standards contained in ANSI A300.
PUBLIC PROPERTY: Any property owned by, dedicated to, or deeded to, the public or for the public's use. City parks, public rights-of-way and other
publicly owned, controlled, leased or managed properties are included in this definition. This definition excludes any Federal or State owned properties,
except where otherwise provided by contract or law.
PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY: Improved or unimproved public property owned by, dedicated to, or deeded to the public or for the public's use, for the purpose
of providing vehicular, pedestrian and other public use. Such public property provides circulation and travel to abutting properties and includes, but is not
limited to, streets, sidewalks, landscaping, provisions for public utilities, cut and fill slopes, and open public space. For the purposes of this chapter, alleys
are excluded from this definition.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 283/503
PUBLIC SAFETY: The condition of being safe from bodily harm and/or property damage resulting from tree conditions and/or failures while using public
property.
PUBLIC TREES: Any tree (inclusive of roots within the critical root zone) whose trunk is located, partly or in whole, on public property.
TOPPING: "Rounding" or "heading back" or any other term that can be described as severe cutting back of limbs within a tree crown to buds, stubs or
laterals not large enough to assume a terminal role or as defined in ANSI A300.
TREE: Any woody plant, which is fifteen feet (15') or more in height at maturity, with a single or multiple trunk, often unbranched for several feet above the
ground and having a definite crown. (1952 Code § 9-16-02)
7-2-3: FINDINGS:
The City finds trees are important elements of the environment which promote and protect public health, safety and general welfare of the community by
providing:
A. Aesthetics: A vital contribution to the aesthetic character of the community and the region's natural beauty;
B. Protection: Cost effective protection against severe weather conditions with cooling effects in the summer months and insulating effects in winter;
C. Property Values: Economic support of local property values;
D. Air, Water Quality: Improved air and water quality with the absorption of pollutants, assimilation of carbon dioxide and generation of oxygen, and the
reduction of excessive noise and adverse impacts caused by noise pollution;
E. Reduction Of Adverse Impacts: A reduction of the adverse impacts of land disturbing activities, such as runoff from impervious surfaces, soil erosion,
land instability and sedimentation pollution; and
F. Wildlife: Habitat, cover, food supply and corridors for a diversity of wildlife. (1952 Code § 9-16-03)
7-2-4: STATEMENT OF PURPOSE:
This chapter establishes regulations and standards necessary to ensure that the City continues to realize the benefits provided by the community forest. It
is not intended to resolve or regulate disputes over trees on private property that do not affect general public safety. This chapter is enacted to:
A. Coverage: Promote the general welfare of the City by establishing and maintaining the maximum amount of canopy coverage provided by trees for their
functions as identified in section 7-2-3 of this chapter;
B. Preservation: Preserve and enhance the City environmental, economic and social character with mature trees;
C. Protection: Protect public safety, health and welfare;
D. Development Practices: Encourage site and utility planning, building and development practices to prevent indiscriminate removal or destruction of
trees and avoid unnecessary disturbance to trees within the City and its area of impact;
E. Care Standards: Maintain trees in a healthy, nonhazardous condition through application of tree care standards contained in ANSI A300;
F. Diversity: Establish and maintain appropriate species diversity and age classes in order to provide a stable and sustainable community forest;
G. Care, Removal: Establish a process by which trees are to be planted, pruned and removed;
H. Comprehensive Plan: Implement the goals and objectives of the City Comprehensive Plan. (1952 Code § 9-16-04)
7-2-5: JURISDICTION:
A. Public Property: The City Forester shall manage and regulate the planting, maintenance, protection, removal and replacement of all public trees within
the City limits, thus exercising the City authority to do so granted pursuant to the provisions of Idaho Code section 50-312, improvement of streets;
Idaho Code section 50-317, removal of snow, ice rubbish and weeds; and Idaho Code section 40-1415(7), responsibilities of single countywide
highway districts within cities, final decision on urban renewal projects, settlement of questions. (1952 Code § 9-16-05; amd. 2019 Code)
B. Private Property: The City Forester shall have jurisdiction over trees located on private property which are found to be public nuisances as defined in
subsection 7-2-12A of this chapter and may cut and remove those trees from all private property within the City and the public rights-of-way abutting
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 284/503
the same and may assess the cost thereof against the property so cleared, and against the property abutting public rights-of-way so cleared, as
provided for in Idaho Code section 50-317. The assessment shall be collected as provided for in Idaho Code section 50-1008. (1952 Code § 9-16-05)
7-2-6: CITY FORESTER; ESTABLISHMENT AND DUTIES:
The Director of the Parks and Recreation Department shall designate an individual as the City Forester and authorize such person to perform the duties
imposed and exercise the powers granted by this chapter. For the purposes identified in section 7-2-4 of this chapter, the City Forester, subject to the
provisions of this chapter and available resources, is hereby authorized to carry out the following duties:
A. Administrative/Management Duties:
1. Develop, administer and maintain a Community Forestry Management Plan;
2. Administer a program of public outreach and education relating to community forestry and the planting and care of trees;
3. Maintain a licensing program as set forth in section 7-2-10 of this chapter;
4. Administer and maintain a permitting procedure for all planting, pruning, protection and removal of trees as set forth in section 7-2-9 of this chapter;
5. Establish and maintain an inventory of all public trees;
6. Maintain a community forestry budget to be contained within, but as a separate division of, the budget of the Boise Parks and Recreation
Department. The City may expend funds to plant, maintain or remove trees in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, the Community Forestry
Management Plan and existing policies;
7. Oversee and require compliance with the Dutch Elm Disease (DED) Management Program as required by this chapter, and other pest management
programs as may be adopted by the Board of Parks and Recreation Commission;
8. To facilitate the proper selection, planting and maintenance of trees in residential, commercial and industrial developments within City limits and the
City area of City impact, the City Forester shall review and provide comment on development applications when such applications are submitted to
the Planning and Development Services Department;
9. Establish policies to carry out the provisions of this chapter;
10. Perform all necessary acts to ensure that all public trees conform with the Community Forestry Management Plan and this chapter;
11. Annually provide public notification of the requirements of this chapter.
B. Tree Planting Duties:
1. Establish and maintain specifications for tree planting on public property;
2. Maintain a nursery for the growing of the species of trees permitted on public property, and to sell and plant the same, upon the payment of
established fees.
C. Tree Maintenance Duties:
1. Order the pruning or removal of public trees to ensure public health, safety and welfare while considering the health of the tree and other elements of
the infrastructure;
2. Declare trees as public nuisances, as defined in subsection 7-2-12A of this chapter. Abatement of public nuisances shall be completed as identified
in subsection 7-2-12B of this chapter.
D. Tree Removal Duties:
1. Remove trees located on public rights-of-way which have been declared to be a public nuisance, as defined in subsection 7-2-12A of this chapter;
2. Any trees on public rights-of-way scheduled for removal shall be affixed with a public notice stating the reason for removal. Such notice shall be
posted not less than thirty (30) days prior to scheduled removal date unless determined by the City Forester to be an emergency or immediate
hazard to public safety.
E. Tree Protection Duties: To avoid creating public nuisances or damaging public trees, the City Forester is authorized to require their protection (including
the critical root zone) from construction or other harmful practices. (1952 Code § 9-16-06)
7-2-7: INTERFERENCE WITH CITY FORESTER:
It shall be unlawful and shall be a misdemeanor to interfere with the City Forester, any police officer, Code Enforcement Officer or any Ada County
Highway District personnel in the performance of their duties connected with the enforcement of this chapter. (1952 Code § 9-16-07)
7-2-8: RESPONSIBILITIES OF ADJACENT PROPERTY OWNERS:
Any person in possession of private property shall maintain trees upon adjacent public rights-of-way and any trees upon private property which may affect
public property, in a safe, healthy condition in compliance with the provisions of this chapter. Adjacent property owners have the following responsibilities:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 285/503
A. Responsibilities For Public Trees:
1. Obtain Permits:
a. Meet all requirements and obtain all permits necessary for work done (including, but not limited to, pruning and removal) on any public trees as
required in section 7-2-9 of this chapter;
b. Meet all requirements and obtain all permits necessary prior to commencing repair of damage done to public streets or sidewalks adjacent to any
public trees as required in section 7-2-9 of this chapter;
c. Meet all requirements and obtain all permits necessary for any tree planting on public property as required in section 7-2-9 of this chapter.
2. Routine Tree Maintenance:
a. Pruning of trees located on public rights-of-way adjacent to the owner's private real property:
(1) Prune and maintain such trees according to ANSI A300, except sections 5.5 and 5.6, which are deleted;
(2) Topping, heading, shearing or rounding over are not acceptable forms of tree pruning and are not allowed on public trees unless first approved
by the City Forester;
(3) Except as otherwise determined by the City Forester, branches that overhang sidewalks or streets shall be pruned to provide sufficient vertical
clearance over the sidewalk and street so as not to interfere with public travel;
(4) Trees shall be pruned to remove dead limbs or other limbs that are considered a public nuisance, as defined in subsection 7-2-12A of this
chapter;
b. Control pests on trees located on public rights-of-way adjacent to the owner's private real property;
c. Provide water sufficient to keep trees located on public rights-of-way adjacent to the owner's private real property in a healthy, growing condition.
3. Protection/Preservation:
a. Obtain a permit from the City Forester before performing any activity which may harm any part of a public tree (inclusive of the critical root zone);
b. Notify the City Forester when any part of a public tree is damaged or destroyed.
B. Responsibilities For Private Trees; Routine Tree Maintenance:
1. Removal or pruning of trees located on the owner's private real property that are considered a public nuisance, as defined in subsection 7-2-12A of
this chapter;
2. Pruning of trees located on the owner's private real property that are considered a public nuisance, as defined in subsection 7-2-12A of this chapter.
Branches that overhang sidewalks or streets shall be pruned to provide sufficient vertical clearance over the sidewalk and street so as not to interfere
with public travel;
3. Control of pests on trees located on the owner's private real property which may, upon determination by the City Forester, pose a threat to public
trees;
4. Removal of all debris (wood, branches and leaves) from public property by sunset of the day on which any tree work is done.
C. Responsibilities For Alley Trees: Prune, remove or otherwise abate public nuisances, as defined in subsection 7-2-12A of this chapter. (1952 Code § 9-
16-08)
7-2-9: PERMIT REQUIRED:
A. When Permit Required: No person may perform any of the following acts without first obtaining from the City Forester a permit for which no fee shall be
charged, and nothing in this section shall be construed to exempt any person from the requirements of obtaining any additional permits as required by
law:
1. Plant trees on public rights-of-way or in any public places;
2. Prune, cut, remove or otherwise disturb any public tree. This provision shall not be construed to prohibit owners of property adjacent to public rightsof-
way from watering or fertilizing such trees;
3. Attach any object to public trees, except as may be authorized by the City Forester pursuant to a duly promulgated rule or regulation;
4. Dig, trench, excavate or pile soil or any other materials within the critical root zone of any public trees;
5. Prune or remove any elm tree on or within public or private property.
B. Permit Application Procedures: Except as otherwise provided pursuant to a duly promulgated rule or regulation, any person who seeks to perform any
of the acts in subsection A of this section shall:
1. Contact the City Forester via mail, phone, fax or e-mail prior to commencement of the proposed work requesting that the City Forester inspect the
proposed work and issue the required permit;
2. Upon inspection, the City Forester may issue a permit, if required, to perform any of the acts specified in subsection A of this section;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 286/503
3. The City Forester may impose such terms and conditions on the issuance of a permit as may be appropriate and necessary under the specific
circumstances of the proposed work.
C. Requirements For Tree Planting Permits:
1. Each application for a planting permit shall designate the species and variety of public tree proposed. The City Forester shall designate the location
of the planting;
2. Approval of tree species, spacing, placement and minimum tree well sizes shall be obtained from the City Forester prior to issuance of a permit;
3. Whenever any tree is planted or set out in conflict with the provisions of this chapter, it shall be lawful for the City Forester to remove or cause
removal of the same. The cost of removal of such tree may be charged to person responsible for the planting thereof.
D. Requirements For Tree Pruning/Removal Permits:
1. Prior to pruning or removal of any public tree or any elm tree on private property, application for permit must be made by the property owner or
private tree firm currently licensed by the City;
2. Whenever a tree on public rights-of-way is removed, the applicant shall replace the tree removed as a condition of issuance of a permit for removal,
unless such requirement is waived by the City Forester for good cause shown. Conditions may include a requirement for compensatory payments as
set forth in section 7-2-14 of this chapter. (1952 Code § 9-16-09)
7-2-10: LICENSING OF PRIVATE TREE SERVICES:
A. License Required: It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the trade or commercial business of pruning or removing trees located on public
property, without first procuring a license from the City Forester.
B. Application For License; Information Required: Each applicant for a license or renewal thereof shall make application to the City Forester on a form to
be furnished by the City. The form shall be signed by the applicant and shall show such information as may be required by the City Forester.
Information shall include, but is not limited to:
1. In what name the business is to be conducted, as well as the name, business address, home address and telephone number of the company
president or owner;
2. Proof of current arborist certification with the International Society of Arboriculture by at least one individual on staff of the business in a supervisory
position and approved by the City Forester;
3. Demonstration that arboricultural work is in accordance with ANSI A300 may be required prior to approval of license;
4. A certificate of liability and property damage insurance executed by an insurer authorized to transact business within the State, such policy of
insurance to provide not less than five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) or the amount currently required by Idaho Code title 6. (1952 Code
§ 9-16-15)
C. Approval Or Disapproval; Fee: The City Forester shall, after examining the applicant's qualifications, either approve or disapprove the application. If the
application is approved, the applicant shall file the application with the City Clerk, together with the annual license fee as specified on the most current
fee schedule. This license shall be issued by the City Clerk for the calendar year, or balance of the calendar year only. (1952 Code § 9-16-15; amd.
2019 Code)
D. Suspension, Revocation: The City Forester is authorized to suspend or revoke the tree care license of any person that performs work which does not
comply with the provisions of this chapter. Failure to maintain arborist certification or required insurance shall also result in suspension or revocation.
(1952 Code § 9-16-15)
7-2-11: DAMAGING, DESTROYING OR MUTILATING PUBLIC TREES:
It shall be unlawful for any person to:
A. Damaging: Damage, mutilate or destroy any public tree;
B. Attaching: Attach any device or structure (i.e., tree houses, lights) to or on public trees, except as may be authorized by the City Forester by duly
promulgated rule or regulation;
C. Harmful Substances: Store, spill or dump substances, whether liquid or solid, which may be harmful to trees, on any part of a public tree or within the
critical root zone of a public tree;
D. Construction Activities: Damage public trees through construction activities in violation of the conditions of a permit issued pursuant to this chapter.
Such activities include, but are not limited to:
1. Making excavations or cuts in the soil near roots of public trees unless otherwise approved by the City Forester;
2. Damage roots of a public tree by compacting or placing fill within the critical root zone of a tree;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 287/503
3. Engage in any pruning activity on public trees not in accordance with ANSI A300, including, but not limited to, topping, heading, rounding or
shearing, unless otherwise approved by the City Forester. (1952 Code § 9-16-10)
7-2-12: PUBLIC NUISANCES:
A. Declared Public Nuisances: The following are hereby declared public nuisances under this chapter:
1. Any tree or part thereof (public or private) which, by reason of location or condition, constitutes a hazard to public safety as determined by the City
Forester;
2. Any tree or part thereof (on public or private property) which obstructs the free passage of pedestrian or vehicular traffic or which obstructs public
streetlighting;
3. Any tree or alternate host plant or part thereof (on public or private property) which harbors pests which reasonably may be expected to injure or
harm public trees. This includes any standing elm tree infected to any degree with Dutch Elm disease or which harbors elm bark beetles, and any
dead elm tree or part thereof, including logs, stumps or other elm material from which the bark has not been removed. (1952 Code § 9-16-13)
B. Abatement Of Public Nuisances: The following are the prescribed means of abating public nuisances under this chapter:
1. Any tree or alternate host plant or part thereof (public or private) declared to be a public nuisance as set forth in subsection A of this section shall be
pruned, removed or otherwise treated in accordance with the requirements of this chapter. Except for removal of trees from public rights-of-way, all
costs for nuisance abatement are the responsibility of the adjacent property owner;
2. The City Forester may cause a written notice to be personally served or sent by mail to the owner of the particular property;
3. In the event the nuisance is not abated by the date specified in the notice, the City Forester is authorized to cause the abatement of said nuisance.
The reasonable cost of such abatement may be charged to the subject property owner. Monies which have not been recovered through the City bill
collection procedures may result in a lien against the property or assessed on taxes as provided for in Idaho Code title 50. In addition, the owner of
the property upon which the nuisance is located may be subject to prosecution under this chapter, or any other chapter of this Code, or the Idaho
Code for maintaining a public nuisance. Nothing in this provision shall be construed to exempt any person from the requirement of obtaining permits
under section 7-2-9 of this chapter;
4. The City Forester is empowered to cause the immediate abatement of any nuisance if it is determined by the City Forester to be an emergency or
immediate hazard to public safety;
5. If the City Forester determines that disposal of the wood, branches and soil from removal or pruning of a nuisance tree is required to complete
abatement, such disposal shall be done as required by the City Forester. All costs associated with the disposal of material from private trees shall be
the responsibility of the property owner. (1952 Code § 9-16-14)
7-2-13: APPEALS:
A. Authorized: Any person affected by an order, grant, denial or revocation of a license or permit by the City Forester may appeal such order, grant, denial
or revocation to the Board of Parks and Recreation Commission. (1952 Code § 9-16-16)
B. Filing; Fee: Such appeal shall be filed in writing with a fee, as specified in the most current fee schedule, and submitted to the Director of the Parks and
Recreation Department within ten (10) days of the date of notification of the City Forester's ruling. (1952 Code § 9-16-16; amd. 2019 Code)
C. Hearing; Stay Of Proceedings: The appeal shall be heard by the Board of Parks and Recreation Commission. Action by the City Forester and the
appellant shall be delayed until the decision of the Board of Parks and Recreation Commission is rendered.
D. Authority Of Board: The Board of Parks and Recreation Commission may, in conformity with the provisions of this chapter, reverse or affirm or modify
wholly or partly, the order, grant, denial or revocation of any license or permit.
E. Further Appeal To City Council; Fee:
1. Any person affected by the decision of the Board of Parks and Recreation Commission may appeal the decision to the City Council. (1952 Code § 9-
16-16)
2. Such appeal shall be filed in writing with a fee, as specified in the most current fee schedule, and submitted to the City Clerk within ten (10) days of
the date of notification of the decision of the Board of Parks and Recreation Commission. (1952 Code § 9-16-16; amd. 2019 Code)
3. The appeal shall be heard by the City Council. Action by the City Forester and the appellant shall be delayed until the decision of the City Council is
rendered.
4. The City Council may, in conformity with the provisions of this chapter, reverse or affirm or modify wholly or partly, the order, grant, denial or
revocation of any permit and the decision of the Board of Parks and Recreation Commission.
5. The decision of the City Council shall be final. (1952 Code § 9-16-16)
7-2-14: COMPENSATORY PAYMENTS:
In the event any person removes, destroys or damages any public tree, except as otherwise required by law, that person shall be required to replace such
tree with a tree of equivalent dollar value on public property, unless otherwise determined by the City Forester. The value of a tree shall be determined by
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 288/503
the City Forester in accordance with accepted plant appraisal methods as set forth in the 8th edition of "The Guide for Plant Appraisal", published by the
International Society of Arboriculture, or the same as amended from time to time. If no suitable location exists in the vicinity of the tree removed or if the
replacement tree is of lesser value, the person causing the tree to be removed shall make a compensatory payment to the City equal to the difference in
value between the tree removed and any replacement tree. Any public tree that is determined by the City Forester to be damaged, but not sufficiently to
justify its removal, shall be considered to be devalued. The amount of devaluation shall be paid to the City by the person causing the damage.
Compensatory payments shall be paid into a fund established for that purpose and restricted to use for community forestry programs. Nothing in this
chapter shall prohibit the City from negotiating agreements with other governmental entities regarding penalties and compensatory payment for removal,
damage or destruction of public trees. (1952 Code § 9-16-11)
7-2-15: PENALTY:
A. Any person who violates any provision of this chapter or who fails to comply with a lawful order of the City Forester shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
Any person convicted of a misdemeanor under the provisions of this chapter may be subject to penalty as provided in section 1-4-1 of this Code. (1952
Code § 9-16-12; amd. 2019 Code)
B. In addition to any criminal penalties that may be imposed, the City may pursue civil penalties and restitution for actual damages as set forth in section 7-
2-14 of this chapter. (1952 Code § 9-16-12)
Chapter 3
OBSTRUCTIONS
ARTICLE A. STREET OBSTRUCTIONS
7-3A-1: OBSTRUCTING STREETS:
Whoever remains standing, lying or sitting down on any of the sidewalks, streets, alleys or public places in such a manner as to obstruct or impede the
free passage of pedestrians or public travel, after being requested to immediately move on by any police officer, City Clerk Licensing Enforcement Officer,
or Code Enforcement Officer or any police officer, or who wilfully remains on the sidewalk in front of any dwelling house or place of business which abuts
on any of the sidewalks in this City, in such manner as to obstruct the free passage of any other person into or out of such dwelling house or place of
business, without the consent or against the will of the proprietor, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor; provided, that this section shall not prohibit the
operation of a sidewalk cafe pursuant to a permit issued by the City Clerk or licensed under title 3, chapter 3 or 4 of this Code. (1952 Code § 9-10-01)
7-3A-2: CAMPING IN PUBLIC PLACES:
A. Prohibitions: It shall be unlawful for any person to use any of the streets, sidewalks, parks or public places as a camping place at any time, or to cause
or permit any vehicle to remain in any of said places to the detriment of public travel or convenience; or to cause or permit any livestock of any
description to be herded into any of said places during any hours of the day or night; provided, that this section shall not prohibit the operation of a
sidewalk cafe pursuant to a permit issued by the City Clerk. The term "camp" or "camping" shall mean the use of public property as a temporary or
permanent place of dwelling, lodging or residence, or as a living accommodation at any time between sunset and sunrise, or as a sojourn. Indicia of
camping may include, but are not limited to, storage of personal belongings, using tents or other temporary structures for sleeping or storage of
personal belongings, carrying on cooking activities or making any fire in an unauthorized area, or any of these activities in combination with one
another or in combination with either sleeping or making preparations to sleep (including the laying down of bedding for the purpose of sleeping).
B. Enforcement: Law enforcement officers shall not enforce this camping section when the individual is on public property and there is no available
overnight shelter. The term "available overnight shelter" is a public or private shelter, with an available overnight space, open to an individual or family
unit experiencing homelessness, at no charge. If the individual cannot utilize the overnight shelter space due to voluntary actions, such as intoxication,
drug use, unruly behavior or violation of shelter rules, the overnight shelter space shall still be considered available.
C. Exception: This section does not affect subsection 7-7A-5E or 7-7A-10A of this title, which do not prohibit sleeping in a public park during hours of
operation. (Ord. 38-14, 9-23-2014)
7-3A-3: PENALTY:
Any person violating the provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, subject to penalty as provided in section 1-4-1 of this Code
and, in addition, such persons shall be liable for damages to such street or streets by reason of violation of the provisions of this article, such damages to
be recovered by the City before any court of competent jurisdiction. (1952 Code § 9-10-20; amd. 2019 Code)
ARTICLE B. STREET AND PARKWAY OBSTRUCTIONS
7-3B-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this article, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivation shall have the meanings given herein. When not inconsistent with
the context, words used in the present include the future, words in the plural number include the singular, and words in the singular number include the
plural number. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 289/503
ENCROACH: The use, intrusion, enclosure or occupation of a street, sidewalk, parkway or the unused portion of a street.
OBSTRUCTION: Any obstacle or thing impeding, or inconveniencing or rendering dangerous, public travel upon and along a street, alley or sidewalk.
PARKWAY: That portion of public right-of-way situated between the curb line of any street and the property line of property abutting and adjoining any
street. In the absence of a curb, the curb line of a street shall be deemed to be the edge of that portion of public right-of-way maintained and open to the
use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel.
PERSON: Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or organization of any kind.
SIDEWALK: The portion of the parkway of a street set aside and intended for the use of pedestrians.
STREET: Highways, roads, alleys and bridges dedicated, purchased or otherwise acquired for the public, including the unimproved or unused portion
thereof, maintained and open to use by the public. (1952 Code § 9-24-01)
7-3B-2: OBSTRUCTIONS:
It shall be unlawful for any person, except as provided by this article, to:
A. Cause, create or maintain any encroachment or obstruction upon or within any street.
B. Place, install or maintain any object, substance or matter in lieu of trees, shrubs, bushes, grass or vegetation upon or within any street.
C. Erect or maintain poles, wires, pipes or structures upon or below the surface of any street.
D. Drive any vehicle or ride an animal upon any sidewalk or parkway. (1952 Code § 9-24-02)
7-3B-3: PROPERTY ABUTTING STREET:
Any owner or occupant of property abutting and adjoining any street may, upon and within the parkway of such street:
A. Improve, adorn or plant trees, shrubs, bushes, grass or vegetation; and
B. Place, install and maintain any object, substance or matter in lieu of trees, shrubs, bushes, grass or vegetation;
Provided, such owner or occupant shall first file an application for a permit with the City Forester, who shall have exclusive jurisdiction and supervision
over any planting of trees, shrubs, bushes, grass or vegetation, or the installation and maintenance of objects, substances or matters in lieu of trees,
shrubs, bushes, grass or vegetation upon and within the parkway of a street. All permits as herein provided shall comply with the provisions of this
article, as well as the provisions of chapter 2 of this title and section 6-4-2 of this Code. In the event an application for a permit is rejected by the City
Forester, the owner or occupant of property may, within ten (10) days following the date of the rejection of such application by the City Forester, appeal
to the Council. (1952 Code § 9-24-03)
7-3B-4: ILLEGAL OBSTRUCTIONS:
If any encroachment or obstruction has been placed, installed, erected and maintained, or a use made and maintained for private or business purposes,
upon a street, sidewalk or parkway without prior permission and consent, the Director of the Department of Public Works shall in writing require immediate
removal thereof. If such encroachment or obstruction or use has not been removed, or commenced to be removed, and diligently prosecuted, prior to the
expiration of ten (10) days from such notification, by the person who caused or owns or controls the encroachment or obstruction or use, the Director must
commence proper action to abate the same as a nuisance, and if judgment is recovered in favor of the City, the owner, occupant or person maintaining
such nuisance may, in addition to having the same abated, be charged ten dollars ($10.00) for every day such nuisance remained after notice as well as
all costs. (1952 Code § 9-24-04)
7-3B-5: APPLICATION FILED:
A person seeking to encroach, obstruct or use a street, sidewalk or parkway, including the unused or unimproved portion of a street, must file an
application with the Director of Public Works, who shall present the same for the approval or disapproval of the Council. The application shall include plans
and specifications of sufficient clarity to indicate the nature and extent of the proposed obstruction, encroachment or use of the street, sidewalk or parkway
by which to demonstrate that relevant provisions of this Code and other relevant laws, ordinances, rules, regulations and orders will be complied with, the
legal description of the property abutting the street, sidewalk or parkway upon or within which such encroachment, obstruction or the use shall be or is
intended to be performed, and any other additional information necessary to make a fair determination of whether to allow or permit the encroachment,
obstruction or use. (1952 Code § 9-24-05)
7-3B-6: CONDITIONS OF PERMIT GRANTED:
A permit granted pursuant to the provisions of section 7-3B-5 of this article shall be subject to the following conditions:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 290/503
A. Rights Limited: The person to whom a permit is given or granted shall acquire no property or contractual right in and to the street, sidewalk or parkway
and such permit may be revoked whenever the Council deems it necessary as a proper police measure.
B. Compliance: The person to whom a permit is issued shall comply with all laws, orders and regulations of the City and with any direction of any public
officer, pursuant to law, which shall impose any duty upon such person, and such person shall at his sole expense obtain all licenses or permits which
may be required.
C. Insurance: The person to whom a permit is issued shall indemnify and save and hold harmless the City from and for any and all losses, claims, actions
and judgments for damages or injuries to persons or property and losses and expenses caused or incurred by the permittee, its servants, agents,
employees, guests and business invitees. In addition, the permittee shall maintain and keep in full force and effect liability insurance in which the City
shall be named as a named insured in amounts established by the Council. The limits of insurance shall not be deemed a limitation of the permittee's
covenant to indemnify and save and hold harmless the City.
D. Replacement, Restoration: Upon revocation of any permit given or granted, or in case of any disturbance or damage to pavement, sidewalk or other
surface or structure, permittee shall, at its own expense, and in the manner required by the City, replace and restore such in a condition acceptable to
the City. (1952 Code § 9-24-06)
Chapter 4
STREET NAMES AND ADDRESSES
7-4-1: SHORT TITLE:
This chapter shall be known as and cited as the BOISE CITY UNIFORM STREET NAME AND ADDRESS NUMBER ORDINANCE. (1952 Code § 9-06-01)
7-4-2: PURPOSE:
This chapter is adopted for the purpose of providing proper implementation, administration and enforcement of a uniform street name and address number
grid system to assist the public, public safety and emergency services providers in the consistent identification of roadways and property addresses. This
chapter shall apply to all lands within the corporate limits of the City and areas of City impact. (1952 Code § 9-06-02)
7-4-3: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and derivations shall have the meanings given herein. The word "shall" is always
mandatory and not merely directory.
ASSOCIATION: Ada Planning Association.
COMMITTEE: The Ada County Street Name Committee. An advisory group composed of the Ada County engineer, association representative, Boise City
Fire Department representative, a department representative and a district representative.
COUNCIL: Boise City Council.
CUL-DE-SAC: A dead end street or road with a turnaround space at its terminus.
DEPARTMENT: Department of Public Works of Boise City.
DISTRICT: Ada County Highway District.
OFFICIAL ADDRESS NUMBER MAP: The map or maps showing all the streets within Boise City with the official address number grid systems and
address numbers maintained by the department or its designee.
OFFICIAL STREET NAME LIST: The list containing the official street names within Boise City composed of all street names as may be approved by the
Council and filed with and maintained by the department or its designee.
OFFICIAL STREET NAME MAP: The map or maps showing all the streets within Boise City with the official name shown thereon as may be approved by
the Council and filed with and maintained by the department or its designee.
PERSON: Any individual, firm, copartnership, association or corporation.
PLAT: Subdivision plat.
STREET: A right-of-way providing vehicular and pedestrian access to adjacent properties and includes the terms street, drive, court, road, way, avenue,
boulevard, place and other such terms. (1952 Code § 9-06-03)
7-4-4: APPROVALS REQUIRED:
A. Street Names: Before any street is named, approval for the name shall be obtained from the Council upon recommendation from the committee. Official
street names shall be maintained on an Official Street Name Map and official street name list on file with the department or its designee.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 291/503
B. Address Numbers: Before any grid system is established for the purpose of assigning address numbers, or before any existing grid system is changed,
it must be approved by the Council upon recommendation from the department or its designee. All official grid systems shall be shown on the Official
Address Number Map maintained by the department or its designee. (1952 Code § 9-06-04)
7-4-5: DESIGNATION OF STREET NAMES:
A. Official List: The Council shall establish an official street name list and thereafter all new streets shall be established in accordance with the same
general standards hereinafter set forth.
B. Duplication: There shall be no duplication of street names by sound or spelling. Differentiation shall not be by the addition of suffixes, such as road,
street or lane.
C. Future Street Dedications: Names for future street dedications may be suggested by the person or agency proposing the street dedication subject to
provisions of this chapter. The Council, upon recommendation of the department and/or the committee, shall determine what constitutes a separate
street.
D. Suffixes: The following suffixes shall be used in designating street names:
1. Street: An east-west street generally running in a straight line.
2. Avenue: A north-south street generally running in a straight line.
3. Drive: A street generally meandering in an east-west direction.
4. Way: A street generally meandering in a north-south direction.
5. Court: An east-west dead end cul-de-sac street intersecting a north-south street.
6. Place: A north-south dead end cul-de-sac street intersecting an east-west street.
7. Boulevard: An eighty foot (80') or greater width street providing vehicular and pedestrian access to adjacent properties and is generally separated by
a median strip, usually landscaped.
8. Road: A designated major street which extends through both urban and rural areas.
E. Private Roads: Private roads (street not dedicated to nor maintained by the district) shall have the suffix "Lane". Any private road which has two (2) or
more addresses shall be officially named.
F. Use Of Road Or Boulevard: The use of "road" or "boulevard" shall be by designation of the committee upon recommendation of the district based upon
the function and improvements of such streets.
G. Cul-De-Sacs: A cul-de-sac having a length of two hundred feet (200') or more (as measured from the centerline of the intersecting street to the point of
radius or centroid of the cul-de-sac), shall be named unless the cul-de-sac is merely a change in direction of a named street.
H. Proposed Streets: A proposed street shall be considered in general alignment with an existing street if it is less than one hundred fifty feet (150') from
centerline to centerline. Where the proposed street is on the same alignment and a continuation of an existing street, the name of the existing street
shall be maintained with the appropriate designation. Where a street is on the same alignment but not linked to an existing street, the Council, upon
recommendation of the department and the committee, shall designate a name giving preference to existing names.
I. Unification Of Two Differently Named Streets: Where a proposed street dedication unites two (2) differently named streets located on the same
alignment, the Council, upon recommendation of the department and the committee, shall designate one of the existing names to be used, giving
consideration to the length, collector status, period of usage and number of residents affected.
J. Directional Prefixes: Streets shall be given the prefix "North", "South", "East" or "West", based on their relationship to the grid system base lines.
K. Obvious Change In Direction: If a street makes a very obvious change in direction as determined by the department or its designee, a new street name
shall be assigned, except as herein provided. Whenever this situation occurs, the change of street name may occur at an intersection rather than the
point where the direction changes.
L. Officially Accepted Private Roads, Lanes: Officially accepted private roads (lanes) shall be listed on the official street name list with the accompanying
designation "private". Applications for private road names shall be made to the department and referred to the committee for recommendation and
approved by Council. Private road signs for interior private roads may be manufactured by a private company, provided the product is in conformance
with district standards and this chapter. Interior private road signs shall not be maintained by the district.
1. The district shall approve the installation of private road signs within the public right-of-way.
2. Owners of properties on private roads shall be responsible for the cost of manufacture, installation and maintenance of street signs. All private roads
shall have signs indicating its name and status as "private".
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 292/503
M. Proposed Subdivisions: Street names for proposed subdivisions shall be shown on preliminary and final plats in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter and:
1. No final plat shall be certified by the City for processing to City Council until the street names proposed have been checked against the Official Street
Name Map and list by the department and reviewed by the committee.
2. Subdividers shall be encouraged to use an overall theme when proposing street names.
3. No plat shall be approved by the City engineer until all provisions of this chapter have been complied with.
4. Subdividers shall erect street name signs at their own expense to district standards and at district designated locations.
N. Change Of Street Names: Street names may be changed as follows:
1. Written request by the applicant shall be made to the department to change a street name, or the department may recommend changes to the
Council in street names for reasons of duplication, similar pronunciation or spelling, or for other reasons relating to public safety or convenience.
Following such request or recommendation, the Council may hold a public hearing if deemed necessary. Applicants shall be required to pay for street
signs as a condition of street name change.
2. If a street name change is deemed necessary, the Council, upon recommendation of the department and the committee, shall determine the street
name. The following circumstances in addition to others, may be considered in changing street names: the number of existing addresses, the length
of time the street name has been used, the date of the original dedication of the street, and the possible inconvenience to residents, property owners
and the public.
3. No street names may be changed until the proposed name change has been checked with the Official Street Name Map and list, and has received
recommendation of the department and the committee.
O. Location; Lettering: All street name signs shall be located to be clearly visible to persons operating vehicles. The lettering of the street name shall be a
minimum of four inches (4") in height; however, all letters designating north, south, east or west shall be not less than two inches (2") in height. All
lettering shall be of such color and width to contrast sharply with the board or plate upon which the lettering is placed and shall be in accordance with
district standards. Said board or plate shall be a minimum of six inches (6") in width. All street name signs shall have the street names lettered on both
sides of the board or plate.
P. Length: In general, street names shall not be over ten (10) letters in length, including spaces, unless otherwise approved by the district in writing. All
street names shall conform to this limitation, except where existing names are to be continued due to alignments. (1952 Code § 9-06-05)
7-4-6: STREET ADDRESS NUMBERING:
A. Grid System Standards: All street address numbers shall conform to the grid system of the City shown on the Official Address Number Map and list on
file at the department or its designee. The general standards to be used in developing a street address grid system are as follows:
1. Sixteen (16) grid blocks to the mile with three hundred thirty feet (330') between grid lines; and
2. A standard one hundred (100) numbers per grid.
B. Display: It shall be the duty of the owners and/or occupants of every dwelling and business to have placed or installed thereon in a place visible from
the street, house or building, address numbers as hereinafter directed.
C. Assignment By Department: All address numbers shall be assigned by the department or its designee. No other person or organization, public or
private, shall assign any address number to any residence, business, industry or use.
D. Requirements: The department and any person shall comply with the following requirements:
1. Only one number shall be assigned to each business, use or dwelling unit.
2. Numbers shall be assigned to vacant lots within platted subdivisions and shall otherwise be assigned in such a manner that adequate numbers are
reserved for possible future developments or resubdivisions of land.
3. All address numbers shall be assigned for the street (or road) upon which the structure fronts. When vehicular access is used from a point other than
the street frontage, the number shall be placed so as to be visible from the street from which it is addressed, and additional access direction signage
may be required, if requested by the Fire Department.
4. All addresses located on the north and east sides of streets shall be even numbers. All addresses on the south and west sides of streets shall be
odd numbers. These requirements may be changed in the case of meandering streets. When a street has been determined to be running in
predominately one direction, the numbering shall not be changed if there are slight changes in street direction.
5. The owner of each building, house or structure shall post the assigned address number on said structure in such a manner to be clearly visible from
the street (or road). The numbers shall be at least four inches (4") high.
6. Existing address numbers not in conformance with the Official Address Number System Map may be changed by the department giving written
notice at least ninety (90) days in advance of the effective date to property owners affected by such changes. New address numbers must be posted
on the property by the effective date.
7. Addresses for apartments, condominiums, commercial suites or other instances of multiple occupancy within a single structure or complex shall be
addressed according to the procedures adopted by the department. (1952 Code § 9-06-06)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 293/503
7-4-7: VARIANCES:
The standards and requirements of these regulations may be modified or varied by the Council where the enforcement of the rules will result in an
extraordinary individual hardship; provided, that the public interest is served. The applicant must specifically state, in writing, the extraordinary hardship
caused by this chapter and prove said variance will not cause an adverse affect to the health, safety and welfare of the community. In granting any such
variance or modification, the Council may require conditions as will, in its judgment, secure substantial compliance with the intent of this chapter. (1952
Code § 9-06-07)
7-4-8: FEES:
Fees shall be required by the applicant or appellant as specified in the current fee schedule. (1952 Code § 9-06-11; amd. 2019 Code)
7-4-9: VIOLATIONS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to:
A. Erect or install a street name sign not in accordance with the Official Street Name Map and without prior approval as provided herein.
B. Remove, alter, change or otherwise deface a street name sign which exists as provided herein.
C. Place or post address numbers not approved or assigned. (1952 Code § 9-06-08)
7-4-10: PENALTY:
Any person who shall violate or fail to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be subject to
penalty as provided in section 1-4-1 of this Code. (1952 Code § 9-06-09; amd. 2019 Code)
Chapter 5
SIDEWALKS
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 19-19 - OBSTRUCTING SIDEWALKS. Go to new ordinance.
7-5-1: OBSTRUCTING SIDEWALKS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to obstruct, injure or impair any of the sidewalks, streets or alleys in the City and to continue such obstruction for a
period of twenty four (24) hours after notice from any police officer, or City Clerk licensing enforcement officers, to remove the same. This section shall not
prohibit the operation of a sidewalk cafe pursuant to a permit issued by the City Clerk. (1952 Code § 9-08-01; amd. 2019 Code)
7-5-2: MARKING ON SIDEWALKS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to post, paste, paint, print, mark, stencil or nail any handbill, poster, advertisement or notice of any kind upon any
curbing, sidewalk, fire alarm box or fire hydrant within the City. (1952 Code § 9-08-02)
7-5-3: SWEEPINGS ON SIDEWALKS:
It shall be unlawful for any person in charge of any place or premises to permit any dust, dirt or refuse matter therefrom to be thrown, placed or swept upon
any sidewalk or street; provided, that in case of accident or necessity while properly using the street, such person shall not be liable if he shall immediately
clean up the dirt, refuse or litter caused thereby, and on his failure to do so the same may be done by the City at his cost and expense, together with the
costs of the action to recover the same. (1952 Code § 9-08-05; amd. 2019 Code)
7-5-4: CLEANING REQUIRED:
Every owner or occupant of any building or vacant lot and every person having the charge of any church, jail or public building in this City abutting upon
any paved street shall daily (Sundays and holidays excepted) or more often if required, sweep up and keep clean the sidewalk in front of such premises
and shall remove the dirt and sweepings therefrom in a manner so as not to litter either the street or sidewalk and must do this between the hours of four
o'clock (4:00) A.M. and nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. on each day. It shall be unlawful for any person to neglect or refuse to sweep and keep clean such portion
of the sidewalk as is in front of his premises and to comply with the provisions of this section. (1952 Code § 9-08-06; amd. 2019 Code)
7-5-5: REMOVING SNOW REQUIRED:
Every owner of any building or vacant lot, and every person having the charge of any church, jail or public building in this City shall, during the time snow
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 294/503
shall be on the ground, by nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. every morning, when necessary, clear the sidewalks and gutters in front of his property from snow, and
keep conveniently free therefrom during the day, so as to allow citizens to use the sidewalks in an easy, safe and commodious manner. It shall be unlawful
for any person to neglect or refuse to comply with the provisions of this section. (1952 Code § 9-08-07; amd. 2019 Code)
7-5-6: DRAINING SIDEWALKS:
Any person having charge of or the care of any lot bordering on or adjacent to any sidewalk shall keep such sidewalk drained so as not to permit or allow
water to stand thereon, and no person shall leave or allow any water hose to remain on such sidewalk during the nighttime. It shall be unlawful for any
person to violate the provisions of this section. (1952 Code § 9-08-08; amd. 2019 Code)
7-5-7: PENALTY:
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, subject to penalty as provided in section 1-4-1 of
this Code. (2019 Code)
Chapter 6
CEMETERIES
7-6-1: LEGAL AUTHORITY:
Idaho Code section 50-320 and Idaho Code title 27, chapter 3, authorize the City to acquire, hold, pay for, improve and regulate Municipal cemeteries, and
to convey, by certificate, the right to be buried in a lot within a Municipal cemetery. (Ord. 29-16, 9-20-2016)
7-6-2: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to ensure the orderly and efficient management, oversight, maintenance and care of the City's cemeteries. (Ord. 29-16, 9-
20-2016)
7-6-3: SCOPE:
This chapter establishes policies, standards, requirements, and procedures applicable to all cemeteries owned, managed, operated and maintained by the
City. (Ord. 29-16, 9-20-2016)
7-6-4: DEFINITIONS:
For purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and derivations shall have the meanings given herein, unless the context clearly
indicates a different meaning. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future tense, words in the plural number
include the singular number, and words in the singular number shall include the plural number. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely
directory. Words used throughout this chapter, but not defined herein, shall have their plain, ordinary and common meaning. Words indicating gender shall
include and apply to all genders.
CEMETERY: A defined area of real property that is reserved and set aside by Boise City for the disposition and memorialization of remains. A cemetery
may include one or more columbaria, crypts, plots and mausoleums.
CERTIFICATE: A certificate of license to inter in a cemetery.
CITY COUNCIL: The Council of Boise City, Idaho, its designee or its authorized representative.
COLUMBARIUM: A structure, similar to a mausoleum, but designed for the interment of remains.
COMMISSION: The Boise City Parks and Recreation Commission, its designee or its authorized representative.
CRYPT: A vault or chamber used for keeping remains.
DEPARTMENT: The Boise City Department of Parks and Recreation or its authorized representative.
GRAVE: An excavation into the earth intended for use as a place of burial.
INTER: To place, deposit or entomb remains in a columbarium, crypt, grave, lot, mausoleum, niche or tomb.
LOT OR BURIAL LOT: The cemetery grounds immediately surrounding a single grave.
MAUSOLEUM: A permanent, aboveground building designed for entombment.
MEMORIAL: Any object permanently placed on or affixed to a columbarium, crypt, grave, lot, mausoleum, niche or tomb to preserve the memory of a
person. Types of memorials may include, without limitation:
A. Gravestone: A stone or marker with an inscription placed or installed near a grave;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 295/503
B. Headstone: A gravestone located at the head of a grave;
C. Marker: Any object permanently placed on or affixed to a columbarium, crypt, grave, lot, mausoleum, niche or tomb; or
D. Monument: A stone, an object, a building or a structure intended or used to preserve the memory of a person.
NICHE: A recess in a wall or columbarium used for the placement of remains.
PROPRIETOR: The current or last known holder of a certificate. A proprietor possesses a right of fee simple determinable in the columbarium, crypt,
grave, lot, mausoleum, niche, tomb, vault or other designated on the certificate, subject to reversion following a determination of abandonment, as
provided herein.
REMAINS: The body of a deceased person, in whole or in part, regardless of its form or condition. (Ord. 29-16, 9-20-2016)
7-6-5: INTERMENT:
A. Certificate Required:
1. No person shall inter remains in a cemetery without first purchasing a certificate from the department.
2. Pursuant to Idaho Code section 50-320C, each certificate shall:
a. Be executed by the Mayor and countersigned by the City Clerk, under the Seal of the City;
b. Include the name of the person to whom the certificate is issued;
c. State that the proprietor of the certificate possesses the right to be interred in the columbarium, crypt, grave, lot, mausoleum, niche, tomb, vault or
other place within a cemetery that is specifically described on the certificate.
3. A certificate shall vest in the proprietor a right in fee simple determinable to be interred, or otherwise laid to rest in the particular location within a
cemetery described on that certificate. Pursuant to Idaho Code title 27, chapter 3, the right in fee simple determinable conveyed by a certificate is
expressly subject to a right of reverter or escheatment back to the City upon a finding of abandonment, after completing the notice procedure
contained in subsection 7-6-9C of this chapter, which finding of abandonment shall be the condition precedent to the right of reverter or escheatment
back to the City.
4. No certificate shall be issued unless and until the application required by the department is completed and submitted.
B. Charges And Fees: All charges and fees for issuance of certificates, interments, disinterments, permits and all other cemetery services, such charges
and fees having been approved by the City Council and listed on the department's fee schedule, shall be paid in full prior to issuance of the license or
permit, and prior to the services being provided.
C. Licenses And Permits: The mortician, undertaker or funeral director, or the decedent's heirs, representatives or agents, shall apply for and obtain all
required licenses, permits and authorizations for interments, disinterments and other cemetery services prior to the services being provided. The City
shall not be responsible for obtaining any required license, permit or authorization, or for confirming the identity of the person being interred.
D. Nonliability Of City: The City shall not be held liable for any damage to an interment container in making an interment or disinterment.
E. Errors: In the event of an error involving interment of remains, the City reserves the right to disinter, exhume and reinter the remains in any other
available columbarium, crypt, grave, lot, mausoleum, niche, tomb or vault (as the case may be) of equal or greater value and similar location. The City
also reserves the right to correct any errors made on an inscription or memorial.
F. Division Of Lots; Uses: No person shall divide any columbarium, crypt, grave, lot, mausoleum, niche, tomb or vault into smaller portions, and no person
shall use any columbarium, crypt, grave, lot, mausoleum, niche, tomb, vault or other burial space for any purpose other than the disposition of remains.
G. Authorized Remains: Interments of remains shall be limited to the proprietor and to the proprietor's spouse, children, authorized heirs and those
authorized, in writing, by the proprietor.
H. Officials Authorized To Inter: No person, other than department employees, contractors and agents who are working within the scope of their authorized
duties, shall inter remains or disinter, exhume, or transfer any remains within a cemetery without the prior express written consent of the department.
I. Box, Liner Required; Exception:
1. Except as otherwise provided herein, all remains interred in a cemetery shall be in a concrete, plastic, metal vault or in a reinforced concrete box or
liner. The department shall approve and adopt rules, regulations and specifications for the vaults and liners, and for the treatment of remains.
2. Cremated remains shall be exempt from the liner box and vault requirements of subsection I1 of this section. (Ord. 29-16, 9-20-2016)
7-6-6: MEMORIALS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 296/503
A. Authority To Create Policies: The department is authorized to create policies governing the specifications of memorials and rules and regulations for the
ornamentation and beautification of memorials.
B. Approval, Compliance: No person shall erect, build, place or affix any memorial, as defined in section 7-6-4 of this chapter, within a cemetery without
obtaining approval from the department, complying with the specifications pertaining to memorials set forth by the department, and paying the fees
listed in the department's fee schedule.
C. Planting Beds: Within the monument sections of a cemetery, planting beds are allowed, subject to the requirements and conditions established by the
department. (Ord. 29-16, 9-20-2016)
7-6-7: RECORDS:
A. The department shall maintain records of all sales and transfers of certificates of licenses to inter, which records shall include, at a minimum:
1. The proprietor's full name, address, and telephone number;
2. The amount paid for the certificate;
3. The certificate issuance date;
4. A specific description of the columbarium, crypt, grave, lot, mausoleum, niche, tomb, vault, or other location or place within a cemetery identified on
the certificate; and
5. The full name of each transferee or assignee of the certificate.
B. The department shall maintain records of all columbaria, crypts, graves, lots, mausoleums, niches, tombs, and vaults, which records shall include, at a
minimum:
1. A specific description of the columbarium, crypt, grave, lot, mausoleum, niche, tomb, vault, or other location or place within a cemetery;
2. The name, address, and telephone number of the proprietor (if any) of the columbarium, crypt, grave, lot, mausoleum, niche, tomb, or vault; and
3. If the columbarium, crypt, grave, lot, mausoleum, niche, tomb, or vault is occupied by remains or cremated remains:
a. The name of the deceased;
b. The date the remains were interred;
c. The name of the mortician, undertaker, or funeral director involved in the interment of remains, other than cremated remains.
C. No person shall transfer any certificate without first making application to the department and paying the transfer fee listed on the department's fee
schedule. Upon approval of a transfer, the department will re-issue a certificate bearing the transferee's name as the proprietor. Proprietors of
certificates may assign burials for deceased other than themselves without the requirement of the certificate being re-issued.
D. All sales, issuances, conveyances, assignments, and transfers of certificates shall be by reference to the section, block, lot, row, niche, or other
subdivision required in subsection 7-6-8A of this chapter.
E. A proprietor shall notify the Department of Parks and Recreation in writing of any change to his or her mailing address within ninety (90) days of such
change. (Ord. 45-18, 9-25-2018)
7-6-8: CEMETERY MAINTENANCE AND CARE:
A. Subdivision Of Cemetery: Each cemetery shall be subdivided into section, blocks, lots, rows, niches or other subdivisions as may be necessary to
accurately describe, number and record the sale, issuance, conveyance, assignment or transfer of certificates.
B. Costs For Maintenance: The City shall budget for and pay all costs of maintaining and caring for its cemeteries.
C. Department Responsibility: Except as otherwise specifically provided herein, the department shall be responsible and have charge of the grounds and
buildings within each cemetery.
D. Level Of Maintenance: Unless otherwise in keeping with its historic character or longstanding standard of care, every cemetery shall be maintained at a
level equal to or exceeding that of a City park, thereby preserving the dignity of the City's cemeteries and honoring those memorialized therein.
E. Minimum Standards: The following general minimum landscaping maintenance standards of care shall be met:
1. Cutting and trimming grass, inhibiting or removing weeds, raking and cleaning grounds, and pruning, replacing or removing trees and shrubs at
reasonable intervals, or as determined necessary based on the character and longstanding standard of care;
2. Regularly collecting and disposing of all litter, trash and garbage, and emptying all trash receptacles;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 297/503
3. Removing and disposing of wilted flowers from funeral displays or floral arrangements;
4. Keeping all buildings, parking lots, cemetery roads and pathways reasonably clear, accessible and free of obstructions and debris;
5. Repairing sunken grave markers, as needed; and
6. Repairing and restoring improvements, structures, fences and other items. (Ord. 29-16, 9-20-2016)
7-6-9: ABANDONED LOTS:
A. Legal Authority: This section is adopted pursuant to the authority granted by Idaho Code section 27-304.
B. Presumption Of Abandonment: There exists a presumption that a lot is abandoned when it remains unused for seventy five (75) years after the most
recent valid and effective purchase, sale, acquisition, assignment or transfer of the lot or of the certificate therein, unless any one or more of the
following rebutting conditions exist:
1. A proprietor holds more than one certificate, and one or more of the lots to which the certificates apply has been used for the interment of remains
within the past seventy five (75) years. In such a case, the date of the last interment shall mark the beginning of a new seventy five (75) year period.
2. A memorial exists on the lot. (The department reserves the right to relocate a memorial to an occupied lot to which the same proprietor holds a
certificate, if it is determined that additional lots will be eligible for reconveyance, pursuant to this chapter.)
3. Within ninety (90) days of the date of the last publication of the "Notice of Intent to Deem Lot Abandoned" pursuant to this section, a proprietor or his
spouse, child, heir, assign or next of kin:
a. Personally appears to assert or deliver proof of his or her status as the proprietor of the certificate applicable to the lot; or
b. Mails to the department, by certified mail with return receipt requested, proof of his status as proprietor of the certificate.
4. Any fact, circumstance or other evidence exists which, taken alone or as a whole, would cause a reasonable person to conclude it is more likely than
not that the proprietor is entitled to maintain his right to burial in the lot.
C. Notice Of Intent To Deem Lot Abandoned:
1. Upon a determination by the department that ownership rights or a license to interment in a lot is presumed abandoned, and prior to a final
determination of abandonment, the department shall:
a. Send a "Notice of Intent to Deem Cemetery Burial Lot Abandoned" to the last known proprietor, his or her known heirs or assigns, and any known
next of kin, by certified mail with return receipt requested, to the last known proprietor's last known address;
b. Publish a "Notice of Intent to Deem Cemetery Burial Lot Abandoned" for three (3) consecutive weeks in the newspaper of general circulation in
Ada County; and
c. Publish a "Notice of Intent to Deem Cemetery Burial Lot Abandoned" for three (3) consecutive weeks in the newspaper of general circulation in the
county in which the last known proprietor's last known address is located. The requirements of subsection C1b of this section and this subsection
may be fulfilled with a single three (3) week publication if the last known proprietor's last known address is located within Ada County, Idaho.
2. The "Notice of Intent to Deem Cemetery Burial Lot Abandoned" shall include, at a minimum, the following information:
a. The name of the last known proprietor;
b. The description of the lot subject to a finding of abandonment;
c. A statement that the lot identified on the proprietor's certificate has not been used for the purpose of interment in the lot for at least seventy five
(75) years from the date of its acquisition or most recent transfer, whichever occurred last in time;
d. A statement that the proprietor's certificate applicable to the lot is not held in common ownership with any certificate applicable to a lot, pursuant to
subsection B1 of this section;
e. A statement that no marker or memorial exists on a lot, pursuant to subsections B2 and B3 of this section; and
f. A statement indicating the City's intention to deem the lot abandoned unless a proper claim is made within ninety (90) days of the date of the last
publication of the "Notice of Intent to Deem Cemetery Burial Lot Abandoned".
D. Determination Of Abandonment: Unless the presumption of abandonment is rebutted, upon completion of the notice requirements contained herein, the
ownership of a lot or certificate shall be deemed abandoned, the condition precedent to the possibility of reverter expressed in subsection 7-6-5A3 of
this chapter shall be deemed to have occurred, and ownership of the certificate applicable to that lot shall escheat or revert to the City.
E. Recovery Of Certificate: If, within twenty five (25) years following a determination of abandonment, any person establishes to the department or to a
court of competent jurisdiction that he would be entitled to the proprietor's rights if those rights had not escheated or reverted to the City as provided by
this chapter, the department shall, at no cost, convey to that person a certificate for an equivalent or similar lot within a cemetery. If no such certificate
is desired, the proprietor or his heirs or assigns may recover the value paid to the City upon the sale of his certificate that was deemed abandoned, less
an administrative fee not to exceed one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00).
F. Set Aside Of Lots By City: The City shall set aside a number of lots equal to five percent (5%) of the number of lots deemed abandoned under this
section. Any person who was the owner of a lot or the proprietor of a certificate that was deemed abandoned under this section shall have the right to
obtain a certificate identifying an equivalent or similar lot, pursuant to subsection E of this section.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 298/503
G. Applicability Of Reversion: Reversion or escheatment of a certificate represents a possibility of reverter in the City, and shall apply retroactively to all
owners' and proprietors' rights related to any certificate or lot previously purchased or transferred within a cemetery. (Ord. 29-16, 9-20-2016)
7-6-10: DEPARTMENT AUTHORITY:
A. Generally: The department hereby is authorized to approve, adopt, promulgate and publish such rules and regulations as are reasonably necessary to
ensure the orderly and efficient administration, maintenance, operation, management, control, supervision, use and regulation of all City cemeteries,
columbaria, crypts, graves, lots, mausoleums, niches, tombs and vaults.
B. Previously Adopted Fees, Rules, Regulations: All fees, rules and regulations previously adopted by the commission or the department and approved or
ratified by the City Council, if approval or ratification was required, that are now in effect hereby are reaffirmed, reapproved and reratified, and shall
remain in full force and effect until amended or repealed.
C. Violations Prohibited: No person shall violate any rule, regulation or specification approved and adopted by the department or by the City Council. (Ord.
29-16, 9-20-2016)
7-6-11: DAMAGE TO CEMETERY PROHIBITED:
No person shall remove, relocate, break, deface, destroy or otherwise injure any marker, as that term is defined herein, or any tree, shrub, plan, vase,
railing, gate or other object, property, structure, article or thing belonging to, placed or erected on or in a cemetery, columbarium, crypt, grave, lot,
mausoleum, niche, tomb and vault. (Ord. 29-16, 9-20-2016)
7-6-12: PENALTY:
A person violating any provision of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a general misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be subject to penalty
as provided in section 1-4-1 of this Code. (Ord. 29-16, 9-20-2016; amd. 2019 Code)
Chapter 7
PUBLIC PARKS
ARTICLE A. PUBLIC PARKS
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 15-19 - SMOKING. Go to new ordinance.
7-7A-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and phrases used in this article shall have the following meanings unless a different meaning clearly appears from the context:
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE: Any beverage containing alcohol, which is a product of distillation of any fermented liquor or synthetic ethyl alcohol, including
beer, wine, spirits, or any liquid containing alcohol, beer, wine, or spirits.
BEER: Any beverage obtained by alcohol fermentation of an infusion or decoction or barley, malt, and/or other ingredients in drinkable water.
COMMISSION: The Boise City Parks and Recreation Commission.
CONSTRUCTION USE LICENSE: Authorized use of public park property by a private individual, contractor, utility company, firm or other entity for a
specified purpose, activity, location and period of time. Uses include but are not limited to: limited vehicular trespass across public park property for
purposes of accessing an adjoining private property, above ground utility work, trenching, grading, construction staging, or manipulation of park land or
facilities for private purposes.
CONTROLLED OFF-LEASH AREAS: An area where domestic pet owners must still carry a leash and waste bag with them, and their domestic pets
should not be thirty feet (30') away from the owner at any time.
DEPARTMENT: The Boise City Department of Parks and Recreation.
DIRECTOR: The Director of the Boise City Department of Parks and Recreation or his/her designee.
DOMESTIC PET: Any animal of a species of vertebrates that has been domesticated by humans so as to live and breed in a tame condition and depend
on humankind for survival.
E-CIGARETTE: Any electronic oral device, such as one composed of a heating or ultrasonic element, battery, and/or electronic circuit, which provides a
vapor of nicotine or any other substance, and use or inhalation of which simulates smoking. The term shall include any such device, whether
manufactured, distributed, marketed, or sold as an e-cigarette, e-cigar, e-pipe, or under any other product name or descriptor.
GREENBELT: The paved or improved pathways and connecting trails and the twenty feet (20') of publicly owned greenspace on either side, including
picnic tables, barbeque stands, benches and other improvements and fixtures connecting Boise parks along the Boise River and maintained by the
department and delineated generally in the publication known as the "map", or specifically in the inventory of park properties at the Office of the Director.
"Greenbelt" does not include any private property that may lie within twenty feet (20') of the paved or improved pathways or connecting trails.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 299/503
MOTOR VEHICLE: Every vehicle which is self-propelled, except vehicles moved solely by human power and motorized wheelchairs. As used in this
section, the definition of "motor vehicle" includes persons operating an electric personal assistive mobility device as defined in Idaho Code title 49.
PARK: Any and all lands, buildings, facilities, reserves and open space, sports complexes, swimming pool grounds, golf courses, game fields, cemeteries,
playgrounds, skate board parks, BMX facilities, zoological and/or botanical gardens, trails and other general or special use outdoor places, including the
Boise River Greenbelt, that are owned, operated or maintained by Boise City or specifically in the inventory of park properties at the Office of the Director.
PATHWAY: Any constructed trail which has been designated for the use of pedestrians, bicyclists, and other wheeled activities propelled solely by human
power.
PEDESTRIAN: Any person afoot and any person operating a wheelchair or motorized wheelchair. As used in this section, the definition of "pedestrian"
does not include persons operating an electric personal assistive device as defined in Idaho Code title 49.
SMOKING: Inhaling, exhaling, burning, carrying, or possessing any combusting (heated, lit, or smoldering) tobacco or any other substance, whether
contained in a cigar, cigarette, or pipe, or any other object, Smoking does not include possession of an unlit or unheated cigar, cigarette, or pipe. Smoking
does not include use of an e-cigarette which creates only a vapor without any smoke.
SPECIAL PURPOSE PARK FEATURE: Any park, feature within a park, or facility designed for a specific intended use or uses. Examples include, but are
not limited to, skate park facilities, parkour courses, golf courses, BMX or bike courses, whitewater features, et cetera.
WINE: Any alcoholic beverage obtained by the fermentation of the natural sugar content of fruits (grapes, apples, etc.) or other agricultural products
containing sugar (honey, milk, etc.) containing not more than fourteen percent (14%) alcohol by volume. (Ord. 44-18, 9-25-2018)
7-7A-2: PROHIBITED ACTS RELATING TO PARK PROPERTY:
No person in any park shall:
A. Buildings And Other Property:
1. Disfiguration And Removal: Willfully mark, deface, disfigure, injure, tamper with, displace or remove, any building, bridges, tables, benches,
fireplaces, railings, paving or paving material, water lines or other public utilities or parts or appurtenances whatsoever, either real or personal, or
have in his possession any of the foregoing things or objects, or any part thereof.
2. Obstruct Or Impair: No person shall use, obstruct or create any condition that would obstruct or impair the intended use of a special purpose park
feature.
3. Restrooms And Washrooms: Fail to cooperate in maintaining restrooms and washrooms in a neat and sanitary condition. No person over the age of
five (5) years shall use the restrooms and washrooms designated for the opposite sex.
4. Erection Of Structures: Construct or erect any building or structure of whatever kind, whether permanent or temporary in character, or run or string
any public service utility into, upon or across such lands, except by written permit issued pursuant to this article.
5. Fences And Restricted Areas: Climb upon or go inside security fences, maintenance service areas, or other permanent or temporary restricted
areas.
B. Injury And Removal Of Trees, Shrubbery And Lawns: Damage, cut, carve, transplant or remove any tree or plant or injure the bark, or pick flowers or
seeds of any tree or plant. Nor shall any person attach any rope, wire or other contrivance to any tree or plant located in any park except as may be
authorized by the City Forester by duly promulgated rule or regulation. A person shall not dig in or otherwise disturb grass areas or climb trees, or in
any other way injure or impair the natural beauty or usefulness of any area, except that retrieval of personal property unintentionally lodged in a tree or
other plant shall be permitted, provided that such removal is achieved safely and without damage to any tree or plant.
C. Animals And Birds:
1. Hunting: Hunt, molest, harm, frighten, kill, trap, chase, tease, annoy, feed, shoot or throw missiles or objects at any animal, reptile or bird including
those confined to the Zoo Boise; nor shall any person remove or be in possession of the young of any wild animal, or the eggs or nest, or young of
any reptile or bird; nor shall any person collect, remove, be in possession of, give away, sell or offer to sell, buy or offer to buy, or accept as a gift, any
specimen alive or dead collected from any park areas.
2. Feeding Animals: Give or offer, or attempt to give to any reptile, bird, waterfowl, or other wildlife any tobacco, alcohol or other known noxious
substances. Feeding of animals within Zoo Boise is prohibited unless otherwise permitted by duly authorized Zoo Boise personnel.
D. Horseback Riding:
1. Except for police officers and their service animals in the official performance of their duties, ride a horse except on designated bridle trails and in
specially designated park areas. Where permitted, horses shall be thoroughly broken and properly restrained, and ridden with due care, and shall not
be allowed to graze or go unattended. The designated bridle paths shall be:
a. Along the roadways and trails of Military Reserve.
b. Along the west and north boundaries of Hillside Park leading from Hill Road to the equestrian show ring in the southeast corner of the park. The
bridle trail shall be marked with signs. (Ord. 44-18, 9-25-2018)
7-7A-3: PARK ACCESS, ENCROACHMENTS, CONSTRUCTION USE AND EASEMENTS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 300/503
A. Purpose And Objectives:
1. The department is responsible for the stewardship of all Boise City park properties, and thus any encroachments upon them. The department shall
regulate all non-park related construction activity on or across park property and provide conditions to assure preservation of the public's interest and
proper restoration of the parks. Boise City projects shall be subject to internal policies and are specifically exempt from the provisions of this article.
2. No person shall use any park property for access to adjoining or nearby property for any purpose, or to construct or install any facility or
improvement upon, over or beneath park property except by license or easement issued or granted pursuant to the provisions of this Code.
B. Objectives:
1. This article shall apply only to those properties owned and/or maintained by the department.
2. Evaluation of the impact of the proposed project shall be made in terms of the site and the associated public use to determine the merit of granting
the work.
3. Work will be allowed only by and/or with the approval of the department for a project that meets the department's construction and restoration
requirements.
4. This article provides for regulation of non-park related access across, or construction activities on park property, and does not, in itself, provide a
permanent easement or lease on a park property.
5. Routine maintenance of improvements located on a park property that are addressed by an established easement and maintenance agreement or
license agreement are specifically exempt from the provisions of this article. For purposes of this article "routine" is defined as maintenance activities
which do not require: placing undue restrictions on a park road, pathway, or recreation facility; excavation; or damage to park grounds or
improvements unless otherwise specified by an established easement and maintenance agreement or license agreement.
C. Construction Use License:
1. Application: An application for a construction use license is required in any case where an adjoining property owner, business, utility company, or
other entity is requesting access through a park site or permission to stage, grade, or modify, in any manner, a public park property. The purpose of
the license is to provide review of proposed non-park related activity on park property to ensure the contemplated activity does not present a safety
hazard to park users or pose an undue burden on park property, and to provide for assurances that the property owner, utility company or their
authorized contractor, assumes all responsibility for any resulting damage to the park grounds, sprinkler systems, or other public park facilities that
may occur as a result of the licensed activity on park property.
2. Process And Fee Requirement:
a. Applicants shall complete a construction use license application to initiate the license process and shall pay a fee in an amount set forth on the fee
schedule. The application shall include:
(1) The name, address and phone number of the property owner;
(2) The name, address and phone number of authorized contractor who will perform the work;
(3) A description of access needs, including a description of the type and purpose of work to be performed on park property and the location of the
proposed activity;
(4) The dates access is being requested;
(5) A park site plan showing the proposed access route relative to locations of park trees, structures, and other improvements and features;
(6) A description and the weight of the equipment that is proposed to be used on park property; and,
(7) A description of the length and area of the park to be used or otherwise disturbed;
(8) Proposed mitigation measures that will be employed to address safety concerns and minimize damage to the park, including a description of all
work that is anticipated to be required for restoring the park to its original condition including anticipated quantities of materials such as: soil, turf,
irrigation system, trees, shrubs, asphalt and curbing.
b. The applicant shall be required to enter into an agreement acknowledging responsibility to pay for all costs to repair damages to park property.
The applicant shall also indemnify the City for liability.
3. Applicant Obligations: The department shall prepare a standard agreement or license outlining the applicant's obligations, including any conditions or
fees.
a. The Director is authorized to review the required approval standards and/or criteria for construction use licenses and issue final approval, approval
with conditions, or withhold final approval for the City. The Director's decision on construction use licenses shall be final unless an appeal is made
as hereinafter provided.
b. Upon expiration of the construction use license, the Department will inspect the park property for damage connected to the permitted activity on
park property. In the event damage to the park site is found, the applicant shall be contacted by the department to effect restoration within ten (10)
working days using an approved and bonded contractor or pay the City for repairs. The department shall specify the extent of damages found, the
scope of required repair and replacement work, the procedure for performing the work, and any allowances for additional time to complete the
work in the event weather or site conditions would warrant such an allowance.
c. The City reserves the right to file claims for damages against the applicant or the applicant's authorized contractor in the event the applicant fails
to effect the required restoration work within the required time frame. The City may also elect to impose penalties in accordance with the penalty
provisions of this article.
D. Action On Construction Use License Applications:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 301/503
1. The following shall be considered by the Director prior to approving or denying a construction use license application:
a. The proposal is permissible under Federal, State, and local laws; and
b. The proposal does not conflict with the location of existing or planned park improvements or other public facilities and improvements or
established easements such as, but not limited to sewer and utility lines, flood control, wells, and communications facilities; and
c. The proposed project cannot be reasonably accomplished or accessed by another way or means, other than through park property; and
d. No permanent disruption or damage to an active park use area would occur due to the proposed project or access, nor would a scheduled
recreation program be affected; and
e. The site conditions and access route are such that potential damages to park property are avoided or minimized; and
f. The time of year and weather conditions will help minimize potential damage to park property; and
g. The project or access will not result in an excessive number of trips through the park property; and
h. Appropriate provisions for recovery of extraordinary costs to the City for temporary use of property, restoration (subsection E of this section),
inspection and monitoring of the proposed project are addressed; and
i. The proposed project is not specifically covered by an existing approved easement and maintenance agreement.
2. The Director shall make a final determination on all applications for construction use licenses within fifteen (15) working days of receipt of a complete
application. The Director's action on applications shall be to deny, approve or approve with conditions. A license issued with conditions may be
monitored by department staff for compliance with requirements to protect the safety of park users and protect park property and improvements from
undue damage or loss. Failure to abide by conditions shall result in revocation of the license and suspension of licensee's activity on park property.
3. An applicant may appeal denial of a construction use license application by written request to the commission. The appeal must be made within ten
(10) working days of written notification of the denial and include an appeal fee in an amount as set forth on the fee schedule.
E. Restoration:
1. Provisions for restoration shall be addressed as part of the conditions for a construction use license. All restoration of park property shall comply with
department standards and specifications. Department specifications are available upon request. Each restoration project will have its own list of
specific requirements. Requirements for enacting restoration work shall be performed according to the department's direction:
a. Department Restoration: The department may restore a construction site to ensure park properties are quickly and safely restored and repaired.
All costs associated with labor and materials to restore property to the department's satisfaction shall be paid by the applicant.
b. Applicant Restoration: The department may direct that an applicant restore a construction site through an approved contractor with demonstrated
expertise in the repair work required. All contractors must be licensed and bonded for the work to be done. All work shall be accomplished in
accordance with department construction standards and materials specifications. The department shall impose a time limit for an applicant's
restoration requirements to be completed by the approved contractor. Department staff shall inspect the contractor's work for completeness and
quality. Failure to meet restoration requirements in a satisfactory or timely manner shall be subject to the violation provisions of this article.
F. Easements:
1. Applicant: No individual, business, Idaho Public Utilities Commission regulated utility company, or other entity shall install a facility such as, but not
limited to: pipe, wire, fiber optic, tower, or any other structure, either temporarily or permanently, without first securing an easement therefore in
accordance with the provisions of this article.
2. Process And Fee Requirements:
a. Applicant shall complete a Request for Easement and submit it to the department together with an application fee in the amount set forth by the
fee schedule. The request shall contain the applicant's name, contact person, a description of the proposed easement, the park and the specific
area over which the applicant seeks the easement.
b. Applicant shall supply a written legal description and a map, stamped by a surveyor or engineer licensed by the State of Idaho, showing the line of
the proposed easement and all trees, shrubs, sidewalks, driveways, buildings, etc., within ten feet (10') of the outer edges of the easement.
c. Applicant shall provide an appraisal of the property proposed for the easement valuing it for its highest and best use.
d. If approved, the applicant shall pay the department fifty percent (50%) of the appraised value of the property for the easement. Calculated cost
shall be based on the square footage of the easement.
e. Applicant may be required to provide written proof of insurance and/or bonding verification. The department may require additional bonding for
large projects.
3. Government And Approved Public Utility Commission (PUC) Regulated Applicant Process: If the applicant is a governmental entity or a utility
regulated by the Idaho Public Utilities Commission and seeks an easement through another regulated utility's previously-approved easement, the
applicant shall:
a. Show written proof the current easement holder has granted use of the easement to the applicant. No application processing fee is required.
b. Provide a legal description and/or map, stamped by an Idaho State certified surveyor or engineer, showing the proposed utility location on City
park property and its relationship to the other utilities in the easement.
c. Applicant may be required to provide written proof of insurance and/or bonding verification. Bonding may be required for large projects.
d. If the applicant desires to be on, or go through City park property (where a utility easement does not exist), the applicant must follow the procedure
set forth in subsection F2 of this section.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 302/503
4. Government And Public Utilities Commission Regulated Businesses Within Public Utility Corridors:
a. If the applicant is a governmental entity or a utility regulated by the Idaho Public Utilities Commission and seeks to be within an established "public
utility corridor", the applicant shall submit a legal description and/or map, stamped by a surveyor or engineer licensed in the State of Idaho,
showing the proposed utility easement location on City park property and its relationship to existing utility easements.
b. The applicant may be required to prove that the corridor in which it seeks to locate is a legally-established public utility corridor.
c. Private utilities not regulated by the Idaho Public Utilities Commission may not obtain easements in public utility corridors.
d. Fee requirements shall be the same as set forth in subsection F2 of this section.
5. Easement Review Process: Upon receipt of a completed application, the Director shall review the application together with the proposed easement
and may seek approval of such easement from the City Council. (Ord. 44-18, 9-25-2018)
7-7A-4: TRAFFIC:
No person in any park shall:
A. Enforcement Of Traffic Regulations: Fail to obey all police officers, park employees, and other such persons authorized and instructed to direct traffic
whenever and wherever needed in the parks.
B. Obey Traffic Signs: Fail to observe all traffic signs indicating speed, direction, caution, stopping or parking, and all others posted for proper control of
traffic and to safeguard life and property.
C. Speed Of Vehicles: Ride or drive a vehicle at a rate of speed exceeding fifteen (15) miles per hour, except upon such roads designated, by posted
signs, for faster travel.
D. Operation Confined To Roads: Drive any vehicle on any area except the paved park roads or parking areas, or such other areas as may on occasion be
specifically designated as temporary parking areas. (Ord. 44-18, 9-25-2018)
7-7A-5: RECREATIONAL ACTIVITIES:
A. Boating, Swimming Or Wading: No person in any park shall boat, windsurf, swim, bathe, or wade in any water or waterways, or pool in any park, except
in such water and at places such regulations or restrictions as have been or may be promulgated and posted by the commission.
B. Fishing: No person in any park shall fish in any waters in any park, whether by the use of a hook and line, net, trap, or other device, except in waters
designated for that use and under such regulations and restrictions as have been or may be promulgated and posted by the commission.
C. Trapping Devices And Fireworks:
1. Prohibitions: No person in any park shall:
a. Except for authorized beaver or pest removal, use any kind of trapping device.
b. Discharge, or be in possession of, any fireworks, except as provided in subsection C2 of this section.
2. Fireworks Permits:
a. The City Clerk, pursuant to the provisions of section 5-12-61 of this Code and any rules, regulations or policies promulgated thereunder, may grant
or deny a permit for the use of fireworks as defined in section 5-12-61 of this Code within Ann Morrison Park only.
b. The City Clerk's issuance or denial of a fireworks permit for Ann Morrison Park shall be subject to prior review and approval by the Boise Parks
and Recreation Commission.
c. Issuance of a fireworks permit by the City Clerk shall be subject to such other reasonable conditions as the City Clerk may prescribe, so long as a
denial of a fireworks permit or any conditions imposed on the granting of a fireworks permit are reasonably necessary for protection of the public
health, safety and welfare.
D. Park Use: No person in any park shall:
1. Regulated: Fail or refuse to comply with directions given by police officers or duly authorized representatives of the Director in regulating the
activities in any area when necessary to prevent congestion and to secure the maximum use for the comfort and convenience of all.
2. Availability: Violate the regulation that use of the individual fireplaces, tables and benches follows generally the rules of "first come, first served".
3. Non-Exclusive: Use any portion of a park for the purpose of holding events to the exclusion of other persons, nor shall any person use such area and
facilities for an unreasonable time if the facilities are crowded; provided, however, reservations in advance may be made for any park facility where
fields, courts, halls, rooms, gyms, gardens, shelters, pavilions, plazas, archery ranges or fireplaces are provided. All persons requesting an advanced
reservation shall pay a fee in an amount set forth on the fee schedule and shall observe all department rules and regulations. Failure to observe such
department rules and regulations shall, in addition to other applicable penalties, result in the immediate termination of the advanced reservation.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 303/503
4. Permit Required: Conduct, sponsor, promote or publicly advertise any meeting, concert, theater, athletic event or other public activity in a park; or
any activities which include amplified sound, use of equipment or apparatus, sales, closing parkways, fundraising, or interference with the normal
and regular use or maintenance of the park without obtaining a park use permit.
5. Moving Tables: Move picnic tables without consulting a duly authorized representative of the Director.
6. Duty Of Reservation Holder: Violate the duty to leave all halls, rooms, gyms and other building and park facilities reserved for use in a condition
identical to that when those facilities were permitted to the reservation holder for use. All trash in the nature of boxes, papers, cans, bottles, garbage
and other refuse is placed in disposal receptacles where provided. If no such trash receptacles are available, then refuse and trash shall be carried
away from the park area to be properly disposed of elsewhere.
E. Camping: No person in any park shall set up tents, shacks, or any other temporary shelter for the purpose of camping as defined in section 7-3A-2 of
this title, except by special permission by the Director, nor shall any person leave in a park after closing hours any movable structure or special vehicle
to be used, or that could be used, for such purpose such as a motor home, camp-trailer, or the like.
F. Fires: No person in any park shall light, build, or maintain a fire in any public park, except for culinary purposes in park grills, fireplaces, or privately
owned grills, and no person shall leave the immediate area without first extinguishing such fire.
G. Games: No person in any park shall take part in or abet the playing of any games involving thrown or otherwise propelled dangerous objects such as
stones, arrows or javelins except in areas set apart for such forms of recreation. Golfing or driving golf balls is prohibited except where specific facilities
have been provided.
H. Tennis Courts: No person in any park shall fail to observe and/or violate the rules and regulations for the use of such courts as promulgated by the
commission.
I. Archery Range: No person in any park shall fail to observe and/or violate rules and regulations for the use of such range promulgated by the
commission.
J. Hot Air Balloons: No person in any park shall tether or launch a hot air balloon except by permit issued pursuant to rules and regulations promulgated by
the commission.
K. Metal Detectors: No person in any park shall operate a metal detector without obtaining a permit from an authorized agent of the Director. All permittees
shall display permit in plain sight and comply with all rules and regulations set forth by the department.
L. Vehicles: No vehicle as said term is defined by section 6-1-1 of this Code shall be permitted in or upon any park except: those vehicles operated and
used for pleasure and designed to carry passengers; those vehicles employed by the City; and those vehicles making deliveries within a park.
M. Wheeled Devices: No person in any park shall ride or operate a skateboard, roller skates, scooter, inline skates, bicycle or other wheeled recreation
equipment on any brickwork, ornamental surface, picnic table, bench, tennis court, fountain area, wading pool, planter, sculpture or other structure
unless otherwise designated as an area where wheeled devices are permitted. (Ord. 44-18, 9-25-2018)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 14-19 - ALCOHOL; PUBLIC PARKS. Go to new ordinance.
7-7A-6: ALCOHOL:
A. Alcohol Generally: Alcoholic beverages other than beer and wine are prohibited in all Boise City parks and facilities unless the location is a licensed
premises or alcoholic beverages other than beer or wine are specifically allowed by this Code. The possession of more than seven and one-half (7.5)
gallons of beer and/or wine per person, group, or event shall require a permit from the department.
B. Possession And Consumption: Alcoholic beverages may be possessed and consumed by persons over the age of twenty one (21) years if such
possession or consumption falls within one of the exceptions contained in subsection 5-2-10C of this Code, provided that such possession and
consumption shall not occur in the following locations:
1. South of the Boise River Greenbelt running from east to west within Julia Davis Park;
2. Within the Richard and Annette Bloch Cancer Survivor Plaza;
3. Within Trevor's Trek Children's Cancer Pavilion.
C. Prohibited Parks And Areas: All alcoholic beverages, including beer and wine, are prohibited in the following Boise City parks, facilities, and areas:
1. Any street, parking lot, restroom, pathway, playground, swimming pool, youth community center, skate park, archery range, cemetery, bike skills
facility, or youth sports complex, unless made specifically allowable by this section or by order of the Director.
2. Bernardine Quinn Riverside Park and Quinn's Pond, 3150 West Pleasanton Avenue.
3. Idaho Fallen Firefighter Memorial Park, 1775 West Shoreline Drive.
4. McAuley Park, 1650 West Resseguie Street.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 304/503
5. Pioneer Community Center, 500 South Ash Street.
6. Shoreline Park, 1375 West Shoreline Drive.
7. Any park or area where alcohol is prohibited by Boise Parks and Recreation signage.
D. Restricted Parks And Areas: Beer and wine is allowed in the following Boise City parks and facilities with a beer and wine permit obtained from the
department, and only during a department-scheduled reservation or a department-sponsored activity:
1. Boise Depot Platt Gardens, 2602 West Eastover Terrace.
2. Boise Urban Garden School, 2995 North Five Mile Road.
3. Borah Park, 801 South Aurora Drive.
4. Cecil D. Andrus Park, 601 West Jefferson Street.
5. C.W. Moore Park, 150 South 5th Street.
6. Dick Eardley Senior Center, 690 Robbins Road.
7. Esther Simplot Park, 625 North Whitewater Park Boulevard.
8. Idaho Ice World, 7072 South Eisenman Road.
9. Julia Davis Park, 700 South Capitol Boulevard.
10. Kathryn Albertson Park, 1001 Americana Boulevard.
11. Veterans Memorial Park, 930 North Veterans Memorial Parkway.
12. Jim Hall Foothills Learning Center, 3188 Sunset Peak Road.
E. Greenbelt Restrictions: Alcoholic beverages, including beer and wine, are generally prohibited on the Boise River Greenbelt and entrances thereto that
are under the jurisdiction or control of the department, including the area within two hundred fifty feet (250') of the Boise River Greenbelt. Beer and
wine is allowed within two hundred fifty feet (250') of the Boise River Greenbelt in the following Boise City parks with a beer and wine permit obtained
from the department, and only during a department-scheduled reservation or a department-sponsored activity:
1. Ann Morrison Park, 1000 Americana Boulevard.
2. Julia Davis Park, 700 S. Capitol Boulevard.
3. Kristin Armstrong Municipal Park, 500 South Walnut Street.
4. Marianne Williams Park, 3451 East Barber Valley Drive.
5. Willow Lane Athletic Complex, 4623 West Willow Lane.
F. Beer/Wine Permit Process And Regulations:
1. Applications shall be submitted at least one business day prior to the event at which beer or wine will be served.
2. Groups of fifty (50) or more attendees, or those persons requesting more than seven and one-half (7.5) gallons of beer and wine shall request in
advance a beer and wine permit and shall not guarantee site availability.
3. Permits issued in conjunction with reservations are valid only for the date and time set forth on the permit.
4. The department shall review all permit applications to determine if an advanced facility reservation is required.
5. The applicant or the applicant's representative shall sign all permit applications and shall be responsible for the actions of the participants.
6. The representative shall be present at the event site and shall display the permit during the period of the event at which beer or wine will be
possessed or consumed.
7. Permit applicants shall be at least twenty one (21) years of age.
8. Persons attending an event at which beer or wine is possessed or served are subject to all Federal, State, County and City Statutes, ordinances,
rules and regulations. Violators shall be subject to ejection from the park and/or prosecution. In the event patrons are ejected from a park or
otherwise cited for violation of any alcohol-related statute, rule, regulation or policy, any law enforcement officer responding to a complaint or
violation may revoke the permit, confiscate any beer or wine associated with the permit and disband the event.
9. In the event that beer or wine possession or consumption authorized by a permit results in the violation of any of the permit conditions, the individual
representative and the group will not be granted another permit for a period of one year.
G. Sale Or Distribution:
1. Any person who seeks a Beer/Wine Sales Application for Special Events shall submit a written proposal describing the purpose of the event to the
Director or Director's designee at least forty five (45) days prior to the event date.
2. The proposal shall accurately describe the scope of event including security plans and event logistics.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 305/503
3. Beer or wine sales and consumption shall be limited to a designated, secure area.
4. Applicant shall obtain a catering permit as defined in section 3-3-5 of this Code from Boise City Clerk's Office, and provide liability insurance naming
Boise City as additional insured.
5. The department shall review all applications to determine compliance with local and State laws, including Boise City's special event ordinance.
6. All applications require approval by the Boise City special events team and Parks and Recreation Commission.
7. Applicant fees shall be charged in an amount set forth on the fee schedule.
8. Any person who sells, keeps for sale, or dispenses beer or wine in a Boise City park or facility may do so only as local and State laws and
regulations allow. (Ord. 44-18, 9-25-2018)
7-7A-7: BEHAVIOR:
A. Safety And Health: No person shall endanger the safety or health of any other person by any conduct or act. Examples include but are not limited to
skydiving, hang-gliding, helicopter landing, bungee jumping, operating trains or kite buggying.
B. Rules And Regulations: No person shall violate any rules and regulations for the use of a park, or any of its facilities or programs, promulgated by the
commission.
C. Sound: No person shall operate or aid in the operation of private radios, stereophonic or sound-amplification devices at a greater operating level than
sixty two (62) decibels measured at a distance of twenty feet (20') from such radios or devices except by permit in designated areas.
D. Park Closure: No person shall enter or remain in the park during hours of closure, except for purposes of transit through the park, or as authorized by
permit.
E. Glass Containers: No person shall use, carry, or be in the possession of any beverage container made of glass.
F. Unlawful Conduct: No person shall engage in any unlawful conduct or criminal activity or in any way commit a violation or breach of the peace, as
defined by Idaho Code and/or this Code. (Ord. 44-18, 9-25-2018)
7-7A-8: DOGS:
A. No person owning or having the care, custody, possession, or control of a dog or other domestic pet shall permit or allow such dog or pet to enter or
remain in any park or open space managed by the department, except:
1. Where such dog or pet is controlled by a leash;
a. Leash length shall not exceed eight feet (8') within two hundred fifty feet (250') of the Boise River Greenbelt.
b. Retractable leash mechanisms are allowed so long as their use is in compliance with the requirements of this section.
2. Where such dog or pet is confined in a motor vehicle;
3. Where in controlled off leash areas in parks and when within thirty feet (30') of the owner and under the voice command of the owner;
4. Where such dog or pet is carried by such person owning or having the care, custody, possession, or control of such dog or pet; or
5. In such areas designated by the order of the Director as training and exercise grounds, subject to the rules and regulations therein and as may be
prescribed.
B. No person owning or having the care, custody, possession, or control of a dog or other domestic pet shall:
1. Fail to have in his/her possession the equipment necessary to remove his/her dog's or pet's fecal matter when accompanied by said dog or pet in
any park; or
2. Fail to remove the fecal matter deposited by his/her dog or pet in any park before the owner leaves the immediate area where the fecal matter was
deposited.
C. No person owning or having the care, custody, possession, or control of a dog or domestic pet shall permit or allow such dog or pet to enter Morris Hill
Cemetery, Pioneer Cemetery, Fort Boise Military Cemetery, Hyatt Hidden Lakes Reserve, the Boise Depot, Platt Gardens, Bernardine Quinn Riverside
Park and Quinn's Pond, Esther Simplot Park and ponds, Veteran's Memorial Park pond, Marianne Williams Park, BMX park, all Boise City skate parks
at any time, and any park where signage is posted by the order of the Director.
D. Unless otherwise posted through signage or prohibited by this Code, dogs may be brought into any park.
E. This section shall not apply to:
1. Police officers and their service animals during the official performance of their duties;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 306/503
2. Handlers of search and rescue animals during the official performance of their duties; or
3. Persons with disabilities utilizing assistance animals.
4. Any authorized employee or contractor utilizing animals in the course of business with permission from the Director. (Ord. 44-18, 9-25-2018)
F. A violation of subsection B2 of this section shall be an infraction, subject to penalty as provided in section 1-4-2 of this Code. Any other violation of this
section shall be an infraction, the penalty for which shall be twenty five dollars ($25.00) excluding court costs and fees. An infraction is a civil public
offense, not constituting a crime, which is punishable only by a penalty as provided in section 1-4-2 of this Code and for which no period of
incarceration may be imposed. There is no right to trial by jury of a citation or complaint for an infraction and such trials shall be held before the court
without a jury. (Ord. 44-18, 9-25-2018; amd. 2019 Code)
7-7A-9: VENDING AND SIGNS:
A. Except as otherwise specifically provided herein, no person shall:
1. Offer any goods, wares, merchandise, article, or any other thing, or any service or amenity, for sale or rent in a park; or
2. Station or place any stand, cart, or vehicle for the transportation, sale, display, or offering of any goods, wares, merchandise, article, or any other
thing, or any service or amenity in a park.
B. A person possessing a valid vendor's permit issued by the Boise City Clerk's Office and operating pursuant to a department-issued permit or a license
agreement approved by the commission is exempt from subsection A of this section. Such vendors shall comply with all applicable laws, ordinances,
requirements and conditions.
C. Except as otherwise specifically provided herein, no person shall paste, glue, tack, attach, post, or display any sign, plaque, advertisement, or
inscription in a park.
D. Employees and agents of the department, and persons acting pursuant to authority granted by the department, are exempt from subsection C of this
section.
E. The department is authorized and directed to establish, post, and publish policies and regulations governing the posting of signs, plaques,
advertisements, and inscriptions in parks. (Ord. 44-18, 9-25-2018)
7-7A-10: PARKS AND GREENBELT SMOKING PROHIBITION:
A. Findings And Purpose: Public health officials have concluded that secondhand tobacco smoke causes disease, including lung cancer and heart
disease, in nonsmoking adults, as well as causing serious conditions such as asthma, respiratory infections, middle ear infections, and sudden infant
death syndrome in children. The conclusions of public health officials concerning secondhand tobacco smoke are sufficient to warrant measures that
prohibit smoking in places and facilities owned, operated, or managed by the Department of Parks and Recreation in order to protect the public health.
Therefore, the City of Boise City exercises the authority granted by Idaho Code sections 39-5511, 39-5713, 50-302, and 50-304. This section shall be
liberally construed so as to further its purposes of limiting the exposure of the public to tobacco products and smoke in Boise parks and on the
Greenbelt.
B. Smoking Prohibited: Smoking is prohibited in any public park, as defined in section 7-7A-1 of this article, except for the areas specifically declared open
to smoking within Ann Morrison Park, Julia Davis Park, and City owned golf courses by the Director.
1. Notice of the smoking prohibition in public parks shall be posted at or near each vehicular entrance or at or near each sidewalk or paved pathway
into the park and along the Boise River Greenbelt at intervals of no less than every two (2) miles.
2. Notice of any areas approved by the Director for smoking within Ann Morrison Park, Julia Davis Park, and City-owned golf courses shall be posted at
or near each vehicular entrance or at or near each sidewalk or paved pathway into the park. The absence of such posted notices shall constitute
evidence the Director has not approved any smoking areas within Ann Morrison Park, Julia Davis Park, and City-owned golf courses and smoking is
prohibited throughout the parks.
C. Where Smoking Is Not Regulated: Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter and section to the contrary, smoking in automobiles, whether in a
parking lot or roadway, within a public park shall be exempt from the provisions of this section. Additionally, bona fide Native American religious
practices as set forth in section 5-11-11 of this Code are exempt from this section.
D. Other Applicable Laws: This section shall not be interpreted or construed to permit smoking where it is otherwise restricted by other applicable laws.
E. Enforcement: In addition to any law enforcement officer, any citizen who desires to complain about a violation of this section, for which the responding
law enforcement officer concludes there is probable cause, may initiate enforcement by requesting to sign a Uniform Citation as the complaining party
and State's witness. (Ord. 44-18, 9-25-2018)
F. Penalty: A person who smokes in an area where smoking is prohibited by the provisions of this section shall be guilty of an infraction, subject to penalty
as provided in section 1-4-2 of this Code. (Ord. 44-18, 9-25-2018; amd. 2019 Code)
7-7A-11: PARK OPERATING POLICY:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 307/503
A. Hours Of Operation: Parks shall be open to the public every day of the year from sunrise to sunset. Visitors and vehicles shall be excluded during the
hours of closure except when authorized by permit, where hours are otherwise posted, or for transit through a park. The Mayor shall have the authority
to change the hours of any park by proclamation and the publication of that proclamation in the official newspaper of Boise City.
B. Closed Areas: Any section or part of any park may be declared closed to the public by the Director at any time and for any interval of time, either
temporarily or at regularly and stated intervals (daily or otherwise) and either entirely or merely for certain uses, as the Director shall find reasonably
necessary.
C. Effect Of A Permit: Permittees shall be bound by all park rules and regulations and all applicable ordinances as fully as though the same were explicitly
stated in said permit. The person or persons to whom a permit is issued shall be liable for any loss, damage or injuries sustained by any person or
property by reason of the negligence of the person or persons to whom such permit shall have been issued. The Director, or a duly authorized
representative, shall have the authority to revoke a permit upon a finding of violation of any rule or ordinance, or upon good cause. (Ord. 44-18, 9-25-
2018)
7-7A-12: ENFORCEMENT:
A. Officials: Except where otherwise provided herein, police officers shall enforce the provisions of this article. Animal control officers, code compliance
officers or any other officer duly employed or appointed by Boise City's animal control contractor also shall be allowed to enforce the provisions of
section 7-7A-8 of this article involving dogs in City parks.
B. Ejectment: A police officer, the Director or a duly authorized representative, shall have the authority to eject from the park any person acting in violation
of this article. Any person ejected from the park shall leave promptly and peaceably and shall not return to the park for any reason on the same
calendar day of the ejectment.
C. Removal Of Vehicles: Any vehicle parked in violation of this article is subject to removal. (Ord. 44-18, 9-25-2018)
7-7A-13: PENALTY:
A person, as defined in Idaho State Code section 49-117, violating any of the provisions of this article for which a fixed penalty has not been designated
shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be subject to penalty as provided in section 1-4-1 of this Code. Nothing in this
article shall be construed as to limit City employees or other authorized persons from performing their official or City authorized duties. (Ord. 44-18, 9-25-
2018)
ARTICLE B. PROHIBITED ACTIVITIES IN AND AROUND BOISE RIVER
7-7B-1: PROHIBITED TRAFFIC ACTIVITY:
This article is intended to address certain acts on or about the Boise River and in and around City parks, as defined in section 7-7A-1 of this chapter.
Through regulation of those acts, this article seeks to preserve the safety of recreational traffic on and around the Boise River and in and around City parks
to ensure the protection of life and property. In addition to City parks, the provisions of this article shall apply to all public property seventy feet (70')
horizontally landward from the ordinary high water mark on either side of the river and including the bed and banks of the river itself. In the above delimited
area, it shall be unlawful for any person or persons to:
A. Jump from, throw or drop any object, including a person, from any bridge, tree or other landscape features into the Boise River within fifty feet (50') of
any boater, floater, rafter or tuber.
B. Obstruct the pathway, bicycle lane, sidewalk or roadway of any bridge in the City or cause the flow or movement of pedestrians, bicycles or vehicles to
be obstructed in the passage across a bridge, including the immediate area surrounding the access to the bridge. "Obstruct" means to stand more than
two (2) persons deep along the railing or side of any bridge or along the side of any bridge accessway. Alternatively, "obstruct" means to occupy all or
such portion of the path, lane, sidewalk, or road, as to block or delay more than momentarily safe passage of another person or vehicle using the path,
lane, sidewalk or road lawfully and carefully.
C. Use or ride in or upon the Boise River within the City any object commonly referred to as a "boogie board", "body board" or "river board", which for the
purposes of this section shall be defined to mean any object regardless of the type of material from which it is constructed which creates a surf type
wave upon or within the water surface or is used to ride upon or against the current and which is secured by, tied to, held or belayed from any rope,
line, cord, bungee or the like attached at any time to any object or fixture within, adjacent to or spanning any portion of the Boise River, except as may
be authorized by the Parks and Recreation Commission by rule or regulation with notice of such posted by City in the location where the activity is
permitted. (1952 Code § 10-24-01)
7-7B-2: PENALTY:
A violation of this article is an infraction, subject to penalty as provided in section 1-4-2 of this Code. (1952 Code § 10-24-02; amd. 2019 Code)
ARTICLE C. WATERCRAFT USAGE IN PUBLIC WATERWAYS
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 308/503
7-7C-1: PURPOSE:
It is the intent of the City Council to place reasonable limitations on the recreational use of public waterways to improve safety, foster the greater
development, use and enjoyment of the waters in the City by watercraft users consistent with the Idaho Safe Boating Act and the other provisions of this
Code. (1952 Code § 10-19-01)
7-7C-2: WATERCRAFT DEFINED:
For purposes of this article, "watercraft" means every vessel used or capable of being used as a means of transporting a person or persons on water,
including motorized and nonmotorized devices, such as inflatable rafts, canoes, kayaks and single inner tubes. "Watercraft", for purposes of this article,
shall not include diver's aids operated and designed primarily to propel a diver below the surface of the water. (1952 Code § 10-19-02)
7-7C-3: INTERFERENCE WITH WATERCRAFT PROHIBITED:
A. Prohibitions: It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with the lawful operation of any watercraft upon public waters by: jumping, throwing or
dropping any object or another from any bridge or public place into the waters of the Boise River within fifty feet (50') of watercraft.
B. Exceptions: This section shall not apply to Boise Fire Department dive team rescue efforts or other emergency rescue operations. (1952 Code § 10-19-
03)
7-7C-4: PROHIBITED ACTIVITIES BY PERSONS IN WATERCRAFT:
It shall be unlawful for any person to:
A. Throw any object, such as glass, cans, litter or garbage, from a watercraft. This section shall not apply to otherwise lawful activities such as fishing.
B. Operate a watercraft carelessly and heedlessly or without due caution and circumspection, or at a speed or in a manner as to endanger or be likely to
endanger any person or property. (1952 Code § 10-19-04)
7-7C-5: PENALTY:
A. Any person found in violation of this article, except section 7-7C-3 of this article, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, subject to
penalty as provided in section 1-4-1 of this Code.
B. Any person in violation of the provisions of section 7-7C-3 of this article shall be guilty of an infraction and, upon conviction, subject to penalty as
provided in section 1-4-2 of this Code. (1952 Code § 10-19-05; amd. 2019 Code)
Title 8
AIRPORT
Chapter 1
TITLE
8-1-1: SHORT TITLE:
This title shall be known and cited as the BOISE AIRPORT (GOWEN FIELD) ORDINANCE. (1952 Code § 12-01-01; amd. 2019 Code)
Chapter 2
AIRPORT SECURITY PROGRAM
8-2-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to establish and provide rules, regulations, standards and requirements for the health and safety of the public in the use of
air transportation facilities at and upon Boise Airport (Gowen Field). (1952 Code § 12-17-01)
8-2-2: RULES, REGULATIONS ADOPTED:
Rules, regulations, standards and requirements which make up the Boise Airport (Gowen Field) Master Security Plan, also known as the Airport Security
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 309/503
Plan, shall govern the security of the Boise Airport (Gowen Field) and shall apply to the use of the air transportation facilities as they now exist and as they
may exist in the future. (1952 Code § 12-17-02)
8-2-3: CIVIL AVIATION SECURITY:
A. Definitions:
STERILE AREA: That portion of the Boise Airport providing passengers access to boarding aircraft and to which the access generally is controlled by
Transportation Security Administration (TSA) or other security screening personnel, by an aircraft operator under 49 USC 1544, or by local, State or
Federal law enforcement through the screening of persons and property.
UNESCORTED ACCESS AUTHORITY: The authority granted by an airport operator under part 1542 of title 49, United States Code, to individuals to
gain entry to, and be present without an escort in, secured areas and SIDA (security identification display areas) of the Boise Airport.
B. Search And Consent: Any person lacking unescorted access authority who enters or attempts to enter into any sterile area of the Boise Airport shall be
presumed to have fully consented to a search of his or her person, clothing and belongings.
C. Entry Or Attempted Entry: No person lacking unescorted access authority or an authorized escort may enter or attempt to enter the sterile area of the
Boise Airport without submitting to screening of his or her person and accessible property in accordance with the procedures being applied to control
access to the sterile area, in accordance with the terms of Idaho Code section 18-7503. (1952 Code § 12-17-03)
D. Interference: No person may interfere with, assault or threaten a Federal, City, air carrier or private security company employee who has passenger or
baggage screening duties or other security duties within any airport facility operated by the City.
E. Penalty: Any violation of subsection B, C or D of this section shall be a misdemeanor, subject to penalty as provided in section 1-4-1 of this Code. (1952
Code § 12-17-03; amd. 2019 Code)
8-2-4: ENFORCEMENT:
Any person violating any provisions of this chapter or refusing to comply with any lawful order, signal or direction of any police officer issued in compliance
with any of the rules, regulations, standards and requirements provided by the Boise Airport (Gowen Field) Security Plan, now in existence or as amended,
shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be subject to penalty as provided in section 1-4-1 of this Code. (1952 Code
§ 12-17-04; amd. 2019 Code)
Chapter 3
AIRPORT PARKING
ARTICLE A. AIRPORT PARKING REGULATIONS
8-3A-1: DEFINITIONS:
For purposes of this article, the following terms, phrases, words and derivations shall have the meanings given herein. When not inconsistent with the
context, words used in the present tense include the future, words in the plural number include the singular number, and words in the singular number
include the plural number. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLE: Vehicles operated by any fire department, law enforcement agency or an ambulance.
OPERATOR: Every person who shall operate a vehicle as the owner thereof, or as the agent, employee or permittee of the owner, or who is in actual
physical control of the vehicle, or to whom the vehicle is registered pursuant to Idaho State Code.
PARK OR PARKING: The standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, other than temporarily for the purpose of and while actively engaged in loading
or unloading of property or passengers.
PERSON: Any individual, firm, copartnership, association, corporation or political subdivision, including a private, common or contract carrier operating a
vehicle on any street.
STREET: Any public street, avenue, road, alley, highway, lane, path or other public place located in Boise City and established for use of vehicles. The
term "street" means the entire width between the boundary lines of every way publicly maintained when any part is open to the use of the public for
vehicular travel, with jurisdiction extending to the adjacent property line, including sidewalks, shoulders, berms and rights-of-way not intended for
motorized traffic.
VEHICLE: Any device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a highway, except devices moved by human
power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks. (1952 Code § 12-16-01; amd. 2019 Code)
8-3A-2: PARKING AREAS AND TIME LIMITS DESIGNATED:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 310/503
A. The Airport Director is hereby authorized to establish and designate the following in regard to the parking and unloading of motor vehicles at the Boise
Airport (Gowen Field):
1. Public parking areas;
2. Airport employee parking areas;
3. Loading and unloading zones, including taxi stands or taxi queues;
4. Allowable maximum parking time limits applicable thereto.
B. Such areas shall be clearly designated by signs or surface markings. The allowable maximum time limits for parking of motor vehicles shall also be
clearly designated by signs in each area. (1952 Code § 12-16-02)
8-3A-3: PARKING TICKETS AND PROCEDURE:
The procedures specified in sections 6-10A-26 and 6-10B-11 of this Code are hereby incorporated by reference. (1952 Code § 12-16-03; amd. 2019
Code)
8-3A-4: PARKING IN LOADING/UNLOADING ZONE:
A. Attended Vehicle: It shall be unlawful for a person to park a vehicle while attended in any zone clearly designated as a loading or unloading zone.
B. Unattended Vehicle:
1. It shall be unlawful for a person to park a vehicle and leave it unattended in any zone clearly designated as a loading or unloading zone. (1952 Code
§ 12-16-05; amd. 2019 Code)
2. "Unattended vehicle" means any vehicle observed by an authorized officer or reported by a member of the public to have been left in a designated
loading and unloading zone, without the consent of the Boise Airport, for any period of time, and neither the owner or operator, nor a validly licensed
passenger, with authority to move the vehicle, remains in the direct physical presence of the vehicle. An attended vehicle which is parked in a loading
or unloading zone must be actively loading or unloading in order to be legally parked. (1952 Code § 12-16-05)
3. If the vehicle is unattended, it shall, following ticketing, be impounded and towed to a suitable and safe place at the Boise Airport where it may be
stored at a rate in such amount as established by the City Council, or airport or police personnel may cause the vehicle to be placed in the custody of
a tow truck operator for such towing and storage, all reasonable expenses of towing and storage to be the responsibility of the vehicle owner, or the
last registered owner of the vehicle, regardless of who left the vehicle unattended. (1952 Code § 12-16-05)
4. Signs shall be posted on or near the property in a clearly conspicuous location in large print, which shall state that unauthorized vehicles will be
removed at the owner's expense and designating the name of the towing firm or agent. The signs shall be prominently displayed at the loading and
unloading zones, which shall direct owners or operators of unattended vehicles to contact the Boise Airport Parking Office and the location and
phone number of such person. Ongoing reasonable efforts shall also be made at the loading and unloading zone to contact the owner or driver of the
unattended vehicle to assist in making contact with the Airport Office. (1952 Code § 12-16-05)
C. Impoundment: Unless otherwise stated herein, impoundment of vehicles which violate this section shall otherwise be in accordance with title 3, chapter
16 and title 6 of this Code. (1952 Code § 12-16-05; amd. 2019 Code)
8-3A-5: EMPLOYEE ONLY PARKING ZONES; DISPLAY OF PERMIT:
It shall be unlawful for unauthorized persons to park a vehicle in a zone clearly designated for employees only. Persons employed and specifically
authorized by regulation of the Airport Director may park in the zone for "employees only", provided the vehicle displays an employee parking permit
attached to the window or rear view mirror of the vehicle and complies with all other regulations established by the Airport Director. (1952 Code § 12-16-
06)
8-3A-6: EXEMPTIONS FOR AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLES:
Authorized emergency vehicles are exempt from the provisions of this article. (1952 Code § 12-16-07)
8-3A-7: ENFORCEMENT:
Any peace officer under the direction of the Airport Director or the Chief of Police shall enforce the provisions of this article. (1952 Code § 12-16-08)
8-3A-8: PENALTY:
Except as otherwise indicated, any owner or operator who shall park a vehicle in violation of any of the provisions of this article shall be deemed to have
committed a parking violation. The administrative procedure for payment of parking tickets for violations is set out in sections 6-10A-26 and 6-10B-11 of
this Code. Violations of subsection 8-3A-4A of this article shall be punishable by an infraction penalty of twenty five dollars ($25.00). A violation of
subsection 8-3A-4B of this article shall be punishable by an infraction penalty of one hundred dollars ($100.00). In the event of nonpayment in accordance
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 311/503
with administrative procedures set out herein, an infraction citation or complaint for a parking violation or failure to pay a parking penalty may be filed in the
Magistrate Division of District Court. (1952 Code § 12-16-09)
ARTICLE B. PERMIT PARKING
8-3B-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this article is to provide for the regulation of commercial ground transportation service at the Boise Airport, to ensure a high quality of
service, and to establish fees and charges for commercial vehicles using the Boise Airport. (1952 Code § 12-19-02)
8-3B-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and derivations shall have the meanings given herein. When not inconsistent with the
context, words used in the present tense include the future tense, words in the plural number include the singular number, and words in the singular
number include the plural number. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory. Words used throughout this chapter, but not defined
herein, shall have their plain, ordinary, and common meaning. Words in any gender shall apply to the feminine, masculine and neuter genders.
COMMERCIAL VEHICLE: Taxicabs, revenue shuttles, off airport parking shuttles, hotel/motel courtesy vehicles and regularly scheduled and chartered
buses not publicly funded and operating on a fixed route.
COMPANY: Any person engaged in the business of operating one or more commercial vehicles, or whose business includes the operation of one or more
commercial vehicles.
COURTESY VEHICLE: Any motor vehicle having eight (8) passenger or greater capacity which, on behalf of a business, transports airport patrons or
passengers, who are patronizing the vehicle's business, to the business. Such vehicles are not for hire by the general public at any time, and shall be
clearly marked with the business' name or logo, owned by, leased by, or contracted for by the business, and exclusively dedicated to serve the business
and patrons of the business or other contracting businesses, at no charge to the patron. Courtesy vehicles may not provide transportation to any
passenger for a charge.
DIRECTOR: The Director of the airport or the Director's designee, who must be an employee of the City.
DWELL TIME: The time during which a shuttle or other commercial vehicle (excluding a taxicab) is stationary in any shuttle lane or space, beginning at the
time of arrival at the revenue shuttle loading area.
OFF AIRPORT PARKING SHUTTLE: Any motor vehicle transporting persons to or from the airport and a fixed off airport location which charges for vehicle
parking.
OTHER VEHICLES: Any vehicle not specifically referenced in this section, including, but not limited to, delivery vehicles, construction/repair vehicles and
government vehicles, engaged in commercial activity at the airport.
REVENUE SHUTTLE: Any motor vehicle which is for hire by passengers for transport to or from the airport and any number of locations or destinations,
and charges passengers on the basis of time, or by a fixed rate depending upon the destination, or some other method rather than distance traveled. This
definition shall apply regardless of whether a name, logo or company designation is displayed, and shall therefore include "limousines" within its definition.
Taxicabs, off airport parking shuttles, and courtesy vehicles are not considered revenue shuttles for purposes of this chapter or title.
REVENUE SHUTTLE LOADING AREA: The area on the Boise Airport grounds set aside and designated for the loading of shuttle passengers. This
loading area is for shared use by commercial vehicles and shall be as clearly marked and designated for use by commercial vehicles or otherwise by the
Airport Director pursuant to section 8-3B-15 of this article.
TAXICAB: Any motor vehicle that is equipped with a taximeter and licensed by Boise City pursuant to title 3, chapter 13, article A of this Code to transport
passengers for hire.
TAXICAB HOLDING AREA: The area on the Boise Airport grounds set aside and designated for the parking of taxicabs waiting to enter the taxicab loading
area, as designated by the Airport Director pursuant to section 8-3B-15 of this article.
TAXICAB LOADING AREA: The area on the Boise Airport grounds set aside and designated for the loading of taxicab passengers, as designated by the
Airport Director pursuant to section 8-3B-15 of this article.
TRIP FEE: A per entrance fee paid to the airport in accordance with this title, allowing the operator of a commercial vehicle or other vehicle to access
restricted areas of the airport which are designated by the Airport Director for the purpose of loading or unloading passengers or goods. (Ord. 3-17, 2-7-
2017)
8-3B-3: PERMIT REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any person or company to operate a commercial vehicle at the Boise Airport, or own such a vehicle there operating, without a valid
Boise Airport parking permit. (1952 Code § 12-19-03)
8-3B-4: APPLICATION FOR PERMIT:
Application for said Boise Airport parking permit shall be made to the Airport Director upon forms provided by the Director. All applicants for a permit to
operate a taxicab must provide proof of a valid City taxicab license issued under title 3, chapter 13, article A of this Code. The Airport Director must, within
thirty (30) days of application, either grant or deny the requested permits. Appeal from a denial of a permit may be taken as provided in title 3, chapter 1,
article A of this Code. (1952 Code § 12-19-04)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 312/503
8-3B-5: FEES:
A. Commercial Vehicles: Each owner or operator of a commercial vehicle shall pay applicable fees as in such amounts as established by the City Council.
(1952 Code § 12-19-05; amd. 2019 Code)
B. Term: All permits issued hereunder shall continue for a term of one year or three (3) months. All annual permits shall expire on December 31 of each
year; all quarterly permits shall expire on March 31, June 30, September 30 or December 31. In the event an application for a permit under this article
is denied, the fees accompanying the application shall be returned to the applicant.
C. Other Vehicles: The City expressly reserves the right to impose fees and require permits for other vehicles upon amendment to this article. (1952 Code
§ 12-19-05)
8-3B-6: TRANSFER:
Upon approval by the Airport Director, and payment of a transfer fee in such amount as established by the City Council, a Boise Airport parking permit may
be transferred to another vehicle. The transferee must possess and maintain all of the qualifications and conditions applicable to an applicant for initial
license. Denial of a permit transfer may be appealed in the manner provided for denial of a permit under section 8-3B-4 of this article. (1952 Code § 12-19-
06; amd. 2019 Code)
8-3B-7: FARES:
Taxicabs operating at the Boise Airport may add an additional charge to the fare limits specified in section 3-13A-14 of this Code for fares departing from
the Boise Airport, which amount shall be equal to and shall not exceed the fee for use of the taxicab loading area established pursuant to section 8-3B-5 of
this article. (1952 Code § 12-19-07)
8-3B-8: COMPLIANCE WITH REGULATIONS:
Every permit issued pursuant to this article shall be conditioned upon strict compliance with all laws, including, but not limited to, this article, the rules and
regulations and lawful orders of the Boise Airport and, with respect to taxicabs, the provisions of title 3, chapter 13, article A of this Code. (1952 Code § 12-
19-08)
8-3B-9: TAXICAB OPERATION:
A. Quality Of Service: Taxicab companies shall at a minimum operate their taxicabs, while on the Boise Airport, in a manner consistent with title 3, chapter
13, article A of this Code. The Airport Director shall have the right to call to the attention of a company or a driver any violation of the rules and
regulations required to be observed under section 8-3B-8 of this article.
B. Right To Accept Passengers: No taxicab shall accept passengers at the Boise Airport unless it shall:
1. Proceed to the taxicab loading area;
2. Pay the fee for use of the taxicab loading area established under section 8-3B-5 of this article;
3. Be in the proper position in the taxicab loading area according to the rotation of taxicabs based upon the order of arrival, except that passengers
may be accepted other than in the proper rotation if by passenger direction or choice.
C. Taxicab Parking Area Operation: A maximum of eleven (11) taxicabs will be permitted in the taxicab loading area. When the taxicab loading area is full,
any taxicab arriving at the Boise Airport must wait in the taxicab loading holding area until a vacancy is created in the taxicab loading area. The order of
taxicabs in the holding area will be in the order of arrival.
D. Loading Areas: There shall be no loading except in the taxicab loading zone, other areas designated for loading in the Airport Rules and Regulations, or
areas specified by the Airport Director or his or her designee. Taxi will-call spaces (for prearranged trips) may be provided at the sole discretion of the
Airport Director or his/her designee. Taxi will-call spaces, if provided, shall be excluded from the eleven (11) spaces designated in subsection C of this
section.
E. Excessive Charges: It shall be unlawful for a taxicab driver or company to charge a passenger a fare that is excessive or otherwise in violation of
section 3-13A-14 of this Code, as modified by section 8-3B-7 of this article. (1952 Code § 12-19-10)
8-3B-10: REVENUE SHUTTLE OPERATION:
A. Quality Of Service: Revenue shuttle companies shall at a minimum operate their vehicles, while on the Boise Airport, in a clean and orderly manner,
and consistent with this Code and the Boise Airport Rules and Regulations. The Airport Director shall have the right to call to the attention of a
company or a driver any violation of this Code or the rules and regulations required to be observed under section 8-3B-8 of this article or the Boise
Airport Rules and Regulations.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 313/503
B. Right To Accept Passengers: No revenue shuttle shall accept passengers at the Boise Airport unless it shall:
1. Payment Of Fee: Pay the fee for use of the revenue shuttle loading area established under section 8-3B-5 of this article;
2. Proper Position: Be in the proper position in the revenue shuttle loading area according to the Airport Director's designations;
3. Manifest: Be in possession of a manifest or other documentation of prearranged or prebooked passenger identities.
C. Revenue Shuttle Parking Area Operation: These spaces will be clearly designated for use by the Airport Director pursuant to section 8-3B-15 of this
article for shared use by courtesy vehicles, revenue shuttles and regularly scheduled and chartered buses not publicly funded and operating on a fixed
route.
1. Designated Parking: No revenue shuttle may dwell or park in the revenue shuttle parking area unless it is located in a space or area designated for
that specific type of commercial vehicle use.
2. Dwell Time: No commercial vehicle may exceed forty five (45) minutes in dwell time in the revenue shuttle parking area; owners or operators whose
vehicles exceed the maximum dwell time will be assessed a penalty of fifty cents ($0.50) per minute in excess of the maximum dwell time, an
amount which shall be paid within thirty (30) days of written notice of the violation.
3. Number Permitted: No company may be allowed to have more than one revenue shuttle in the revenue shuttle loading area at one time, unless
otherwise negotiated by contract.
D. Loading Zone: There shall be no loading except in the revenue shuttle loading zone. (1952 Code § 12-19-11)
8-3B-11: DRIVER CONDUCT:
It shall be prohibited for any driver of a commercial vehicle to do any of the following:
A. Litter in or about the Boise Airport.
B. Solicit, induce or encourage passengers to accept transportation by any visual or manual device, unless the driver is seeking to establish contact with a
prearranged or prebooked passenger or group of passengers.
C. Engage in verbal, uninvited solicitation of customers or passengers.
D. Park a commercial vehicle in any area other than that designated for that type of vehicle.
E. Loiter in the Boise Airport building, except that a driver may assist a passenger with luggage, or use the Boise Airport restaurant and restroom facilities.
F. Engage in any conduct or activity upon the Boise Airport grounds which is prohibited by title 5, chapter 2 of this Code, or the provisions of this article.
(1952 Code § 12-19-12)
8-3B-12: COMMERCIAL VEHICLE CONDITION:
All commercial vehicles must be maintained in a clean and mechanically workable condition. Commercial vehicles with substantial body or interior damage
are expressly prohibited from the Boise Airport grounds. Permits may be suspended, revoked or not renewed until such conditions are corrected. (1952
Code § 12-19-13)
8-3B-13: INDEMNITY:
The driver and company assume all responsibility for the safe and proper carriage and delivery of passengers, their baggage and personal effects, and
agree to indemnify and hold the City and all employees harmless from and against any and all liabilities, demands, claims, suits, damages, causes of
action, fines or judgments, including costs, attorney and witness fees and expenses incident thereto, for injuries to persons (including death) and for loss,
damage or destruction to property arising out of or in connection with the operations permitted by this article, unless caused by the gross negligence or
wilful misconduct of the City or its employees. (1952 Code § 12-19-14)
8-3B-14: ASSIGNMENT:
No driver or company shall assign any right granted by any permit issued pursuant to this article, unless the written consent of the Airport Commission is
first obtained. (1952 Code § 12-19-15)
8-3B-15: PARKING REQUIREMENTS:
All commercial vehicles, including other vehicles, whether or not a permit is required under this article, must stop or park only in the areas designated for
such vehicle or class of vehicles by the Airport Director. (1952 Code § 12-19-16)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 314/503
8-3B-16: REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION OF PERMIT:
Upon a determination that any permittee or other person has violated any law, rule or regulation established by the Boise Airport, any provision of this
chapter, or any condition of a permit governed by this chapter, the Director may:
A. Initiate informal enforcement procedures including, but not limited to, issuing written orders or letters, or engaging in alternative dispute resolution;
B. Revoke or suspend the permit governed by this chapter; or
1. Every permit revocation or suspension shall be effective at twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight on the seventh day following the date written notice of the
suspension or revocation is sent to the permittee.
2. Notice of revocation or suspension shall be deemed properly served if sent by United States Postal Service, certified mail, to the address on file with
the airport that was provided by the applicant or permittee, or if hand served upon the permittee. A permittee's failure to accept, acknowledge, or
receive notification of revocation or suspension shall not invalidate the revocation or suspension, provided notice was served as provided in this
section.
3. Notice of revocation or suspension shall include the grounds upon which the revocation or suspension is based, and shall include a statement that
informs the permittee of their right to appeal the revocation or suspension.
4. A third suspension in one (1) 12-month period shall be deemed a revocation.
5. Revocation shall be for a period of no more than one year. A permittee who has a permit revoked must reapply for a new permit after completion of
the revocation period.
6. Suspension shall not exceed a period of one hundred eighty (180) days.
C. Pursue any other action authorized by law. (Ord. 3-17, 2-7-2017)
8-3B-17: REVIEW OF REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION OF PERMIT:
A. Request For Review: Upon receipt of a notice of suspension or revocation, a permittee may request a review by the Director within ten (10) business
days after the date the notice is mailed or otherwise delivered to the permittee.
B. Information Required: A request for a review shall contain the following information:
1. The name of permittee;
2. The airport permit number; and
3. The reasons for which the review is requested set forth with specificity.
C. Director Review: Upon receipt of a request for review, the Director shall:
1. Review the decision or action and any information submitted by a permittee; and
2. Communicate with the permittee if additional documentation or clarification is required.
D. Refusal To Consider: The Director will refuse to consider any request for review that is not received within ten (10) business days of the date of the
notice of suspension or revocation.
E. Failure Of Permittee To Respond: If the permittee fails to respond to communication requests, the revocation or suspension shall become effective at
twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight on the effective date of the notice.
F. Burden Of Proof: The permittee has the burden of proof and must establish that the decision to revoke or suspend the permit was arbitrary or capricious.
G. Review Decision With Permittee: The Director shall review the decision or action and the reasons therefor with the permittee. The permittee, in person,
may present any evidence showing reason why the decision or action was arbitrary or capricious.
H. Failure To Appear: If a permittee fails to appear at the review, the Director shall uphold the suspension or revocation.
I. Written Decision; Time Limit: The Director's written decision will be issued within seven (7) business days of the review. The Director's written decision
will include the reasons supporting the decision.
J. Effective Date Of Decision: The Director's decision shall become effective ten (10) business days after the date the written decision is mailed or hand
delivered to the permittee.
K. Prohibited Review: The review shall not be conducted by the individual who issued the notice of revocation or suspension. (Ord. 3-17, 2-7-2017)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 315/503
8-3B-18: PENALTY:
Any person violating any of the provisions of, or doing any act forbidden by, or failing to perform any act required in this article, shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be subject to penalty as provided in section 1-4-1 of this Code. (Ord. 3-17, 2-7-2017; amd. 2019 Code)
Chapter 4
AIRPORT FACILITIES
8-4-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and derivations thereof shall have the meanings given herein:
AIRCRAFT: A vehicle used and designed for navigation of or flight in the air.
AIRCRAFT MANEUVER AND PARKING AREA: Public use runway and taxiway system of the airport for landing, taking off, taxiing and surface movement
of aircraft, including aprons and ramps and the areas between the runways and taxiways and the necessary clearance areas.
AIRPORT: Boise Airport (Gowen Field) as defined and described in this title.
BUSINESS OR COMMERCIAL ACTIVITY: Use of the airport or any portion thereof by any person for conducting business or commercial activities,
including the carrying for hire of passengers, freight, express or mail, for paid instruction in aviation or any aviation related field, for the sale of fuel, aviation
supplies and materials, for aircraft rental, sales, maintenance or service, or for any other aviation or nonaviation, business, commercial or industrial activity.
OPERATIONAL AREA: Any area of the airport used or intended to be used for landing, taking off, parking or surface movement of aircraft, the military
exclusive leased area, and any area under lease to a tenant or the lessee of buildings, structures or ground on the airport.
OPERATOR: Any person who operates an aircraft.
OWNER: Any person in whose name the aircraft is registered as the title holder and owner thereof.
PERSON: Any natural person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or organization of any kind.
RAMP: An area designated as an apron or ramp and used for the parking and maneuvering, loading and unloading, and servicing of aircraft while on the
ground. Servicing of an aircraft, as used in this title, shall only mean oiling and fueling thereof.
ROAD: All areas designated as public use roads or streets for the exclusive use of ground vehicles, but shall not include any such areas under lease to a
tenant or lessee on the airport.
TAXIWAYS: All areas designated as public use taxiways and used for the exclusive use of aircraft movement on the ground, but shall not include any
areas under lease to a tenant or a lessee on the airport.
TOWER: The control and authority established and operated by the Federal Aviation Administration for the control of aircraft and motor vehicles on the
operational areas and the air space above, within and without the airport for the landing, taking off, maneuvering and taxiing of aircraft.
UNDEVELOPED AREAS: All land on the airport except that defined as operational areas and roads and except that land legally used by or under lease to
a tenant or lessee. (1952 Code § 12-18-01; amd. 2019 Code)
8-4-2: COMPLIANCE REQUIRED:
All persons shall, at all times, comply with, be subject to and be governed by: a) the lawful exercise of the police power by City; b) the terms and provisions
of this Code now in force or as hereinafter amended; c) all rules and regulations promulgated by the Airport Commission pursuant to the provisions of title
2, chapter 2 of this Code, and as approved by the Mayor and Council by resolution; and d) all rules and regulations established and promulgated by the
Federal Aviation Administration. The observance of the foregoing shall be a condition under which all persons may use the facilities of the airport, and
failure to observe and comply with, and the violation of any provision of the foregoing and this title, shall constitute a misdemeanor. (1952 Code § 12-18-
02)
8-4-3: RESTRICTED AREAS:
A. Security Identification Display Area: It shall be unlawful for any person to be upon or within, or to go upon or within, the security identification display
areas (SIDA) except in conformance and compliance with the Airport Security Program provided by chapter 2 of this title.
B. Operational Area: It shall be unlawful for any person, other than those in aircraft operating on the airport or in vehicles authorized to service or support
such aircraft, to enter or be upon and within the operational area unless with prior approval of the Airport Director.
C. Closure Authorized: The Airport Director at any time and for any interval of time, either temporarily or at regularly and stated intervals (daily or
otherwise), and either entirely or merely to certain uses, whenever he shall find it reasonably necessary, shall have the authority to close to use to any
and all persons, or groups or classifications thereof, any section or part of the airport. (1952 Code § 12-18-03)
8-4-4: CONDUCT OF BUSINESS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 316/503
It shall be unlawful for any person to solicit, offer for hire or sale, or engage in any business activity of any nature on, upon, within or from the airport,
except with the prior approval thereof and only then in conformance with an appropriate lease or permit. (1952 Code § 12-18-04)
8-4-5: SERVICE VEHICLES:
It shall be unlawful for any vehicle to be operated on the operational areas except those specifically authorized by the Airport Manager. Each person
entering or leaving operational areas through a gate shall ensure, by remaining there or otherwise, that: a) it has closed completely after his use; and b)
that no unauthorized use of that gate or any other entry to the secured area accompanies his use. (1952 Code § 12-18-06)
8-4-6: AIRCRAFT OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE:
It shall be unlawful for any person to navigate, land, fly, service, move, maintain or repair any aircraft, or conduct any aviation activities, upon, within or
from the airport other than in conformity with current rules and regulations promulgated by the Airport Commission and approved and ratified by the Mayor
and Council, and with the current rules and regulations established under Federal authority, including all current air traffic rules established by the Federal
Aviation Administration. (1952 Code § 12-18-07)
8-4-7: AIRCRAFT STORAGE AND REPAIRS:
Aircraft shall be stored and repairs shall be made only on the leased sites where permitted. With prior permission, aircraft may be stored on ramps or
aprons and repair work may be made or performed on such ramps or aprons. (1952 Code § 12-18-08)
8-4-8: SECURING UNATTENDED AIRCRAFT:
A. Unattended Aircraft Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any person to leave an aircraft unattended on any area of the airport, including leased premises,
unless properly secured.
B. Responsibility For Securing Aircraft: Securing of aircraft shall be the sole responsibility of the owner or operator of the aircraft. (1952 Code § 12-18-09)
8-4-9: TAXIING:
It shall be unlawful for any person to taxi an aircraft until he is certain, after visual inspection, and after clearance with the tower, that there will be no
danger of collision with any person, aircraft or other object. All aircraft shall be taxied at a slow and reasonable speed. (1952 Code § 12-18-10)
8-4-10: DISABLED AIRCRAFT:
Each aircraft owner, or his pilot or agent, or the operator thereof, shall be responsible for the prompt removal of disabled aircraft and parts thereof unless
required or directed to delay such action pending an investigation of an accident. If the operator, or the owner or his pilot or agent, authorizes the airport to
remove the disabled aircraft from runways, ramps, aprons, taxiways or other operational or undeveloped areas on the airport, charges shall be made for
equipment and labor at currently established prices and rates. (1952 Code § 12-18-11)
8-4-11: PARKING OF AIRCRAFT:
A. Requirements: Except for parking and servicing of aircraft where permitted on public use ramps or aprons, all aircraft shall be parked on leased
premises where permitted and on the operational area of the airport where designated by markings or other directional signs or signings and as
directed by the Airport Manager. No holding, stopping or parking of aircraft on the taxiways shall be permitted other than to gain immediate ingress or
egress of the aircraft to runways for take off, or from or to adjacent premises or/and as directed by the tower.
B. Prohibited Parking: It shall be unlawful for any person to park at any place upon the airport other than at those places provided in subsection A of this
section.
C. Failure To Pay Fees: It shall be unlawful for any person to fail to pay the fees required for, and as the condition for the privilege of, parking as required
by the rules and regulations promulgated by the Airport Commission and as adopted and approved by the Council and Mayor. (1952 Code § 12-18-12)
8-4-12: REMOVAL AND IMPOUNDMENT OF PROPERTY:
A. Authorized: The Airport Manager, or his duly authorized representative, may remove from any area of the airport, including any leased premises, any
aircraft, motor vehicle or other property which causes or constitutes or reasonably appears to cause or constitute an imminent or immediate danger to
the health or safety of the persons using the airport or a significant portion thereof. The expense of such removal and any storage fees shall become a
lien chargeable to the owner and/or operator of such aircraft, motor vehicle or other property. Said operator/owner shall be notified of the removal and
storage of said aircraft, motor vehicle or other property by certified or registered mail with return receipt requested, sent to the operator/owner's
address as known to the Airport Manager or his authorized representative, within three (3) days of said removal and storage. The notice shall include:
1. If an aircraft or motor vehicle, the make, year, model and license number, or if other property, a general description.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 317/503
2. The approximate place where the motor vehicle, aircraft or property was found.
3. The place to which the motor vehicle, aircraft or property was removed.
4. A statement that the motor vehicle, aircraft or other property can be sold for removal and storage charges if not claimed within thirty (30) days of
mailing the notice.
B. Failure To Pay Parking Fees: Whenever any person shall fail to pay the parking fees as herein required, in addition to any other remedy or procedure
herein authorized, the Airport Manager may impound such aircraft until payment of the appropriate parking fee and may as an alternative and further
remedy remove and impound the aircraft in compliance with and in the manner provided by subsection A of this section. (1952 Code § 12-18-13)
8-4-13: PENALTY:
Any person violating any of the provisions of, or doing any act forbidden by, or failing to perform any act required in, this chapter shall be deemed guilty of
a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined in an amount not exceeding three hundred dollars ($300.00) or be imprisoned in the City Jail
for a period not exceeding thirty (30) days, or be both so fined and imprisoned. (1952 Code § 12-18-14)
Chapter 5
NONTENANT RENTAL CAR BUSINESS PERMIT
8-5-1: PURPOSE:
In order to protect the public, to provide for public safety, to preserve the good order and peace of the airport, and to regulate the entrances to property and
buildings of the airport and the way of ingress and egress to and from the same, it is necessary to enact reasonable standards, controls, rules, regulations
and procedures of off airport rental car businesses. (1952 Code § 12-20-01)
8-5-2: PERMIT REQUIRED:
A person, persons or corporation desiring access to the Boise Airport for the purpose of conducting rental car business operations, either directly or
indirectly, shall first obtain a Boise Airport rental car nontenant business permit prior to conducting any such business on airport property. (1952 Code
§ 12-20-02)
8-5-3: APPLICATION FOR PERMIT:
The Airport Director may issue a rental car nontenant business permit only upon receipt of a signed and verified application from the rental car business
owners containing the following information, agreements and proof:
A. Interested Persons: The names and addresses of every person or corporation having an interest in the business.
B. Corporations: For corporations not traded publicly, the names and addresses of every person having an interest in the business. (1952 Code § 12-20-
04)
C. Liability Insurance: Proof of comprehensive general liability insurance in the amount of at least one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) covering all business
operations, employees and customers, and naming the City as an additional insured. (1952 Code § 12-20-04; amd. 2019 Code)
D. Vehicle Information: The make, model, color, identification number and motor vehicle identification number of all vehicles to be operated on airport
property.
E. Gross Revenue Payment:
1. A written agreement to pay, for the duration of the permit, to the Boise Airport, seven percent (7%) of airport generated gross revenue receipts,
payable on the tenth day of each month for the preceding month's contracts.
2. "Gross revenue receipts" shall mean the time and mileage charges, including revenues received and services performed for cash, on credit or
otherwise, of every kind, name and nature, for the rental of automobiles affected by the permittee and receipts from the sale of personal accidental
insurance, and shall include any and all amounts paid by a customer to a permittee, including any fees paid to the airport or the City by permittee,
which are passed through to the customer; but shall not include any Federal, State or Municipal Sales Taxes or other similar taxes separately stated
and collected from customers of the permittee now or hereafter levied or imposed, nor any sums received for damage to automobiles or other
property of the permittee, or for loss, conversion or abandonment of such automobiles.
3. "Airport generated gross revenue receipts" shall mean those gross revenue receipts of a permittee which were derived from the furnishing of an
automobile to an aircraft passenger by use of an automobile rental contract between a permittee and such aircraft passenger picked up at the Boise
Airport who was transported either directly or indirectly by a permittee to a rental station operated by and/or for the benefit of such permittee.
F. Management And Employee Information: The names and job titles of local management personnel, as well as all business employees engaged in the
operation of vehicles to be operated on airport property.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 318/503
G. Agreement To Comply: A written agreement covenanting to obey and follow all standards and regulations and ordinances of the City and the Airport
Commission.
H. Required Permits: Proof of all business and motor vehicle permits required by local, State and Federal authorities.
I. Agreement For Proof Of Contracts: A written agreement to submit written proof, on a monthly basis, to the airport of all automobile rental contracts at the
time payment is due, accompanied by a statement certified by an officer of the company attesting to the accuracy of payments due the Airport Director.
The monthly written report shall include a detailed list of airport generated gross revenue receipts and a copy of the trial balance.
J. Audit Approval: A written agreement to authorize the Airport Director to audit all business records and accounts during normal business hours time upon
demand and to make said records and accounts available.
K. Activity At Airport: A written agreement that vehicles will stop while at the Boise Airport only while in the process of loading and unloading customers.
Drivers of vehicles (or company personnel that may accompany them) shall be prohibited from solicitation of business in any manner whatsoever upon
the airport. The operation of vehicles will be specifically limited to the picking up and delivery of customers.
L. Parking Area: A written agreement to park only in the parking and pick up area designated for nontenant rental cars.
M. Indemnification: A written agreement to indemnify and hold harmless and defend the City and the Boise Airport from any and all claims whatsoever
arising out of the permittee's business operations and proof of insurance for such contractual liability.
N. Additional Requirements: A written agreement to abide by such additional requirements as the Airport Commission may enact from time to time. (1952
Code § 12-20-04)
8-5-4: FEE FOR APPLICATION:
There shall be a charge in such amount as established by the City Council in advance to defray administrative costs of a permit request for each permit.
This cost is not refundable in the event the permit application is rejected or in the event the permit is revoked. (1952 Code § 12-20-11; amd. 2019 Code)
8-5-5: ISSUANCE OF PERMIT; TERM:
Rental car nontenant business permits will be issued annually for a twelve (12) month period within thirty (30) days after the application for permit has
been submitted to the Airport Director, provided the application is approved. (1952 Code § 12-20-03)
8-5-6: PROHIBITED ACTIONS AND ACTIVITIES:
A nontenant rental car business permit shall not be construed to permit a business holding such permit to have an office or station on airport property, to
park rental cars on airport property, except in designated public parking facilities, or to operate rental cars on airport property; and all of these actions and
activities are expressly prohibited. (1952 Code § 12-20-05)
8-5-7: ADVERTISING AND TELEPHONES:
A nontenant rental car business not having a nontenant rental car business permit shall not advertise on airport property and shall not place a telephone
on airport property. A permitted nontenant rental car business permit may advertise the nontenant rental car business on airport property and place a
nontenant rental car business telephone on airport property. Fees for such advertising and telephones are not included in the permit fees and charges.
Advertising and telephone fees, charges and location must be negotiated separately in addition to permit fees and charges. (1952 Code § 12-20-06)
8-5-8: CONDITION OF STRICT COMPLIANCE:
Every permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall be conditioned upon strict compliance with the regulations set forth in this chapter and the rules and
regulations of the Boise Airport. (1952 Code § 12-20-07)
8-5-9: VIOLATION PROCEDURE:
Upon a showing of sufficient cause to believe that a violation of the rules and regulations specified in this chapter has occurred, the Airport Director may:
A. Proceedings To Suspend Or Revoke Permit: Initiate proceedings to suspend or revoke the permit by notifying the permittee of the possible suspension
or revocation of the permit and the grounds therefor. The notice shall specify the date, time and place of the hearing before the Airport Commission on
the possible suspension or revocation of the permit and shall be served on the permittee by certified mail, personal service or substituted service at
least ten (10) working days before the scheduled date of the hearing. Failure of the permittee to actually receive a notice sent or served shall not
invalidate the proceedings.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 319/503
B. Immediate Suspension: Immediately suspend the permit upon a determination that the conduct of the permittee and his continued operation at the
Boise Airport presents an exigent danger to persons or property.
1. In such event, the Director shall notify the permittee by certified mail or personal service that the permittee must immediately cease and desist all
activity authorized by the permit.
2. The notice shall specify the grounds for the immediate suspension of the permit and the date, time and place of the hearing before the commission
on the continued suspension or possible revocation of the permit. The hearing shall be held not more than five (5) working days from receipt by the
permittee of the notice to cease and desist.
3. If the Airport Commission determines to continue suspension of the permit or to revoke the permit, the effective date of such suspension or
revocation shall be the date the permittee received the notice to cease and desist. (1952 Code § 12-20-08)
8-5-10: HEARINGS:
Hearing on a denial of the issuance or transfer of a permit under this chapter or on the suspension or revocation of a permit under this chapter shall be
before the Airport Commission. At such hearing, the permittee may present evidence, call witnesses and be represented by counsel. The commission may
render its decision orally at the conclusion of the hearing, but shall provide the permit applicant or permittee with written notice of its decision not later than
five (5) days after the date of the hearing.
A. Denial: On appeal of a denial of the issuance or transfer of a permit, the commission may affirm the denial or approve the issuance or transfer of a
permit, and may, upon approval thereof, impose such reasonable conditions related to the use of the permit as are appropriate in the circumstances.
B. Suspension Or Revocation: After hearing on the suspension or revocation of a permit, the commission may:
1. Revoke the permit.
2. Suspend the permit for a period not to exceed sixty (60) days. In its decision to suspend a permit, the commission may provide for the reinstatement
of the permit prior to the expiration of the suspension period upon the fulfillment of such reasonable conditions as the commission may impose, and
may further provide that in the event such conditions have not been fulfilled upon the expiration of the suspension period, the period of suspension
will be extended for a stated additional period. In the event of an extension, notice thereof and the reasons therefor shall be provided to the
permittee, but further hearing shall not be required, unless requested in writing by the permittee. Provided, however, that no suspension shall be
continued for a total period in excess of sixty (60) days without notice and hearing as provided in this chapter.
3. Issue a letter of warning notifying the permittee that any further violation may result in the suspension or revocation of the permit.
4. Allow the use of the permit to continue and impose such reasonable conditions related to the use of the permit as are appropriate under the
circumstances. (1952 Code § 12-20-09)
8-5-11: APPEALS:
An appeal of the decision of the Airport Commission under this chapter may be taken to the City Council by filing a notice of appeal with the City Clerk
within ten (10) working days of the date of the written decision of the Airport Commission. Notice of the date of hearing before the Council shall be
provided to the appellant within fourteen (14) days of the hearing. At the hearing before the Council, the appellant may present evidence, call witnesses
and be represented by counsel. The Council may affirm or reverse the decision of the commission, and may delete or modify conditions imposed by the
commission, or impose such reasonable conditions as it deems appropriate. (1952 Code § 12-20-10)
8-5-12: PENALTY:
The violation of any provision of this chapter shall be considered a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of three hundred dollars ($300.00) and/or six (6)
months in jail. (1952 Code § 12-20-12)
Chapter 6
FACILITY CHARGES
8-6-1: CAR RENTAL CUSTOMER FACILITY CHARGE:
A. Definitions: As used in this section, the following definitions apply:
AIRPORT, THE AIRPORT OR BOISE AIRPORT: The approximately four thousand nine hundred (4,900) acre area of Boise Airport, a division of the
Boise City Department of Aviation and Public Transportation, which is a division of Boise City.
CHARGE EFFECTIVE DATE: The date on which the customer facility charge is effective as provided in subsection C of this section.
CITY OR THE CITY: The City of Boise City.
CUSTOMER FACILITY CHARGE OR CFC: The charge imposed by a car rental company upon a car rental customer arriving at the airport and renting
a vehicle from an on airport or off airport car rental company serving the airport. The amount of the CFC shall be as established by the City Council.
The CFC shall be collected by the car rental company for the benefit of the airport, pursuant to subsection C of this section.
OFF AIRPORT: A car rental company that is not located at the Boise Airport but which does business at the airport.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 320/503
ON AIRPORT: A car rental company that is located at, upon or within the Boise Airport.
TRANSACTION DAY: That period of time a car is rented for twenty five (25) or fewer hours for the initial or first transaction day, and any portion of one
or more additional twenty four (24) hour periods for each transaction day thereafter. (1952 Code § 12-22-01; amd. 2019 Code)
B. Findings And Purpose:
1. Findings: The City finds that:
a. The City owns and controls certain airports and facilities located in Ada County, State of Idaho, and known as Boise Airport; and
b. The airport promotes and supports a strong economic base for the community, assists and encourages world trade opportunities, and is of vital
importance to the health, safety and welfare of the State; and
c. The operation of Boise Airport as a public facility attracting scheduled airline passengers who use car rental facilities at the airport imposes
financial responsibility on the City for car rental facilities and operations; and
d. The City will expend substantial resources for capital investment, operation, maintenance and development of the car rental facilities to meet the
future demand for customers using the Boise Airport or its facilities; and
e. It is in the City's best economic interest, and likewise in the interest of the car rental customers and car rental companies, to adopt a Customer
Facility Charge (CFC) Program as identified in this section to maintain, improve and further expand the car rental facilities of the airport; and
f. In establishing and implementing the Customer Facility Charge Program, the car rental customers using the airport should contribute to a greater
degree toward the development and improvement of car rental facilities; and
g. The fees implemented by this section are reasonable for the use of the airport and car rental facilities by the general public.
2. Purpose: The purpose of this section is to enact a Customer Facility Charge Program consistent with the above findings and this section and the
regulations published pursuant thereto shall be liberally construed to effectuate the purposes expressed. (1952 Code § 12-22-02)
C. Car Rental Customer Facility Charge:
1. Commencing not later than sixty (60) days after the approval and publication of this section by the City Council, or on such date thereafter as the
customer facility charge can be collected, as determined by the Airport Director ("charge effective date"), the Airport Customer Facility Charge
Program authorized by this section shall be imposed.
2. The CFCs shall be used to pay or reimburse the airport for the costs associated with the design, planning and construction of facilities or
improvements exclusively used by the rental car companies located at the airport. Any or all of the CFCs collected may be pledged to the punctual
payment of debt service on obligations issued by or on behalf of the airport for the cost of the car rental portion of the parking garage expansion, and
to create and maintain reasonable reserves. Eligible costs for the car rental facilities shall include all costs, fees and expenses associated with the
planning, design, equipping, construction and other related costs for the development, improvement or acquisition of car rental facilities. Eligible
costs for the related transportation facilities and equipment shall include operating costs in addition to the foregoing costs. Nothing herein shall be
construed to make fees or costs incurred in tenant improvements for space exclusively used by a car rental company ineligible.
3. The CFCs shall be used to pay or reimburse the participating car rental companies for reasonable and necessary consulting and attorney fees, as
determined by the Airport Director, which are directly related to their participation in facility projects.
4. The CFC fees imposed by car rental companies shall be identified on separate lines on the car rental customer contract, before taxes, and shall be
described as the "transaction fee" or "facility fee".
5. There shall be no suspension of CFC collections unless all of the following occur:
a. All car rental companies operating at the airport have timely and accurately remitted their CFC collections to the airport, together with the required
reports of transaction day data.
b. The City has completed all design development, architectural and engineering drawings for the facility construction or improvements.
c. Sufficient CFC proceeds have been collected to reimburse the airport for the costs identified in subsection C2 of this section incurred through the
completion of design development and to reimburse the participating car rental companies for the costs identified in subsection C3 of this section.
d. The airport has not entered into the construction phase of the project.
e. The CFCs have not been pledged to the payment of debt service on obligations issued by or on behalf of the airport or the City.
6. Following any suspension of CFC collections under subsection C5 of this section, the Airport Director shall consider relevant economic factors and
consult with the airport on and off airport car rental companies regarding such factors and review the size, scope and projected costs of the car rental
facilities or improvements prior to reimposing the CFC collection requirement.
7. The customer facility charge authorized by this section shall expire on the date determined pursuant to car rental leases for on airport car rental
companies.
8. The Airport Director or designee is authorized to execute the authorization of the City CFC Program, including the assurances contained therein and
other documents necessary for implementation of the CFC Program on behalf of the City. (1952 Code § 12-22-03)
D. Eligible Projects: The customer facility charge collected pursuant to this program shall be expended solely for rental car projects approved by the Airport
Commission and the City Council. (1952 Code § 12-22-04)
E. Collections:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 321/503
1. All CFCs collected by all car rental companies are and shall be trust funds held by the car rental companies for the benefit of the airport. Car rental
companies and their agents hold only a possessory interest in the CFCs, and no legal or equitable interest. All car rental companies shall segregate,
separately account for and disclose all CFCs as trust funds in their financial statements, and shall maintain adequate records that account for all
CFCs charged and collected. Failure to segregate the CFCs shall not alter or eliminate their trust fund nature. The airport shall have the right to audit
the CFC records upon reasonable notice.
2. All car rental companies shall remit all CFCs that were collected or should have been collected from its airport customers on a monthly basis to the
airport, together with the monthly statement of transactions and transaction days. The CFCs shall be remitted by the last day of the month following
the month the CFCs were collected. Failure to strictly comply with this subsection shall be considered a material breach of the car rental company's
authorization to do business at the airport.
3. Collection of the CFCs shall be limited to the first fourteen (14) transaction days of any car rental customer contract, to limit the remittance by any car
rental company on any car rental customer contract to fourteen (14) times the CFC. (1952 Code § 12-22-05)
F. Violations: In the event any car rental company violates any term or condition of this section, the airport or City may exercise any rights or remedies
allowed by law or equity. (1952 Code § 12-22-06)
Title 9
BUILDING CODES AND REGULATIONS
Chapter 1
BUILDING CODE
9-1-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to provide certain minimum standards and requirements to safeguard life or limb, health, property, and the public welfare by
regulating and controlling the design, construction, erection, alteration, moving, demolition, quality of materials, use, occupancy, location, and maintenance
of all buildings and structures in the City. (Ord. 44-17, 12-19-2017, eff. 1-1-2018)
9-1-2: CODES ADOPTED:
All the rules, regulations, and ordinances of a general and permanent character relating and applying to the regulation of the erection, construction,
enlargement, alteration, repair, moving, removal, conversion, demolition, occupancy, equipment, use, height, area, and maintenance of buildings or
structures as said rules, regulations and ordinances are printed and contained in Code book form designated and entitled the "2015 International Building
Code" (IBC) including appendix H (Signs) and appendix J (Grading), and the "2012 International Residential Code" (IRC) which is hereby amended to
delete chapters 1 - 11 and chapter 44 and replacing those chapters with the corresponding chapters of the "2015 International Residential Code" parts I
through IV and IX, including appendix S, (Strawbale Construction) and adding appendix V (Tiny Homes), be and the same hereby are adopted as the
Building Code of Boise City as amended shall be the rules, regulations, and ordinances governing the erection, construction, enlargement, alteration,
repair, moving, removal, conversion, demolition, occupancy, equipment, use, height, area, and maintenance of buildings or structures at and within the
City. A copy of the Building Code of Boise City shall be on file in the Office of the Clerk for inspection. It shall be unlawful to erect, construct, enlarge, alter,
repair, move, remove, convert, demolish, or maintain buildings or structures in violation of, or without complying with the rules, regulations, and ordinances
set forth by the Building Code of Boise City as adopted and may be changed, altered, or amended by the Building Code of Boise City. All provisions in this
chapter shall be effective January 1, 2018. (Ord. 44-17, 12-19-2017, eff. 1-1-2018)
9-1-3: IBC BUILDING CODE AMENDMENT, SECTION 101.1, TITLE:
101.1 Title. Boise City Code title 9, chapter 1 shall be known as the Building Code of Boise City, and hereinafter may be referred to as the "code".
(Ord. 44-17, 12-19-2017, eff. 1-1-2018)
9-1-4: IBC BUILDING CODE AMENDMENT, SECTION 101.4.3, APPLICABLE PLUMBING CODE:
101.4.3 Plumbing. The provisions of the plumbing code as adopted and amended by the city of Boise City shall apply to the installation, alteration, repair,
and replacement of plumbing systems, including equipment, appliances, fixtures, fittings, and appurtenances, and where connected to a water or sewage
system, and all aspects of medical gas systems. The number of required plumbing fixtures shall be determined by using IBC Table 2902.1 and as per the
International Plumbing Code as referenced in the table.
(Ord. 44-17, 12-19-2017, eff. 1-1-2018)
9-1-5: IBC BUILDING CODE AMENDMENT, SECTION 101.4.4, PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE DELETED:
101.4.4 Property Maintenance Code. Deleted.
(Ord. 44-17, 12-19-2017, eff. 1-1-2018)
9-1-6: IBC BUILDING CODE AMENDMENT, ADD SECTION 101.4.8, ABATEMENT OF DANGEROUS BUILDINGS CODE:
101.4.8 Abatement. The provisions of the Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings Code as adopted and amended by the city of Boise
City and known as the Boise City Dangerous Buildings Code shall provide a just, equitable and practicable method to abate buildings or structures that
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 322/503
may endanger the life, limb, health, morals, property, safety, or welfare of the general public or occupants.
(Ord. 44-17, 12-19-2017, eff. 1-1-2018)
9-1-7: IBC BUILDING CODE AMENDMENT, ADD SECTION 101.4.9, APPLICABLE ELECTRICAL CODE:
101.4.9 Electrical. The provisions of the electrical code as adopted and amended by the city of Boise City shall apply to the installation of electrical
systems, including alteration, repair, replacement, equipment, appliances, fixtures, fittings, and appurtenances thereto.
(Ord. 44-17, 12-19-2017, eff. 1-1-2018)
9-1-8: IBC BUILDING CODE AMENDMENT, SECTION 102.6, EXISTING STRUCTURES:
102.6 Existing Structures. The legal occupancy of any structure existing on the date of adoption of this code shall be permitted to continue without
change, except as otherwise specifically provided for by this code, the International Existing Building Code, or the International Fire Code.
(Ord. 44-17, 12-19-2017, eff. 1-1-2018)
9-1-9: IBC BUILDING CODE AMENDMENT, SECTION 102.6.2, BUILDINGS PREVIOUSLY OCCUPIED:
102.6.2 Buildings previously occupied. The legal occupancy of any building existing on the date of adoption of this code shall be permitted to continue
without change, except as otherwise specifically provided for by this code, the International Fire Code, the Boise City Dangerous Buildings Code or as is
deemed necessary by the building official in order to protect the general safety and welfare of the occupants or the public.
(Ord. 44-17, 12-19-2017, eff. 1-1-2018)
9-1-10: IBC BUILDING CODE AMENDMENT, SECTION 103, DIVISION OF BUILDING SAFETY:
Repeal section 103 in its entirety and replace with the following:
SECTION 103
DIVISION OF BUILDING SAFETY
103.1 Creation of Enforcement Agency. The Division of Building Safety is hereby created and the official in charge thereof shall be known as the
Planning and Development Services Director.
103.2 Director. The Planning and Development Services Director shall be appointed by the Mayor with the consent of the Boise City Council.
103.3 Agents. Authorized Agents of the Planning and Development Services Director shall be designated by the Planning and Development
Services Director.
103.4 Designations. The Planning and Development Services Director shall have the authority to designate the related technical officers, assistant
building officials, inspection and plan review supervisors, plan examiners, inspectors, and other employees. Such employees shall have such powers
and authority as delegated by the Director.
103.5 Division Manager, Building Official. The Planning and Development Services Director shall have the authority to appoint a Division Manager
to head the Building Division, which shall be also known as the building official. The assistant building officials, inspection and plan review
supervisors, inspectors, plan examiners, and other employees located in the Building Division shall report to the building official.
103.6 Building Damage Assessment and Reconstruction Plan. The Planning and Development Services Director shall have the authority to
appoint the related technical officers, plans examiners, inspectors, individuals, and other representatives from supporting jurisdictions to implement a
building damage assessment and reconstruction plan in the event of calamitous events either natural or man-made. Such employees shall have
such powers as delegated by the Director and protections as afforded by Section 104.8.
(Ord. 44-17, 12-19-2017, eff. 1-1-2018)
9-1-11: IBC BUILDING CODE AMENDMENT, SECTION 104.10.1, FLOOD HAZARD AREAS:
Repeal section 104.10.1 in its entirety and replace with the following:
104.10.1 Flood hazard areas. The Floodplain Administrator shall not grant modifications to any provision required by section 1612.3 unless that
modification conforms to the Variances and Appeals section in the Flood Hazard regulations of the Boise Development Code.
(Ord. 44-17, 12-19-2017, eff. 1-1-2018)
9-1-12: IBC BUILDING CODE AMENDMENT, SECTION 105.1.1, ANNUAL PERMIT:
105.1.1 Annual permit. In lieu of an individual building permit to construct, enlarge, alter, repair, or change the occupancy of a building or structure
(facility) that has previously received a Certificate of Occupancy, or for alterations to an already approved electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing
installation, the building official is authorized to issue an annual permit upon application to any person, firm or corporation regularly employing one or more
qualified tradeperson(s) in the building, structure or on the premises owned or operated by the applicant for the permit.
(Ord. 44-17, 12-19-2017, eff. 1-1-2018)
9-1-13: IBC BUILDING CODE AMENDMENT, ADD SECTION 105.1.3, FACILITY PERMITTING:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 323/503
105.1.3 Facility Permitting. Building owners shall be eligible to enroll facilities and buildings in the Facility Permitting Program (FPP) of the Planning and
Development Services Department upon approval of the Building Official and/or their designee. Building permits and other trade permit applications
related to projects being reviewed and inspected under this program shall be submitted to the Planning and Development Services Department in the
customary manner.
The Building Official or designee shall complete a preliminary review of the construction drawings that have been submitted as part of the permit
application and/or inspect the future job site prior to commencement of work on the project. A limited amount of work prior to the issuance of the building
permit may be authorized at the discretion of the Building Official or designee. Failure to stay within the limited scope of work authorized by the Building
Official or designee will result in the issuance of a stop work order and assessment of a special investigation fee equivalent to two times the actual plan
review and permit fees.
(Ord. 44-17, 12-19-2017, eff. 1-1-2018)
9-1-14: IBC BUILDING CODE AMENDMENT, SECTION 105.2, WORK EXEMPT FROM PERMIT:
105.2 Work exempt from permit. Exemptions from permit requirements of this code shall not be deemed to grant authorization for any work to be done in
any manner in violation of this code or any other laws or ordinances of this jurisdiction. Permits shall not be required for the following:
Building:
1. One-story detached accessory structures used as tool and storage sheds, playhouses and similar uses, provided the floor area is not greater than
120 square feet (11 m2).
2. Fences not over 7 feet (2134 mm) high.
3. Oil derricks.
4. Retaining walls that are not over 4 feet (1219 mm) in height measured from the bottom of the footing to the top of the wall, unless supporting a
surcharge or impounding Class I, II, or III-A liquids.
5. Water tanks supported directly on grade if the capacity is not greater than 5,000 gallons (18 927 L) and the ratio of height to diameter or width is
not greater than 2:1.
6. Sidewalks and driveways not more than 30 inches (762 mm) above adjacent grade, and not over any basement or story below and are not part of
an accessible route.
7. Painting, papering, tiling, carpeting, cabinets, counter tops and similar finish work.
8. Temporary motion picture, television and theater stage sets and scenery.
9. Prefabricated swimming pools accessory to a Group R-3 occupancy which are less than 24 inches (610 mm) deep, do not exceed 5,000 gallons
(18,927 Liters), and are installed entirely above ground.
10. Shade cloth structures constructed for nursery or agricultural purposes and not including service systems.
11. Swings and other outdoor playground equipment.
12. Window awnings in Group R-3 and U occupancies supported by an exterior wall that do not project more than 54 inches (1372 mm) from the
exterior wall and do not require additional support.
13. Non fixed and movable fixtures, cases, counters, and partitions not over 5 feet 9 inches (1753 mm) in height and storage racks 8 feet or less in
height.
14. Work with a total value of five hundred dollars ($500.00) or less.
15. Utility poles when supported on grade.
16. Un-manned public transit centers, 120 square feet or less and not exceeding 15 feet in height, open on at least one side for the entire length of
the structure, only when located in rights-of-way and accompanying curbs, gutters, culverts, sidewalks, paved medians, bulkheads and retaining
walls, or when located in public alleys.
17. Below grade, non-occupied vault utilized in the maintenance of a public or private entity, only when located in rights-of-way and accompanying
curbs, gutters, culverts, sidewalks, paved medians, bulkheads and retaining walls, or when located in public alleys.
(Ord. 44-17, 12-19-2017, eff. 1-1-2018)
9-1-15: IBC BUILDING CODE AMENDMENT, SECTION 105.2, DELETING SUBSECTIONS ON ELECTRICAL, GAS,
MECHANICAL AND PLUMBING:
105.2. Deleting subsections on electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing.
(Ord. 44-17, 12-19-2017, eff. 1-1-2018)
9-1-16: IBC BUILDING CODE AMENDMENT, SECTION 105.2.1, EMERGENCY REPAIRS:
105.2.1 Emergency Repairs. Where equipment replacements and repairs must be performed in an emergency situation, the permit application shall be
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 324/503
submitted the next working business day or at a time as required by the Building Official.
(Ord. 44-17, 12-19-2017, eff. 1-1-2018)
9-1-17: IBC BUILDING CODE AMENDMENT, SECTION 105.2.2, REPAIRS:
105.2.2 Repairs. Application or notice to the Building Official is not required for ordinary repairs to structures. Such repairs shall not include the cutting
away of any wall, partition or portion thereof, the removal or cutting of any structural beam or load-bearing support, or the removal or change of any
required means of egress, or rearrangement of parts of a structure affecting the egress requirements.
(Ord. 44-17, 12-19-2017, eff. 1-1-2018)
9-1-18: IBC BUILDING CODE AMENDMENT, SECTION 105.3, APPLICATION FOR PERMIT:
105.3 Application for permit. To obtain a permit, the applicant shall first file an application on a form furnished by the division of building safety for that
purpose. Such application shall:
1. Identify and describe the work to be covered by the permit for which application is made.
2. Describe the land on which the proposed work is to be done by parcel number, street address or similar description that will readily identify and
definitely locate the proposed building or work.
3. Indicate the use and occupancy for which the proposed work is intended.
4. Be accompanied by construction documents and other information as required in Section 107.
5. State the valuation of the proposed work.
6. Contain the applicant or the applicant's authorized agent's signature.
7. Give such other data and information as required by the Building Official.
(Ord. 44-17, 12-19-2017, eff. 1-1-2018)
9-1-19: IBC BUILDING CODE AMENDMENT, SECTION 105.3.2, TIME LIMITATION OF APPLICATION:
105.3.2 Time Limitation of Application. Applications for which no permit is issued within 180 days following the date of receipt of application shall expire
by limitation, and plans and other data submitted for review may thereafter be returned to the applicant or destroyed by the building official or designee.
The building official may extend the time for action by the applicant for a period not exceeding 180 calendar days on request by the applicant showing that
circumstances beyond the control of the applicant have prevented action from being taken. No application shall be extended more than twice. In order to
renew action on an application after expiration, the applicant shall resubmit plans and pay a new plan review fee.
(Ord. 44-17, 12-19-2017, eff. 1-1-2018)
9-1-20: IBC BUILDING CODE AMENDMENT, SECTION 105.5, EXPIRATION:
105.5 Expiration. Every permit issued by the building official or designee under the provisions of this code shall expire by limitation and become null and
void if the building or work authorized by such permit is not commenced within one calendar year from the date of issuance of such permit, or if the
building or work authorized by such permit is suspended or abandoned at any time after the work is commenced for a period of 180 calendar days.
The timeframe by which a project shall be deemed to be suspended or abandoned if no inspection has been requested shall be measured from the date of
the last required inspection or if no inspection has been required then a project shall be deemed to be suspended one calendar year from the date the
permit was issued. Required inspections include: footing/foundation inspection, concrete slab or under-floor inspection, lowest floor elevation inspection,
framing inspection, lath or gypsum board inspection, fire resistant penetration inspection, energy efficiency inspection, any required special inspections,
final inspections and any other inspections, other than conference inspections required by the building official. However, the building official may extend a
permit when a good faith effort toward code compliant work has been performed and that significant progress has occurred towards the next stage of
inspection.
a. New Permit Required After Expiration. Before work on the site can be recommenced after expiration, a new permit shall be first obtained to do so,
and the fee therefor shall be one half the amount required for a new permit provided no changes have been made or will be made in the original
plans and specifications for such work, that the work is still possible given current conditions, and that work has not been suspended or abandoned
for more than one year from the last required, recorded inspection. In such cases, a new permit shall not be issued after expiration when the original
review was performed using a previously adopted code.
Exception: For all construction or structures governed only by the International Residential Code an exception exists allowing the permit to be reissued
if requested in writing. This exception applies until the City has adopted a new version of the IRC building code, then the applicant shall
apply for a new permit and the plans will be subject to a new plan review process and related permit fees.
The building official shall have the authority to deny the new permit which utilizes the requirements of the expired permit unless the permittee made
an effort to complete the project and reasons beyond their control, related to the project, resulted in suspension or abandonment of the project. The
permittee must provide a written report on the current status of construction which will include a request for an extension and a timeframe for
completion in order for the building official to renew the permit. The building official may also require documentation from a third party be provided by
the permit applicant regarding the current state of the construction prior to issuance of a new permit.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 325/503
b. Permit Extensions. Any permittee holding an unexpired permit may apply for an extension of the time within which work may commence under that
permit, when the permittee is unable to commence work within the time required by this section. The building official may extend the time for action
by the permittee for a period not exceeding 180 calendar days on written request by the permittee with written evidence provided demonstrating that
a good faith effort to complete the project has been made and that reasons beyond the control of the permittee have resulted in a delay. Under no
condition shall a permit be extended more than three times, for a total maximum time of three 180 day extensions. Each 180-day extension must be
approved individually by the building official.
(Ord. 44-17, 12-19-2017, eff. 1-1-2018)
9-1-21: IBC BUILDING CODE AMENDMENT, ADD SECTION 105.8, PERMIT TRANSFER:
105.8 Permit transfer. A building permit shall be transferable to another party if such party can provide a document signed by the original permit holder
consenting to the transfer itself and all agreements and conditions incorporated into the original permit approval. A permit may also be transferred back to
the property owner or owner's designated legal agent in cases where the property owner has terminated their legal relationship with their contractor or
owner's designated legal agent. An administrative fee for the transfer of the permit will be assessed for the work performed by city staff to facilitate the
transfer.
(Ord. 44-17, 12-19-2017, eff. 1-1-2018)
9-1-22: IBC BUILDING CODE AMENDMENT, SECTION 107.1 AND THE EXCEPTIONS, SUBMITTAL DOCUMENTS:
Repeal section 107.1 in its entirety and replace with the following:
107.1 Submittal documents. Construction documents, special inspection and structural observation programs, and other data as required by Boise City
submittal checklists shall be submitted with each application for a permit. These plans and specifications shall be prepared, signed and sealed by an
architect licensed by the State of Idaho under Section 54-309, Idaho Code, as amended.
Exceptions: Nothing contained above shall be held or construed to have any application to or prevent or affect the following:
1. Groups B, F1, F2, M, S1 and S2 occupancies not exceeding two (2) stories and 6,000 square feet total area may be prepared, signed and sealed
by a professional engineer licensed by the State of Idaho.
2. Buildings which are multiple living units not to exceed three (3) units.
3. Farm buildings, out buildings or auxiliary buildings in connection with residential or farm premises.
4. Groups R-3 and U occupancies not exceeding three (3) stories in height above grade.
5. Existing interior tenant improvements, where no change of use or occupancy is occurring, not exceeding a total for the entire tenant space of
1,500 square feet for existing A, B, E, F1, F2, M, S1, and S2 occupancies.
6. Interior nonbearing partitions not exceeding sixty (60) lineal feet.
7. Minor work at discretion of the building official.
For buildings or structures, not principally architectural, the design of which involves principally engineering considerations, the plans and specifications
may be prepared, signed and sealed by a professional engineer licensed by the State of Idaho and qualified in the engineering specialty involved.
(Ord. 44-17, 12-19-2017, eff. 1-1-2018)
9-1-23: IBC BUILDING CODE AMENDMENT, ADD SECTION 107.2.1.1, FOOD-PRODUCTS PREPARATION OR SALES:
107.2.1.1 Food-Products preparations or sales. Plans and specifications to construct, build, repair, or alter a building or structure wherein foods, food
products, or beverages are prepared, manufactured, concocted, or stored for either sale at retail or wholesale shall be submitted to and approved by
Central District Health prior to applying for a building permit for paper submittal.
For the purpose of this subsection the term foods, food products, or beverages shall mean and include all articles used for food, drink, confectionery, or
condiment, whether simple, mixed or compound, and all substance or ingredients used in the preparation thereof for human consumption.
(Ord. 44-17, 12-19-2017, eff. 1-1-2018)
9-1-24: IBC BUILDING CODE AMENDMENT, SECTION 107.2.5.1, DESIGN FLOOD ELEVATIONS:
107.2.5.1 Design Flood Elevations. All construction within flood hazard areas shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the Flood Hazard
regulations of the Boise Development Code in addition to this code. Where design flood elevations are not specified, they shall be established in
accordance with Section 1612.3.1.
(Ord. 44-17, 12-19-2017, eff. 1-1-2018)
9-1-25: IBC BUILDING CODE AMENDMENT, ADD SECTION 107.3.3.1, EARLY START APPROVALS:
107.3.3.1 Early start approvals. The building official may issue an early start permit for construction within an existing building before construction
documents for the entire structure have been reviewed for compliance with this code. The building official may only issue an early start permit for projects
where the work being performed in existing buildings and involving nonstructural interior framing for retail, office, or warehouse uses with the storage of
non-hazardous materials. The building official may issue an early start permit for other occupancies and uses when he/she deems such work to be
appropriate and necessary to maintain building safety requirements while expediting construction schedules.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 326/503
An early start permit authorizes the permit holder to proceed with construction within a limited scope of work as defined by the building official or his/her
designee. The early start permit shall be issued in addition to the building permit which authorizes the whole remodel, alteration, or repair. Fees shall be
collected for this permit based on the hourly plan review administrative activities fee found within the fee schedule in Table No. 1-A contained in this code
and pursuant to policies set by the Planning and Development Services Department.
(Ord. 44-17, 12-19-2017, eff. 1-1-2018)
9-1-26: IBC BUILDING CODE AMENDMENT, SECTION 108, TEMPORARY STRUCTURES AND TEMPORARY USES IN
STRUCTURES INCLUDING SECTIONS 108.1 THROUGH 108.6:
Repeal section 108 in its entirety and replace with the following:
108.1 Uses in temporary structures. Temporary structures with uses for 180 calendar days or less in duration shall be regulated by the fire code
official and the Planning Director or his/her designee.
108.2 Temporary uses in permanent structures. The building official is authorized to issue a temporary use permit for temporary uses in
permanent structures when the duration of the use will extend beyond 30 calendar days but is less than or equal to 180 calendar days. Permanent
structures having temporary uses of 30 calendar days or less in duration shall be subject to approval and permit by the fire code official.
108.3 Regulation of permanent and temporary structures with overnight sleeping areas utilized for less than 180 calendar days. The
building official is authorized, in conjunction with the fire code official, to issue permits for uses in temporary and permanent structures with overnight
sleeping areas when such uses have a limited duration of 180 calendar days or less. The building official is authorized to grant permit extensions for
good cause. A temporary use permit shall not be issued when the building code official determines that the potential hazards of the use cannot be
mitigated.
108.4 Conformance. Temporary structures and uses shall conform to the structural strength, fire, safety, means of egress, accessibility, light
ventilation, and sanitary requirements of this code as necessary to ensure public health, safety and general welfare. The building code official is
authorized to approve alternative temporary methods of achieving minimum code compliance when evaluating temporary uses in temporary and
permanent structures.
108.5 Temporary power. The building official is authorized to give permission to temporarily supply and use power in part of an electric installation
before such installation has been fully completed and the final certificate of completion has been issued. The part covered by the temporary
certificate shall comply with the requirements specified for temporary lighting, heat, or power in NFPA 70.
108.6 Termination of approval. The building official is authorized to terminate such permit for a temporary structure or use and to order the
temporary structure or use to be discontinued.
(Ord. 44-17, 12-19-2017, eff. 1-1-2018)
9-1-27: IBC BUILDING CODE AMENDMENT, SECTION 109.2, SCHEDULE OF PERMIT FEES, TABLE NO. 1-A, BUILDING
PERMIT FEE SCHEDULE:
109.2 Schedule of permit fees. Building permit fees shall be in such amounts as established by the City Council.
(Ord. 44-17, 12-19-2017, eff. 1-1-2018; amd. 2019 Code)
9-1-28: IBC BUILDING CODE AMENDMENT, SECTION 109.4, WORK COMMENCING BEFORE PERMIT ISSUANCE:
109.4 Work commencing before permit issuance. Any person who commences any work on a building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical, or
plumbing system before obtaining the necessary permits shall be subject to a special investigation that shall be made before a permit may be issued for
such work.
A special investigation fee, in addition to the permit fee, shall be collected whether or not a permit is then or subsequently issued. The special investigation
fee shall be equal to the amount of the permit fee required by this code. The minimum special investigation fee shall be the same as the minimum fee set
forth in accordance with the fee schedule in Table No. 1-A contained in this code. The payment of such special investigation fee shall not exempt any
person from compliance with all other provisions of this code nor from any penalty prescribed by law.
(Ord. 44-17, 12-19-2017, eff. 1-1-2018)
9-1-29: IBC BUILDING CODE AMENDMENT, ADD SECTION 109.5.1, BONDS:
109.5.1 Bonds. The building official may require bonds in such forms and amounts as he/she deems necessary to ensure the mitigation of hazardous
conditions resulting from abandoned excavation occurring in conjunction with the construction of large new structures, beneath large structures, or on
projects having unique site conditions. The building official shall cash the bond and the proceeds from the posted bond shall be used to correct or
eliminate hazardous conditions on the site when the permit applicant fails to complete work in accordance with approved plans, specifications and permits.
In lieu of a surety bond, the building official may allow the applicant to post a cash bond or instrument of credit with the building official in an amount equal
to that which would be required in the surety bond. The bond shall ensure that sufficient funds are available to repay the city of Boise City for any
expenditure incurred by the City for the protection or removal of property, both real and personal. The bond shall further ensure the property is in a proper
and safe condition, that all combustible and non-combustible materials are removed, and that any remaining excavation is filled.
(Ord. 44-17, 12-19-2017, eff. 1-1-2018)
9-1-30: IBC BUILDING CODE AMENDMENT, SECTION 109.6, FEE REFUNDS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 327/503
109.6 Fee Refunds. The building official may authorize a refund of any fee paid hereunder which was erroneously paid or collected.
The Building Official may authorize a refund of 100 percent of the permit fee less any administrative activity fees, paid when no work has been done under
a permit issued in accordance with this code.
The building official may authorize a refund of not more than 80 percent of the plan review fee paid when an application for a permit for which a plan
review fee has been paid is withdrawn or canceled before any plan reviewing is done.
The building official shall not authorize a refund of any fee paid except on written application filed by the original permittee or owner's representative not
later than 180 days after the date of fee payment.
(Ord. 44-17, 12-19-2017, eff. 1-1-2018)
9-1-31: IBC BUILDING CODE AMENDMENT, SECTION 110.3.3, LOWEST FLOOR ELEVATION:
110.3.3 Lowest Floor Elevation. In addition to the initial elevation certificate required at time of permit application in flood hazard areas, upon placement
of the lowest floor, including the basement, a second elevation certification required in the Flood Hazard regulations of the Boise Development Code and
Section 1612.5 shall be submitted to the building official or designee prior to the request for a framing inspection.
(Ord. 44-17, 12-19-2017, eff. 1-1-2018)
9-1-32: IBC BUILDING CODE AMENDMENT, SECTION 110.6, INSPECTION APPROVAL REQUIRED:
110.6 Approval required. Work shall not be performed beyond the point indicated in each successive inspection without first obtaining the approval of the
building official. The building official, upon notification, shall make the requested inspections and shall either indicate the portion of the construction that is
satisfactory as completed, or shall notify the permit holder or agent of the permit holder where the work fails to comply with this code. Any work or portion
thereof that does not comply shall be corrected and shall not be covered or concealed until authorized by the building official. A final inspection and
approval is required upon completion and prior to occupancy and use of all building and structures.
(Ord. 44-17, 12-19-2017, eff. 1-1-2018)
9-1-33: IBC BUILDING CODE AMENDMENT, SECTION 111.1, USE AND OCCUPANCY, EXCEPTION DELETED:
111.1 Use And Occupancy. Exception is deleted.
(Ord. 44-17, 12-19-2017, eff. 1-1-2018)
9-1-34: IBC BUILDING CODE AMENDMENT, ADD SECTION 111.1.1, COMMERCIAL OCCUPANCY EVALUATION REQUEST:
111.1.1 Commercial occupancy evaluation request. Where no work requiring a building permit is occurring and a commercial tenant lacks a certificate
of occupancy, desires to obtain a certificate of occupancy or is required to obtain a certificate of occupancy from a department of the City, the Division of
Building Safety shall create a permit application with a review and inspection process in order to issue a new certificate of occupancy. A fee shall be
charged in accordance with the fee schedule in Table No. 1-A of this code for services to establish a certificate of occupancy.
(Ord. 44-17, 12-19-2017, eff. 1-1-2018)
9-1-35: IBC BUILDING CODE AMENDMENT, ADD SECTION 111.2.1, CERTIFICATE OF COMPLETION:
111.2.1 Certificate of Completion. A Certificate of Completion may be issued in lieu of a Certificate of Occupancy when the scope of work of a permit
does not affect, alter, or change the occupant load, occupancy group, or occupancy use classification of a tenant space, structure, or portion of a structure.
The work described within the scope of work of a permit is deemed to be complete and in substantial compliance by the Planning and Development
Services Department with adopted building codes when a final inspection has occurred and a Certificate of Completion has been issued.
(Ord. 44-17, 12-19-2017, eff. 1-1-2018)
9-1-36: IBC BUILDING CODE AMENDMENT, SECTION 111.3, TEMPORARY OCCUPANCY:
111.3 Temporary occupancy. If the building official finds that no substantial hazard will result from occupancy of any building or portion thereof before the
same is completed, a temporary certificate of occupancy may be issued for the use of a portion or portions of a building or structure prior to the completion
of the entire building or structure. A temporary occupancy shall be for 90 days. Multiple time extensions of a maximum of 90 days each may be granted
when requested in writing to the building official when a good faith effort is demonstrated by the permit holder. In no case shall a temporary occupancy
extend beyond two (2) years, unless the building official finds extenuating circumstances.
(Ord. 44-17, 12-19-2017, eff. 1-1-2018)
9-1-37: IBC BUILDING CODE AMENDMENT, SECTION 112.1, CONNECTION OF SERVICE UTILITIES:
112.1 Connection of service utilities. Final inspection and approval is required upon completion of work and prior to occupancy or use of all buildings
and structures for connection of service utilities. Lack of building official approval may result in the termination of utility services to said building or structure
and prosecution under IBC Section 114.3.
(Ord. 44-17, 12-19-2017, eff. 1-1-2018)
9-1-38: IBC BUILDING CODE AMENDMENT, ADD SECTION 112.4, AUTHORITY TO DISCONNECT UTILITIES FOR
OCCUPANCY VIOLATIONS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 328/503
112.4 Authority to disconnect utilities for occupancy violations. Whenever any building, structure, or equipment therein regulated by this code is
being used contrary to the provisions of this code or other laws which are enforced by the city of Boise City, the building official may order such use
discontinued and the structure, or portion thereof, vacated, and the utility services disconnected by notice served on any person causing such use to be
continued. Such person shall discontinue the use or make the structure or portion thereof comply with the requirements of this code or other laws which
are enforced by the city of Boise City, within thirty (30) days of receipt of such notice or as required by the building official.
(Ord. 44-17, 12-19-2017, eff. 1-1-2018)
9-1-39: IBC BUILDING CODE AMENDMENT, SECTION 113.1, BUILDING CODE BOARD OF APPEALS, ADD SECTION 113.4,
APPEALS TO THE BUILDING CODE BOARD OF APPEALS AND ADD SECTION 113.5, APPEAL PROCEDURE:
113.1 Building code board of appeals. In order to hear and decide appeals of orders, decisions, or determinations made by the building official with
respect to the application and interpretation of this code, there shall be and is hereby created a Board of Appeals consisting of ten (10) members including:
three (3) Idaho registered engineers; three (3) Idaho licensed architects; three (3) building contractors and one (1) person who owns or operates a fire
sprinkler business, and are qualified by experience and training to pass upon matters pertaining to building construction, all of whom shall not be
employees of the city of Boise City. At least five (5) of the members shall be residents of the city of Boise City. Members not residing in Boise City must
reside in Ada County and transact business in Boise City. The building official shall be an ex officio member of and shall act as secretary to said board but
shall have no vote upon any matter before the board. The Board of Appeals shall be appointed for a term of four (4) years by the governing body and shall
hold office at the pleasure of the Mayor and Boise City Council. The board may adopt rules of procedure for conducting its business and shall render all
decisions and findings in writing to the appellant with a duplicate copy to the building official.
113.4 APPEALS TO THE BUILDING CODE BOARD OF APPEALS
A. APPLICATION FOR APPEAL
Any applicant for a permit, whose application has been rejected by the City, or any person who has been ordered by the City to modify, alter,
remove, or install any building code provisions as required by this code may within ten (10) calendar days thereafter, request an appeal by filing
notice in writing with the building official. The building official or designee shall deliver such notice to the board. The hearing shall be held within
thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of the notice of appeal or as otherwise agreed upon by parties to the appeal. At the hearing the board may, by a
majority vote, affirm, annul or modify the action of the City. If the actions of the City are modified or annulled, a permit shall be issued in
accordance with the determination of the board.
(Ord. 44-17, 12-19-2017, eff. 1-1-2018)
B. APPEAL FEE
Any person appealing a decision of the City shall include payment of a fee in an amount established by the Boise City Council and listed on the
most current fee schedule. In the event that the appellant prevails, then the fee shall be refunded to the appellant.
(Ord. 44-17, 12-19-2017, eff. 1-1-2018; amd. 2019 Code)
C. APPEAL TO CITY COUNCIL
Any order, decision, or ruling of the board may be appealed, by filing notice in writing to the Boise City Council within ten (10) calendar days of
such order, decision, or ruling.
113.5 APPEAL PROCEDURE
The Building Code Board of Appeals may receive all evidence on appeal in accordance with the following procedure:
A. The building official or designee shall present background information on the project in question, including relevant code sections and their
interpretation. The board may ask questions during or after each presentation.
B. Applicant shall be allowed to present any information or applicable code sections to support a reversal of the building official's decision. The
appellant shall have up to twenty (20) minutes to present evidence.
C. The chair shall open the hearing to receive public testimony. Each person wishing to provide public testimony shall be given up to five (5) minutes
to do so.
D. Following the close of public testimony, the building official or designee shall be allowed up to ten (10) minutes for rebuttal.
E. The appellant shall then have up to ten (10) minutes for rebuttal and any final comments.
F. The Chairman of the board may allocate equivalent additional time to the applicant and the Building Official or his designee if the clarity of the
issue at hand can be enhanced by receiving additional testimony.
G. Following the hearing, the board may deliberate and render a final decision by a roll call vote, may request more information before a final
decision is made, or may take the matter under advisement and reconvene at a reasonable time not to exceed fifteen (15) calendar days to make or
render a final decision. The final decision shall be in writing and a copy provided to the appellant and any parties of record. The decision by the board
may be appealed to the Boise City Council within ten (10) calendar days following the date of issuance of a written decision.
(Ord. 44-17, 12-19-2017, eff. 1-1-2018)
9-1-40: IBC BUILDING CODE AMENDMENT, SECTION 114.4, CRIMINAL PENALTIES:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 329/503
Repeal section 114.4 in its entirety and replace with the following:
114.4 Criminal Penalties. Any person, firm or corporation violating the provisions of this code shall be deemed guilty of misdemeanor, and upon
conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), by imprisonment for not more than one hundred eighty
(180) days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Each separate day or any portion thereof during which any violation of this code occurs or continues
shall be deemed to constitute a separate offense, and upon conviction thereof shall be punishable as herein provided.
A. In the discretion of the building official, the City may charge the offender with an infraction in lieu of a misdemeanor. The infraction shall be
payable by a fine of three hundred dollars ($300.00). There shall be no right to a trial by jury for an infraction citation or complaint.
B. For purposes of trial by court or jury, the infraction described within this section shall not constitute a lesser included offense for any misdemeanor
citation or complaint.
C. A prosecuting attorney may reduce a misdemeanor charge under this chapter to an infraction as described herein, payable by a $300 fine, if the
defendant engages in corrective actions resulting in fully completed and permitted work.
(Ord. 44-17, 12-19-2017, eff. 1-1-2018)
9-1-41: IBC BUILDING CODE AMENDMENT, SECTION 116, UNSAFE STRUCTURES AND EQUIPMENT, SECTION 116.1,
CONDITIONS:
116.1 Conditions. Structures or existing equipment deemed unsafe shall be taken down and removed or made safe in accordance with provisions of the
Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings as adopted by the Dangerous Buildings Code of Boise City.
Notwithstanding any other provision of this code, whenever, in the opinion of the code official, there is an imminent danger due to an unsafe condition, the
code official shall have authority to summarily order temporary safeguard work to be performed in order to render the structure temporarily safe or to warn
the public of the dangerous condition. The temporary safeguard work required may include, but shall not be limited to placement of placards or signage,
erecting barrier tape, barricades, or fencing, securing openings, or other means as the code official deems necessary to address such emergency.
(Ord. 44-17, 12-19-2017, eff. 1-1-2018)
9-1-42: IBC BUILDING CODE AMENDMENT, SECTIONS 116.2 THROUGH 116.5, DELETE SECTIONS ON UNSAFE
STRUCTURES AND EQUIPMENT:
116.2 Through 116.5. Delete sections on unsafe structures and equipment.
(Ord. 44-17, 12-19-2017, eff. 1-1-2018)
9-1-43: IBC BUILDING CODE AMENDMENT, ADD SECTION 117, UPGRADE AGREEMENTS:
117 Upgrade Agreements. The building official and fire code official shall have the discretion to enter into building upgrade agreements on behalf of the
City in order to achieve code compliance. Building upgrade agreements shall be in writing and signed and notarized by the building owner(s). Any upgrade
agreements that exceed one year in length shall be recorded with the Ada County Assessor's Office.
The building official shall make the determination as to whether a bond shall be required. The amount of this bond shall be determined by the City in the
amount needed to accomplish the work as described in the upgrade agreement. An upgrade agreement shall not extend beyond three years in duration.
All upgrade agreements shall include the following items:
a. The remaining scope of work that shall be completed to fulfill the terms of the upgrade agreement;
b. The applicable building permit number;
c. An expiration date or date of completion of the agreement;
d. The parcel number(s) and address;
e. A description of the type and expiration of any bonding instrument (where applicable);
f. Other methods for assuring completion of the scope of work;
g. Signature of the owner(s), Building Official and/or Fire Code Official all contained on the original notarized agreement (no copies);
h. A statement acknowledging the following possible consequences for failure of the tenant and building owner to complete the terms of the upgrade
agreement within the time frame found in the agreement;
i. Revocation of the occupancy certificate of the tenant(s) in said structure;
ii. Utilization of the bond originally posted by the permit applicant by the City to complete the remaining work outlined in the upgrade agreement;
iii. Assessment of penalties and or issuance of misdemeanor citations by the City for failure to complete the work described within the agreement
by the expiration date of the agreement; and the institution of a fire watch or any other appropriate method deemed necessary by the City to
complete the work outlined in the upgrade agreement.
(Ord. 44-17, 12-19-2017, eff. 1-1-2018)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 330/503
9-1-44: IBC BUILDING CODE AMENDMENT, SECTION 202, DEFINITION OF TOWNHOUSE:
TOWNHOUSE. A single-family dwelling unit constructed in a row of attached units separated by property lines and with open space on at least two sides.
(Ord. 44-17, 12-19-2017, eff. 1-1-2018)
9-1-45: IBC BUILDING CODE AMENDMENT, SECTION 305.2.3, TWELVE OR FEWER CHILDREN IN A DWELLING UNIT:
305.2.3 Twelve or fewer children in a dwelling unit. A facility such as the above within a dwelling unit and having twelve or fewer children receiving such
day care shall be classified as a Group R-3 occupancy or shall comply with the International Residential Code.
(Ord. 44-17, 12-19-2017, eff. 1-1-2018)
9-1-46: IBC BUILDING CODE AMENDMENT, SECTION 308.6.4, PERSONS RECEIVING CARE IN A DWELLING UNIT:
308.6.4 Persons receiving care in a dwelling unit. A facility such as the above within a dwelling unit and having twelve or fewer children receiving day
care or having five or fewer persons receiving custodial care shall be classified as a Group R-3 occupancy or shall comply with the International
Residential Code.
(Ord. 44-17, 12-19-2017, eff. 1-1-2018)
9-1-47: IBC BUILDING CODE AMENDMENT, SECTION 310.5, RESIDENTIAL GROUP R-3:
310.5 Residential Group R-3. Residential Group R-3 occupancies where the occupants are primarily permanent in nature and not classified as Group R-
1, R-2, R-4, E or I, including:
Buildings that do not contain more than two dwelling units;
Boarding houses (non-transient) with 16 or fewer occupants;
Boarding houses (transient) with 10 or fewer occupants;
Care facilities that provide accommodations for five or fewer persons receiving care;
Congregate living facilities (non-transient) with 16 or fewer occupants;
Congregate living facilities (transient) with 10 or fewer occupants;
Dwelling units providing day care for twelve or fewer children; or
Lodging houses with five or fewer guest rooms.
(Ord. 44-17, 12-19-2017, eff. 1-1-2018)
9-1-48: IBC BUILDING CODE AMENDMENT, SECTION 310.5.1, CARE FACILITIES WITHIN A DWELLING:
310.5.1 Care facilities within a dwelling. Care facilities for twelve or fewer children receiving day care or for five or fewer persons receiving care that are
within a single-family dwelling are permitted to comply with the International Residential Code.
(Ord. 44-17, 12-19-2017, eff. 1-1-2018)
9-1-49: IBC BUILDING CODE AMENDMENT, SECTION 1503.1, GENERAL ROOF COVERING:
1503.1 General. Roof decks shall be covered with approved roof coverings secured to the building or structure in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter. Roof coverings shall be designed, installed and maintained in accordance with this code and the approved manufacturer's installation instructions
such that the roof covering shall serve to protect the building or structure. Roof covering requirements for hillside and Wildland Urban Interface areas shall
be regulated by the Fire Prevention Code of the Boise City Municipal Code.
(Ord. 44-17, 12-19-2017, eff. 1-1-2018)
9-1-50: IBC BUILDING CODE AMENDMENT, SECTION 1605.2, LOAD COMBINATIONS USING STRENGTH DESIGN OR LOAD
AND RESISTANCE FACTOR DESIGN, ADD EXCEPTION 3:
Add exception 3 to section 1605.2 as follows:
3. In Equation 16-3, the snow load S shall be calculated using pm as defined in Section 1608.1. For other load combinations involving snow loads, S
shall be calculated using flat roof snow load (pf) or sloped roof snow load (ps) as defined in ASCE 7.
(Ord. 44-17, 12-19-2017, eff. 1-1-2018)
9-1-51: IBC BUILDING CODE AMENDMENT, SECTION 1605.3.1, BASIC LOAD COMBINATIONS, ADD EXCEPTION 6:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 331/503
Add exception 6 to section 1605.3.1 as follows:
6. In Equation 16-10, the snow load S shall be calculated using pm as defined in Section 1608.1. For other load combinations involving snow loads,
S shall be calculated using flat roof snow load (pf) or sloped roof snow load (ps) as defined in ASCE 7.
(Ord. 44-17, 12-19-2017, eff. 1-1-2018)
9-1-52: IBC BUILDING CODE AMENDMENT, SECTION 1608.1, SNOW LOADS:
1608.1 General. Design snow loads shall be determined in accordance with Chapter 7 of ASCE 7, but the design roof load, regardless of roof slope, shall
not be less than a uniform snow load of pm = 25 psf. This minimum roof snow load is a separate load case. It need not be used in determining or in
combination with drift, sliding, unbalanced, rain-on-snow surcharge, or partial loads. These loads shall be considered as required by ASCE 7 and IBC
section 1608.2 as amended. See Figure A showing two examples of required load cases.
FIGURE A
(Ord. 44-17, 12-19-2017, eff. 1-1-2018)
9-1-53: IBC BUILDING CODE AMENDMENT, SECTION 1608.2, GROUND SNOW LOADS:
1608.2 Ground snow loads. The ground snow load shall be pg = 20 psf.
(Ord. 44-17, 12-19-2017, eff. 1-1-2018)
9-1-54: IBC BUILDING CODE AMENDMENT, SECTION 1612.3, ESTABLISHMENT OF FLOOD HAZARD AREAS:
1612.3 Establishment of flood hazard areas. All construction within flood hazard areas as defined by the Flood Hazard regulations of the Boise
Development Code shall be designed and constructed in accordance with that ordinance in addition to this code. To establish flood hazard areas, the
applicable governing authority shall adopt a flood hazard map and supporting data. The flood hazard map shall include, at a minimum, areas of special
flood hazard as identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency in an engineering report entitled "The Flood Insurance Study for the City of
Boise City" with date of issuance, as amended or revised with the accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) and Flood Boundary and Floodway
Map (FBFM) and related supporting data along with any revisions thereto. First Floodplain Ordinance for the City of Boise City became effective December
12, 1983. Flood Insurance Study (FIS) February 19, 2003. Panel numbers (all with a date of 2/19/2003) are: 0160 H, 0161 H, 0162 H, 0166 H, 0167 H,
0169 H, 0178 H, 0186 H, 0187 H, 0188 H, 0189 H, 0193 H, 0254 H, 0258 H, 0259 H, 0265 H, 0267 H, 0270 H, 0276 H, 0277 H, 0281 H, 0282 H, 0283 H,
0284 H, 0286 H, 0287 H, 0291 H, 0295 H, 0305 H, 0315 H. The adopted flood hazard map and supporting data are hereby adopted by reference and
declared to be part of this section.
(Ord. 44-17, 12-19-2017, eff. 1-1-2018)
9-1-55: IBC BUILDING CODE AMENDMENT, SECTION 1804.6, COMPACTED FILL MATERIAL:
1804.6 Compacted fill material. Where foundations will bear on compacted fill material, the compacted fill shall comply with the provisions of an
approved geotechnical report, as set forth in Section 1803.
Exception: Compacted fill material 12 inches in depth or less need not comply with an approved report, provided the in-place dry density is not less
than 95 percent of the maximum dry density at optimum moisture content determined in accordance with ASTM D 1557. The compaction shall be
verified by special inspection in accordance with Section 1705.6.
(Ord. 44-17, 12-19-2017, eff. 1-1-2018)
9-1-56: IBC BUILDING CODE AMENDMENT, SECTION 1805.1.2.1, FLOOD HAZARD AREAS:
1805.1.2.1 Flood hazard areas. All construction within flood hazard areas as defined by Flood Hazard regulations of the Boise Development Code shall
be designed and constructed in accordance with that ordinance in addition to this code. For buildings and structures in flood hazard areas as established
in Section 1612.3, the finished ground level of an under-floor space such as a crawl space shall be equal to or higher than the outside finished ground
level on at least one side.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 332/503
Exception: Under-floor spaces of Group R-3 buildings that meet the requirements of FEMA TB 11.
(Ord. 44-17, 12-19-2017, eff. 1-1-2018)
9-1-57: IBC BUILDING CODE AMENDMENT, SECTION 1809.5, FROST PROTECTION:
Item number one of section 1809.5 shall be amended as follows:
1. Extending below or equal to the frost line of 24 inches below finished grade;
(Ord. 44-17, 12-19-2017, eff. 1-1-2018)
9-1-58: IBC BUILDING CODE AMENDMENT, SECTION 2107.2.1, LAP SPLICES:
The last paragraph of section 2107.2.1 Lap splices, shall read as follows:
In regions of moment where the design tensile stresses in the reinforcement are greater than 80 percent of the allowable steel tension stress, Fs, the
lap length of splices shall be increased not less than 50 percent of the minimum required length, but need not be greater than 72 db. Other
equivalent means of stress transfer to accomplish the same 50 percent increase shall be permitted. Where epoxy coated bars are used, lap length
shall be increased by 50 percent.
(Ord. 44-17, 12-19-2017, eff. 1-1-2018)
9-1-59: IBC BUILDING CODE AMENDMENT, TABLE 2902.1, ADD FOOTNOTE F:
Add footnote (f) in the header row of the table column labeled "Drinking Fountains" of table 2902.1 Minimum Number of Required Plumbing Fixtures, and
add footnote (f) under table 2902.1 to state the following:
f. Drinking fountains are not required for an occupant load of thirty (30) or fewer.
(Ord. 44-17, 12-19-2017, eff. 1-1-2018)
9-1-60: IBC BUILDING CODE AMENDMENT, TABLE 2902.1, FOOTNOTE E:
e. For business occupancies, excluding restaurants, and mercantile occupancies with an occupant load of thirty (30) or fewer, service sinks shall not be
required.
(Ord. 44-17, 12-19-2017, eff. 1-1-2018)
9-1-61: IBC BUILDING CODE AMENDMENT, SECTION 3103.1, TEMPORARY STRUCTURES, GENERAL:
3103.1 General. Temporary structures with uses for 180 calendar days or less in duration shall be regulated by the fire code official and the Planning
Director of the Planning and Development Services Department. Those erected for a longer period of time shall comply with the applicable sections of this
code.
(Ord. 44-17, 12-19-2017, eff. 1-1-2018)
9-1-62: IBC BUILDING CODE AMENDMENT, SECTIONS 3103.1.1 THROUGH 3103.4, DELETE SECTIONS ON TEMPORARY
STRUCTURES:
3103.1.1 Through 3103.4. Delete sections 3103.1.1 through 3103.4.
(Ord. 44-17, 12-19-2017, eff. 1-1-2018)
9-1-63: IBC BUILDING CODE AMENDMENT, APPENDIX H SIGNS, SECTION H101.2, SIGNS EXEMPT FROM PERMITS:
Section H101.2 shall be repealed and replaced with the following:
H101.2 Signs exempt from permits. The following signs are exempt from the requirements to obtain a building permit before erection:
1. The changing of the advertising copy on a painted or printed sign, theater marquees and similar signs specifically designed for the use of
replaceable copy.
2. Signs painted on buildings, fences or walls shall be exempted from obtaining a building permit.
3. Permanent signs supported by the building or structure that are less than or equal to 32 square feet which are non-illuminated and project less
than or equal to three (3) feet from the building or structure face.
4. Permanent pole or ground signs that are less than seven feet to the top edge of the sign.
5. Temporary signs. Temporary signs must comply with Boise Development Code.
6. Any sign less than four (4) square feet.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 333/503
7. Signs erected by transportation authorities.
These exemptions shall not be construed as relieving the owner of the sign from the responsibility of its erection and maintenance, and its compliance with
the provisions of this code or any other law or ordinance regulating the same.
(Ord. 44-17, 12-19-2017, eff. 1-1-2018)
9-1-64: IBC BUILDING CODE AMENDMENT, APPENDIX H SIGNS, SECTION H102.1, DEFINITIONS:
The following definitions shall be amended as follows:
DISPLAY SIGN. The area made available by the sign structure for the purpose of displaying the advertising message. Defined as "Sign Area" in the
Boise Development Code.
GROUND SIGN. A billboard or similar type of sign which is supported by one or more uprights, poles or braces in or upon the ground other than a
combination sign or pole sign, as defined by this code. Regulated as a "Poster Panel and Bulletin Panel Off-Premises Signs" in the Boise
Development Code.
POLE SIGN. A sign wholly supported by a sign structure in the ground. Defined as "Free Standing Sign" in the Boise Development Code.
(Ord. 44-17, 12-19-2017, eff. 1-1-2018)
9-1-65: IBC BUILDING CODE AMENDMENT, APPENDIX H SIGNS, SECTION H103.1, LOCATION RESTRICTIONS:
H103.1 Location restrictions. Signs shall not be erected, constructed or maintained so as to obstruct any fire escape, any window, door or opening
required or used as a means of egress which would prevent free passage from one part of a roof to any other part thereof. A sign shall not be attached in
any form, shape or manner to a fire escape, nor be placed in such manner as to interfere with any opening required for ventilation. All sign locations must
comply with the Boise Development Code.
(Ord. 44-17, 12-19-2017, eff. 1-1-2018)
9-1-66: IBC BUILDING CODE AMENDMENT, APPENDIX H SIGNS, SECTION H104, IDENTIFICATION IS DELETED IN ITS
ENTIRETY:
H104 Identification. Deleted in its entirety.
(Ord. 44-17, 12-19-2017, eff. 1-1-2018)
9-1-67: IBC BUILDING CODE AMENDMENT, APPENDIX H SIGNS, SECTION H105.1, GENERAL REQUIREMENTS, ADD
EXCEPTION:
H105.1 General Requirements. Signs shall be designed and constructed to comply with the provisions of this code for use of materials, loads and
stresses.
Exception: Where Chapter 17 Special Inspections and Tests requires periodic special inspections for all post-installed concrete anchors, installation of
signs utilizing these types of anchors will be considered minor in nature and not require periodic special inspection when acting primarily in shear and
utilizing less than 50% of the allowable loading when tested in accordance with ACI 318.
(Ord. 44-17, 12-19-2017, eff. 1-1-2018)
9-1-68: IBC BUILDING CODE AMENDMENT, APPENDIX H SIGNS, SECTION H105.2, PERMITS, DRAWINGS AND
SPECIFICATIONS:
H105.2 Permits, drawings, and specifications. Where a permit is required, as provided in Chapter 1, construction documents shall be required. These
documents shall show the dimensions, material and required details of construction, including loads, stresses and anchors. Plans and documents shall be
submitted and include information as required by the applicable Boise City submittal checklist.
(Ord. 44-17, 12-19-2017, eff. 1-1-2018)
9-1-69: IBC BUILDING CODE AMENDMENT, APPENDIX H SIGNS, ADD SECTION H105.2.1, ENGINEERING:
H105.2.1 Engineering. Submittal documents must include structural drawings and structural calculations stamped and signed by an Idaho licensed
engineer.
Exception: Engineering is not required for wall signs mounted flush against the wall with anchorage that can easily be verified as adequate.
(Ord. 44-17, 12-19-2017, eff. 1-1-2018)
9-1-70: IBC BUILDING CODE AMENDMENT, APPENDIX H SIGNS, SECTION H106.1, ILLUMINATION:
H106.1 Illumination. A sign shall not be illuminated by other than electrical means, and electrical devices and wiring shall be installed in accordance with
the requirements of NFPA 70, National Electrical Code, and the International Energy Conservation Code. Any open spark or flame shall not be used for
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 334/503
display purposes unless specifically approved by the building official and/or fire code official.
Exception: Replaced signs on existing branch circuits do not need to comply with the controls of the Energy Conservation Code of Boise City when
approved by the Electrical Inspection Supervisor or designee.
(Ord. 44-17, 12-19-2017, eff. 1-1-2018)
9-1-71: IBC BUILDING CODE AMENDMENT, APPENDIX H SIGNS, SECTION H106.2, ELECTRICAL SERVICE:
H106.2 Electrical service. Signs that require electrical service shall comply with NFPA 70, National Electric Code, and the International Energy
Conservation Code.
Exception: Replaced signs on existing branch circuits do not need to comply with the controls of the Energy Conservation Code of Boise City when
approved by the Electrical Inspection Supervisor or designee.
(Ord. 44-17, 12-19-2017, eff. 1-1-2018)
9-1-72: IBC BUILDING CODE AMENDMENT, APPENDIX H SIGNS, SECTION H107.1.2, ELECTRIC SIGN FACES IS DELETED:
H107.1.2 Electric Sign Faces. Deleted.
(Ord. 44-17, 12-19-2017, eff. 1-1-2018)
9-1-73: IBC BUILDING CODE AMENDMENT, APPENDIX H SIGNS, SECTION H107.1.3, AREA LIMITATION IS DELETED:
H107.1.3 Area Limitation. Deleted.
(Ord. 44-17, 12-19-2017, eff. 1-1-2018)
9-1-74: IBC BUILDING CODE AMENDMENT, APPENDIX H SIGNS, SECTION H109.1, HEIGHT RESTRICTIONS:
H109.1 Height restrictions. The structural frame of ground signs shall not be erected of combustible materials to a height of more than 40 feet above the
ground. Ground signs constructed entirely of noncombustible material shall not be erected to a height of greater than 100 feet above the ground. Greater
heights are permitted where approved and located so as not to create a hazard or danger to the public.
(Ord. 44-17, 12-19-2017, eff. 1-1-2018)
9-1-75: IBC BUILDING CODE AMENDMENT, APPENDIX H SIGNS, SECTION H109.3, WOOD ANCHORS AND SUPPORTS:
H109.3 Wood anchors and supports. Where wood anchors or supports are embedded in the soil, the wood shall be pressure treated with an approved
preservative and shall have approved corrosion resistant steel or galvanized mechanical connectors.
(Ord. 44-17, 12-19-2017, eff. 1-1-2018)
9-1-76: IBC BUILDING CODE AMENDMENT, APPENDIX H SIGNS, SECTION H112.4, HEIGHT LIMITATION IS DELETED:
H112.4 Height Limitation. Deleted.
(Ord. 44-17, 12-19-2017, eff. 1-1-2018)
9-1-77: IBC BUILDING CODE AMENDMENT, APPENDIX H SIGNS, SECTION H113.4, HEIGHT LIMITATION IS DELETED:
H113.4 Height Limitation. Deleted.
(Ord. 44-17, 12-19-2017, eff. 1-1-2018)
9-1-78: IBC BUILDING CODE AMENDMENT, APPENDIX H SIGNS, SECTION H114, PORTABLE SIGNS IS DELETED IN ITS
ENTIRETY INCLUDING TABLE 4-A AND TABLE 4-B:
H114 Portable Signs. Deleted in its entirety, including table 4-A and table 4-B.
(Ord. 44-17, 12-19-2017, eff. 1-1-2018)
9-1-79: IBC BUILDING CODE AMENDMENT, APPENDIX J GRADING, SECTION J101.1, SCOPE:
J101.1 Scope. The purpose of this chapter is to safeguard life, safety, property, or the public welfare by regulating grading, excavation and earthwork
construction, including fills and embankments on private and public property. Where conflicts occur between the technical requirements of this chapter and
the geotechnical report, the geotechnical report shall govern.
(Ord. 44-17, 12-19-2017, eff. 1-1-2018)
9-1-80: IBC BUILDING CODE AMENDMENT, APPENDIX J GRADING, SECTION J101.2, FLOOD HAZARD AREAS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 335/503
J101.2 Flood hazard areas. The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to grading, excavation and earthwork construction, including fills and
embankments, in floodways within flood hazard areas established in the Flood Hazard regulations of the Boise Development Code or section 1612.3 of
this code.
(Ord. 44-17, 12-19-2017, eff. 1-1-2018)
9-1-81: IBC BUILDING CODE AMENDMENT, APPENDIX J GRADING, ADD SECTION J101.3, HAZARDS:
J101.3 Hazards. Whenever the building official determines that an existing excavation or embankment or fill on private property has become a safety
hazard or endangers property, or adversely affects the safety, use or stability of a public way or drainage channel, the owner of the property upon which
the excavation or fill is located, or other person or agent in control of said property, upon receipt of written notice from the building official, shall within the
period specified therein repair or eliminate such excavation or embankment to eliminate the hazard and bring the subject property into conformance with
any applicable codes.
(Ord. 44-17, 12-19-2017, eff. 1-1-2018)
9-1-82: IBC BUILDING CODE AMENDMENT, APPENDIX J GRADING, SECTION J103.2, EXEMPTIONS:
J103.2 Exemptions. A grading permit shall not be required for the following:
1. Grading in an isolated, self-contained area, provided there is no danger to the public, and that such grading will not adversely affect adjoining
properties.
2. Excavation for construction of a structure permitted under this code.
3. Cemetery graves.
4. Refuse disposal sites controlled by other regulations.
5. Excavations for wells, or trenches for utilities.
6. Mining, quarrying, excavating, processing or stockpiling rock, sand, gravel, aggregate or clay controlled by other regulations, provided such
operations do not affect the lateral support of, or significantly increase stress upon the soil of adjoining properties.
7. Exploratory excavations performed under the direction of a registered design professional.
8. Fills not intended to support structures.
9. Fills less than 1 foot in depth.
Exemption from the permit requirements of this appendix shall not be deemed to grant authorization for any work to be done in any manner in violation of
the provisions of this code or any other law or ordinance of this jurisdiction.
(Ord. 44-17, 12-19-2017, eff. 1-1-2018)
9-1-83: IBC BUILDING CODE AMENDMENT, APPENDIX J GRADING, ADD SECTION J103.3, FEES:
J103.3 Fees. Fees shall be assessed in accordance with the provisions of this section and shall be as set forth in the fee schedules outlined in Table
J103.3.1 and Table J103.3.2 contained in this chapter.
(Ord. 44-17, 12-19-2017, eff. 1-1-2018)
9-1-84: IBC BUILDING CODE AMENDMENT, APPENDIX J GRADING, ADD SECTION J103.3.1, GRADING PLAN REVIEW
FEES:
J103.3.1 Grading Plan Review Fees. When a plan or other data are required to be submitted, a plan review fee shall be paid at the time of submitting
plans and specifications for review. Said plan review fee shall be as set forth in the fee schedule outlined in Table J103.3.1 contained in this chapter.
Separate plan review fees shall apply to retaining walls or major drainage structures as required elsewhere in this code. For excavation and fill on the
same site, the fee shall be based on the volume of the excavation or fill, whichever is greater.
(Ord. 44-17, 12-19-2017, eff. 1-1-2018)
9-1-85: IBC BUILDING CODE AMENDMENT, APPENDIX J GRADING, ADD TABLE J103.3.1, GRADING PLAN REVIEW FEES:
Table J103.3.1 Grading Plan Review Fees. Grading plan review fees shall be in an amount established by the Boise City Council and listed on the most
current fee schedule.
(Ord. 44-17, 12-19-2017, eff. 1-1-2018; amd. 2019 Code)
9-1-86: IBC BUILDING CODE AMENDMENT, APPENDIX J GRADING, ADD SECTION J103.3.2, GRADING PERMIT FEES:
J103.3.2 Grading Permit Fees. A fee for each grading permit shall be paid as set forth in the fee schedule outlined in Table J103.3.2 contained in this
chapter. Separate permits and fees shall apply to retaining walls or major drainage structures as required elsewhere in this code. There shall be no
separate charge for standard terrace drains and similar facilities.
(Ord. 44-17, 12-19-2017, eff. 1-1-2018)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 336/503
9-1-87: IBC BUILDING CODE AMENDMENT, APPENDIX J GRADING, ADD TABLE J103.3.2, GRADING PERMIT FEES:
J103.3.2 Grading Permit Fees. Grading permit fees shall be in an amount established by the Boise City Council and listed on the most current fee
schedule.
(Ord. 44-17, 12-19-2017, eff. 1-1-2018; amd. 2019 Code)
9-1-88: IBC BUILDING CODE AMENDMENT, APPENDIX J GRADING, ADD SECTION J103.4, BONDS:
J103.4 Bonds. The building official may require bonds in such form and amounts as deemed necessary to ensure that the work, if not completed in
accordance with the approved plans and specifications, will be corrected to eliminate adverse conditions.
In lieu of a surety bond, the building official may allow the applicant to post a cash bond or instrument of credit with the building official in an amount equal
to that which would be required in the surety bond.
(Ord. 44-17, 12-19-2017, eff. 1-1-2018)
9-1-89: IBC BUILDING CODE AMENDMENT, APPENDIX J GRADING, SECTION J105.1, GENERAL:
J105.1 General. Grading operations for which a permit is required shall be subject to inspection by the building official or designee as governed by Section
110 of this code and in accordance with sections J105.1.1 through J105.3.1. Professional inspection of grading operations shall be provided by the
registered design professional retained to provide such services for engineered grading and as required by the building official for regular grading.
(Ord. 44-17, 12-19-2017, eff. 1-1-2018)
9-1-90: IBC BUILDING CODE AMENDMENT, APPENDIX J GRADING, ADD SECTION J105.1.1, REGISTERED DESIGN
PROFESSIONAL:
J105.1.1 Registered Design Professional. The registered design professional shall provide professional inspection within his or her technical specialty,
which shall consist of observation and review as to the establishment of line, grade, surface drainage of the development area, observation during grading
and testing for required compaction, and professional inspection of the bedrock excavation to determine if conditions encountered are in conformance with
the approved report. The soils engineer shall provide sufficient observation during the preparation of the natural ground and placement and compaction of
the fill to verify that such work is being performed in accordance with the conditions of the approved plan and the applicable requirements of this chapter.
Revised recommendations relating to conditions differing from the approved soils engineering and engineering geology reports shall be submitted to the
permittee, the building official and the registered design professional. If revised plans are required during the course of the work they shall be prepared by
the registered design professional.
(Ord. 44-17, 12-19-2017, eff. 1-1-2018)
9-1-91: IBC BUILDING CODE AMENDMENT, APPENDIX J GRADING, ADD SECTION J105.1.2, PERMITTEE:
J105.1.2 Permittee. The permittee shall be responsible for the work to be performed in accordance with the approved plans and specifications and in
conformance with the provisions of this code. The permittee shall engage consultants, if required, to provide professional inspections on a timely basis.
The permittee shall act as a coordinator between the consultants, the contractor and the building official. In the event of changed conditions, the permittee
shall be responsible for informing the building official of any such change and shall provide revised plans for approval.
(Ord. 44-17, 12-19-2017, eff. 1-1-2018)
9-1-92: IBC BUILDING CODE AMENDMENT, APPENDIX J GRADING, ADD SECTION J105.1.3, BUILDING OFFICIAL:
J105.1.3 Building Official. The building official, or designee, shall inspect the project at the various stages of work requiring approval to determine that
adequate control is being exercised by the professional consultants.
(Ord. 44-17, 12-19-2017, eff. 1-1-2018)
9-1-93: IBC BUILDING CODE AMENDMENT, APPENDIX J GRADING, ADD SECTION J105.1.4, NOTIFICATION OF
NONCOMPLIANCE:
J105.1.4 Notification of noncompliance. If, in the course of fulfilling their respective duties under this chapter, the registered design professional finds
that the work is not being done in conformance with this chapter or the approved grading plans, the discrepancies shall be reported immediately in writing
to the permittee and to the building official.
(Ord. 44-17, 12-19-2017, eff. 1-1-2018)
9-1-94: IBC BUILDING CODE AMENDMENT, APPENDIX J GRADING, ADD SECTION J105.1.5, TRANSFER OF
RESPONSIBILITY:
J105.1.5 Transfer of responsibility. If the registered design professional of record is changed during grading, the work shall be stopped until the
replacement has agreed in writing to accept responsibility within the area of technical competence for approval upon completion of the work. It shall be the
duty of the permittee to notify the building official in writing of such change prior to the recommencement of such grading.
(Ord. 44-17, 12-19-2017, eff. 1-1-2018)
9-1-95: IBC BUILDING CODE AMENDMENT, APPENDIX J GRADING, SECTION J105.2, SPECIAL INSPECTIONS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 337/503
J105.2 Special inspections. The special inspection requirements of Section 1705.6 shall apply to work performed under a grading permit where required
by the building official.
(Ord. 44-17, 12-19-2017, eff. 1-1-2018)
9-1-96: IBC BUILDING CODE AMENDMENT, APPENDIX J GRADING, ADD SECTION J105.3, FINAL REPORTS:
J105.3 Final Reports. Upon completion of the rough grading work and at the final completion of the work, the following reports and drawings and
supplements thereto are required for engineered grading or when professional inspection is performed for regular grading, as applicable.
1. An as-built grading plan prepared by the registered design professional retained to provide such services showing original ground surface
elevations, as-graded ground surface elevations, lot drainage patterns, and the locations and elevations of surface drainage facilities and of the
outlets of subsurface drains. As-constructed locations, elevations and details of subsurface drains shall be shown as reported by the registered
design professional. Registered design professionals shall state that to the best of their knowledge the work within their area of responsibility was
done in accordance with the final approved grading plan.
2. A report prepared by the registered design professional retained to provide such services, including locations and elevations of field density tests,
summaries of field and laboratory tests, other substantiating data, and comments on any changes made during final grading and their effect on the
recommendations made in the approved soils engineering investigation report. Registered design professionals shall submit a statement that, to the
best of their knowledge, the work within their area of responsibilities is in accordance with the approved soils engineering report and applicable
provisions of this chapter.
3. A report prepared by the registered design professional retained to provide such services, including a final description of the geology of the site
and any new information disclosed during the grading and the effect of same on recommendations incorporated in the approved grading plan.
Registered design professionals shall submit a statement that, to the best of their knowledge, the work within their area of responsibility is in
accordance with the approved engineering geology report and applicable provisions of this chapter.
4. The grading contractor shall submit in a form prescribed by the building official a statement of conformance with the as-built plan and the
specifications.
(Ord. 44-17, 12-19-2017, eff. 1-1-2018)
9-1-97: IBC BUILDING CODE AMENDMENT, APPENDIX J GRADING, SECTION J105.3.1, NOTIFICATION OF COMPLETION:
J105.3.1 Notification of completion. The permittee shall notify the building official or designee when the grading operation is ready for final inspection.
Final approval shall not be given until all work, including installation of all drainage facilities and their protective devices, and all erosion control measures
have been completed in accordance with the final approved grading plan, and the required reports have been submitted.
(Ord. 44-17, 12-19-2017, eff. 1-1-2018)
9-1-98: IBC BUILDING CODE AMENDMENT, APPENDIX J GRADING, SECTION J107.5, COMPACTION:
J107.5 Compaction. All fill material shall be compacted to 95 percent of maximum density as determined by ASTM D 1557, Modified Proctor, in lifts not
exceeding 12 inches in depth.
(Ord. 44-17, 12-19-2017, eff. 1-1-2018)
9-1-99: IBC BUILDING CODE AMENDMENT, APPENDIX J GRADING, SECTION J109.1, GENERAL:
J109.1 General. Unless otherwise recommended by a registered design professional, drainage facilities shall be provided in accordance with the
requirements of this section. Terracing in accordance with the requirements of this section shall be provided when recommended by the registered design
professional.
Exception: Drainage facilities and terracing need not be provided where the ground slope is not steeper than 3 horizontal to 1 vertical (33 percent).
(Ord. 44-17, 12-19-2017, eff. 1-1-2018)
9-1-100: IRC BUILDING CODE AMENDMENT, SECTION R101.1, TITLE:
R101.1 Title. These provisions shall be known as the Residential Code for One- and Two-Family Dwellings of Boise City, and may be referred to
hereunder as such or as this "code" hereunder.
(Ord. 44-17, 12-19-2017, eff. 1-1-2018)
9-1-101: IRC BUILDING CODE AMENDMENT, SECTION R101.2, SCOPE, DELETE EXCEPTION NUMBER ONE AND REPEAL
EXCEPTION NUMBER TWO AND REPLACE:
Exception number one to section R101.2 is deleted.
Exception number two to section R101.2 is repealed and replaced with one exception as follows:
Exception: Owner-occupied lodging houses with five or fewer guestrooms shall be permitted to be constructed in accordance with the Residential Code
for One- and Two-family Dwellings of Boise City.
(Ord. 44-17, 12-19-2017, eff. 1-1-2018)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 338/503
9-1-102: IRC BUILDING CODE AMENDMENT, SECTION R102.7, EXISTING STRUCTURES:
R102.7 Existing structures. The legal occupancy of any structure existing on the date of adoption of this code shall be permitted to continue without
change, except as is specifically covered in this code, the International Fire Code, Uniform Housing Code, or as is deemed necessary by the building
official for the general safety and welfare of the occupants or the public.
(Ord. 44-17, 12-19-2017, eff. 1-1-2018)
9-1-103: IRC BUILDING CODE AMENDMENT, SECTION R103, DIVISION OF BUILDING SAFETY:
Repeal section R103 in its entirety and replace with the following:
SECTION R103
DIVISION OF BUILDING SAFETY
R103.1 Creation of Enforcement Agency. The Division of Building Safety is hereby created and the official in charge thereof shall be known as the
Planning and Development Services Director.
R103.2 Director. The Planning and Development Services Director shall be appointed by the Mayor with the consent of the Boise City Council.
R103.3 Agents. Authorized Agents of the Planning and Development Services Director shall be designated by the Planning and Department
Services Director.
R103.4 Designations. The Planning and Development Services Director shall have the authority to designate the related technical officers, assistant
building officials, inspection and plan review supervisors, plans examiners, inspectors and other employees. Such employees shall have such
powers and authority as delegated by the Director.
R103.5 Division Manager, Building Official. The Planning and Development Services Director shall have the authority to appoint a Division
Manager to head the Building Division, which shall be also known as the building official. The assistant building officials, inspection and plan review
supervisors, inspectors, plans examiners and other employees located in the Building Division shall report to the Building Official.
R103.6 Building Damage Assessment and Reconstruction Plan. The Planning and Development Services Director shall have the authority to
appoint the related technical officers, plans examiners, inspectors, individuals and other representatives from supporting jurisdictions to implement a
building damage assessment and reconstruction plan in the event of calamitous events either natural or man-made. Such employees shall have
such powers as delegated by the Director and protections as afforded by Section R104.8.
(Ord. 44-17, 12-19-2017, eff. 1-1-2018)
9-1-104: IRC BUILDING CODE AMENDMENT, SECTION R104.10.1, FLOOD HAZARD AREAS:
R104.10.1 Flood hazard areas. The Floodplain Administrator shall not grant modifications to any provision related to flood hazard areas established by
Table R301.2(1) unless said modification conforms to the Variances and Appeals section in the Flood Hazard regulations of the Boise Development Code.
(Ord. 44-17, 12-19-2017, eff. 1-1-2018)
9-1-105: IRC BUILDING CODE AMENDMENT, SECTION R105.2, WORK EXEMPT FROM PERMIT:
R105.2 Work exempt from permit. Exemption from the permit requirements of this code shall not be deemed to grant authorization for any work to be
done in any manner in violation of the provisions of this code or any other laws or ordinances of this jurisdiction. Permits shall not be required for the
following:
Building:
1. One-story detached accessory structures, provided the floor area does not exceed 200 square feet (18.58 square meters).
2. Fences not over 7 feet (2134 mm) high.
3. Retaining walls that are not over 4 feet (1219 mm) in height measured from the bottom of the footing to the top of the wall, unless supporting a
surcharge.
4. Water tanks supported directly upon grade if the capacity does not exceed 5,000 gallons (18 927 L) and the ratio of height to diameter or width
does not exceed 2 to 1.
5. Sidewalks and driveways not more than 30 inches (762 mm) above adjacent grade and not over any basement or story below.
6. Painting, papering, tiling, carpeting, cabinets, counter tops and similar finish work.
7. Prefabricated swimming pools that are not greater than four (4) feet (1219 mm) deep.
8. Swings and other playground equipment accessory to a one- or two-family dwelling.
9. Window awnings supported by an exterior wall which do not project more than 54 inches (1372 mm) from the exterior wall and do not require
additional support.
10. Work with a total value of five hundred dollars ($500.00) or less.
11. Decks that are not more than 12 inches above grade at any point and do not serve the exit door required by Section R311.4.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 339/503
12. Flag Poles.
(Ord. 44-17, 12-19-2017, eff. 1-1-2018)
9-1-106: IRC BUILDING CODE AMENDMENT, SECTION R105.2.1, EMERGENCY REPAIRS:
R105.2.1 Emergency Repairs. Where equipment replacements and repairs must be performed in an emergency situation, the permit application shall be
submitted within the next working business day or as at a time as required by the Building Official.
(Ord. 44-17, 12-19-2017, eff. 1-1-2018)
9-1-107: IRC BUILDING CODE AMENDMENT, SECTION R105.2.2, REPAIRS:
R105.2.2 Repairs. Application or notice to the building official is not required for ordinary repairs to structures, replacement of lamps, or the connection of
approved portable electrical equipment to approved permanently installed receptacles. Such repairs shall not include the cutting away of any wall, partition
or portion thereof, the removal or cutting of any structural beam or load bearing support, or the removal or change of any required means of egress, or
rearrangement of parts of a structure affecting the egress requirements; nor shall ordinary repairs include addition to, alter of, replacement or relocation of
any, gas piping, combustion vent, electric wiring, mechanical, or other work affecting public health or general safety.
(Ord. 44-17, 12-19-2017, eff. 1-1-2018)
9-1-108: IRC BUILDING CODE AMENDMENT, SECTION R105.3.1.1, DETERMINATION OF SUBSTANTIALLY IMPROVED OR
SUBSTANTIALLY DAMAGED EXISTING BUILDINGS IN FLOOD HAZARD AREAS:
The first paragraph of section R105.3.1.1, determination of substantially improved or substantially damaged existing buildings in flood hazard areas, shall
be amended to read as follows:
R105.3.1.1 Determination of substantially improved or substantially damaged existing buildings in flood hazard areas. For applications for
reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of existing buildings or structures located in an area prone to flooding as established by Table
R301.2(1), the Boise City Floodplain Administrator or designee shall examine or cause to be examined the construction documents for the proposed work.
For buildings that have sustained damage of any origin, the value of the proposed work shall include the cost to repair the building or structure to its predamaged
condition. If the Floodplain Administrator or designee finds that the value of the building or structure before the damage has occurred or the
improvement is started, the proposed work is a substantial improvement or restoration of substantial damage and shall require existing portions of the
entire building or structure to meet the requirements of R322. All substantially improved or reconstruction of existing structures shall be made in
accordance with the Flood Hazard regulations of the Boise Development Code in addition to this code.
(Ord. 44-17, 12-19-2017, eff. 1-1-2018)
9-1-109: IRC BUILDING CODE AMENDMENT, SECTION R105.3.2, TIME LIMITATION OF APPLICATION:
R105.3.2 Time limitation of application. Applications for which no permit is issued within 180 days following the date of application shall expire by
limitation, and plans and other data submitted for review may thereafter be returned to the applicant or destroyed by the building official. The building
official may extend the time for action by the applicant for a period not exceeding 180 calendar days upon request by the applicant showing that
circumstances beyond the control of the applicant have prevented action from being taken. No application shall be extended more than twice. In order to
renew action on an application after expiration, the applicant shall resubmit plans and pay a new plan review fee.
(Ord. 44-17, 12-19-2017, eff. 1-1-2018)
9-1-110: IRC BUILDING CODE AMENDMENT, SECTION R105.5, EXPIRATION:
R105.5 Expiration. Every permit issued by the building official or designee under the provisions of this code shall expire by limitation and become null and
void if the building or work authorized by such permit is not commenced within one calendar year from the date of issuance of such permit, or if the
building or work authorized by such permit is suspended or abandoned at any time after the work is commenced for a period of 180 calendar days.
The timeframe by which a project shall be deemed to be suspended or abandoned if no inspection has been requested shall be measured from the date of
the last required inspection or if no inspection has been required then a project shall be deemed to be suspended one calendar year from the date of
issuance the permit was issued.
Required inspections include: footing/foundation inspection, concrete slab or under-floor inspection, lowest floor elevation inspection, framing inspection,
lath or gypsum board inspection, fire resistant penetration inspection, energy efficiency inspection, any required special inspections final inspection and
any other inspections, other than conference inspections required by the building official. However, the building official may extend a permit when a good
faith effort toward code compliant work has been performed and that significant progress has occurred towards the next stage of inspection.
a. New Permit Required After Expiration. Before work on the site can be recommenced after expiration, a new permit shall be first obtained to do so, and
the fee therefor shall be one half the amount required for a new permit provided no changes have been made or will be made in the original plans and
specifications for such work, that the work is still possible given current conditions, and that work has not been suspended or abandoned for more than
one year from the last required, recorded inspection. In such cases, a new permit shall not be issued after expiration when the original review was
performed using a previously adopted code.
Exception: For all construction or structures governed only by this code, an exception exists allowing the permit to be re-issued if requested in writing.
This exception applies until the City adopted a new version of the IRC building code, then the applicant must apply for a new permit and the plans will be
subject to a new plan review process and related permit fees.
The building official shall have the authority to deny the new permit which utilizes the requirements of the expired permit unless the permittee made an
effort to complete the project and reasons beyond their control, related to the project, resulted in suspension or abandonment of the project. The permittee
must provide a written report on current status of construction which will include a request for an extension and a timeframe for completion in order for the
building official to renew the permit. The building official may also require documentation from a third party be provided by the permit applicant regarding
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 340/503
the current state of the construction prior to issuance of a new permit.
b. Permit Extensions. Any permittee holding an unexpired permit may apply for an extension of the time within which work may commence under that
permit, when the permittee is unable to commence work within the time required by this section. The building official may extend the time for action by the
permittee for a period not exceeding 180 calendar days on written request by the permittee with written evidence provided demonstrating that a good faith
effort to complete the project has been made and that reasons beyond the control of the permittee have resulted in a delay. Under no condition shall a
permit be extended more than three times, for a total maximum time of three 180 day extensions. Each 180-day extension must be approved individually
by the building official.
(Ord. 44-17, 12-19-2017, eff. 1-1-2018)
9-1-111: IRC BUILDING CODE AMENDMENT, ADD SECTION R105.10, PERMIT TRANSFER:
R105.10 Permit transfer. A building permit shall be transferable to another party if that party can provide a document signed by the original permit holder
consenting to the transfer and that all agreements and conditions are incorporated into the original permit approval. A permit may also be transferred back
to the property owner or owner's designated legal agent in cases where the property owner has terminated their legal relationship with their contractor or
owner's designated legal agent. An administrative fee for the transfer of the permit will be assessed for the work performed by staff to facilitate the transfer.
(Ord. 44-17, 12-19-2017, eff. 1-1-2018)
9-1-112: IRC BUILDING CODE AMENDMENT, SECTION R106.1, SUBMITTAL DOCUMENTS:
R106.1 Submittal documents. Two (2) sets of construction plans, special inspection, and structural observation programs, and other data as required by
Boise City submittal checklists shall be submitted with each application for a permit. Plans for all townhouse construction with four (4) or more units
attached shall be prepared, signed and sealed by an architect licensed by the State of Idaho under section 54-309, Idaho Code, as amended.
Dwelling and townhouse units constructed in areas under the purview of the Hillside and Foothills Development Standards of the Boise Development
Code, shall have foundation designs signed and sealed by a professional engineer licensed by the State of Idaho, and qualified in the engineering
specialty involved.
(Ord. 44-17, 12-19-2017, eff. 1-1-2018)
9-1-113: IRC BUILDING CODE AMENDMENT, SECTION R107.1, TEMPORARY STRUCTURES:
R107.1 Temporary structures - General. The building official is authorized to issue a permit for temporary structures with temporary uses having an
overnight stay. Such permits shall be limited as to time of service, but shall not be permitted for more than 180 days. The building official is authorized to
grant extensions for demonstrated cause. Approvals for other temporary structures and uses of not more than 180 days that do not involve an overnight
stay shall be regulated by the Boise Development Code and Fire Department.
(Ord. 44-17, 12-19-2017, eff. 1-1-2018)
9-1-114: IRC BUILDING CODE AMENDMENT, SECTION R107.3, TEMPORARY POWER:
R107.3 Temporary power. The building official is authorized to give permission to temporarily supply and use power in part of an electric installation
before that installation has been fully completed and the final certificate of completion has been issued. The part covered by the temporary certificate shall
comply with the requirements specified for temporary lighting, heat, or power in the electrical code as adopted by the city of Boise City.
(Ord. 44-17, 12-19-2017, eff. 1-1-2018)
9-1-115: IRC BUILDING CODE AMENDMENT, SECTION R108.2, SCHEDULE OF PERMIT FEES:
R108.2 Schedule of permit fees. Permit fees are to be charged in accordance with the fee schedule in Table No. 1-A contained in this code.
(Ord. 44-17, 12-19-2017, eff. 1-1-2018)
9-1-116: IRC BUILDING CODE AMENDMENT, SECTION R108.3, BUILDING PERMIT VALUATIONS:
R108.3 Building permit valuations. The applicant for a permit shall provide an estimated permit value at time of application. Permit valuations shall
include total value of work, including materials and labor, for which the permit is being issued, such as building, electrical, gas, mechanical, plumbing,
equipment and permanent systems. If, in the opinion of the building official, the valuation is underestimated on the application, the permit shall be denied,
unless the applicant can show detailed estimates which meets the approval of the building official. The final building permit valuation shall be set by the
building official.
(Ord. 44-17, 12-19-2017, eff. 1-1-2018)
9-1-117: IRC BUILDING CODE AMENDMENT, SECTION R108.5, FEE REFUNDS:
R108.5 Fee Refunds. The building official may authorize a refund of any fee paid hereunder which was erroneously paid or collected.
The building official may authorize a refund of 100 percent of the permit fee, less any administrative activity fees, paid when no work has been done under
a permit issued in accordance with this code.
The building official may authorize a refund of not more than 80 percent of the plan review fee paid when an application for a permit for which a plan
review fee has been paid is withdrawn or canceled before any plan reviewing is done.
The building official shall not authorize a refund of any fee paid except on written application filed by the original permittee or owner's representative not
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 341/503
later than 180 days after the date of fee payment.
(Ord. 44-17, 12-19-2017, eff. 1-1-2018)
9-1-118: IRC BUILDING CODE AMENDMENT, SECTION R108.6, WORK COMMENCING BEFORE PERMIT ISSUANCE:
R108.6 Work commencing before permit issuance. Any person who commences any work on a building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical, or
plumbing system before obtaining the necessary permits shall be subject to a special investigation that shall be made before a permit may be issued for
such work.
An investigation fee, in addition to the permit fee, shall be collected whether or not a permit is then or subsequently issued. The investigation fee shall be
equal to the amount of the permit fee required by this code. The minimum investigation fee shall be the same as the minimum fee set forth in Table No. 1-
A contained in this code The payment of such investigation fee shall not exempt any person from compliance with all other provisions of this code nor from
any penalty prescribed by law.
(Ord. 44-17, 12-19-2017, eff. 1-1-2018)
9-1-119: IRC BUILDING CODE AMENDMENT, SECTION R109.1.3, FLOODPLAIN INSPECTIONS:
R109.1.3 Floodplain Inspections. For construction in flood hazard areas as established by Table R301.2(1), in addition to the initial elevation certificate
required at time of permit application, upon placement of the lowest floor, including basement, the building official or designee shall require submission of
documentation, prepared by persons as specified in the Flood Hazard regulations of the Boise Development Code, of the elevation of the lowest floor,
including basement, required in Section R322 prior to the request for a framing inspection.
(Ord. 44-17, 12-19-2017, eff. 1-1-2018)
9-1-120: IRC BUILDING CODE AMENDMENT, SECTION R109.4, APPROVAL REQUIRED:
R109.4 Approval required. Work shall not be performed beyond the point indicated in each successive inspection without first obtaining the approval of
the building official. The building official or designee, upon notification, shall make the requested inspections and shall either indicate the portion of the
construction that is satisfactory as completed, or shall notify the permit holder or an agent of the permit holder wherein the same fails to comply with this
code. Any portions that do not comply shall be corrected and such portion shall not be covered or concealed until authorized by the building official. A final
inspection and approval is required upon completion and prior to occupancy and use of all building and structures.
(Ord. 44-17, 12-19-2017, eff. 1-1-2018)
9-1-121: IRC BUILDING CODE AMENDMENT, ADD SECTION R110.1.1, CERTIFICATE OF COMPLETION:
R110.1.1 Certificate of Completion. A Certificate of Completion may be issued in lieu of a Certificate of Occupancy when the scope of work of a permit
does not affect, alter or change the occupant load, occupancy group or occupancy use classification of a tenant space, structure, or portion of a structure.
The work described within the scope of work of a permit is deemed to be complete and in substantial compliance with the applicable building and trade
codes when a final inspection has occurred and a Certificate of Completion has been issued.
(Ord. 44-17, 12-19-2017, eff. 1-1-2018)
9-1-122: IRC BUILDING CODE AMENDMENT, SECTION R111.1, CONNECTION OF UTILITIES:
R111.1 Connection of service utilities. Final inspection and approval is required upon completion of work and prior to occupancy or use of all buildings
and structures for connection of service utilities. Lack of building official approval may result in the termination of utility services to said building or structure
and prosecution under the penalty provisions of this code.
(Ord. 44-17, 12-19-2017, eff. 1-1-2018)
9-1-123: IRC BUILDING CODE AMENDMENT, ADD SECTION R111.4, DISCONNECT UTILITIES FOR OCCUPANCY
VIOLATIONS:
R111.4 Authority of disconnect for occupancy violations. Whenever any building or structure or equipment therein regulated by this code is being
used contrary to the provisions of this code and/or other laws which are enforced by Boise City, the building official may order such use discontinued and
the structure, or portion thereof, vacated and the utility services disconnected by notice served on any person causing such use to be continued. Such
person shall discontinue the use or make the structure or portion thereof, comply with the requirements of this code, and/or other laws which are enforced
by Boise City, within a time period of thirty (30) days of receipt of such notice or as designated by the building official.
(Ord. 44-17, 12-19-2017, eff. 1-1-2018)
9-1-124: IRC BUILDING CODE AMENDMENT, SECTION R112.1, BUILDING CODE BOARD OF APPEALS, ADD SECTION
R112.1.1, APPEALS TO THE BUILDING CODE BOARD OF APPEALS AND ADD SECTION R112.1.2, APPEAL PROCEDURE:
R112.1 Building Code Board of Appeals. In order to hear and decide appeals of orders, decisions, or determinations made by the building official with
respect to the application and interpretation of this code, there shall be and is hereby created a Board of Appeals consisting of ten (10) members including:
three (3) Idaho registered engineers; three (3) Idaho licensed architects; three (3) building contractors and one (1) person who owns or operates a fire
sprinkler business, and are qualified by experience and training to pass upon matters pertaining to building construction, all of whom shall not be
employees of the city of Boise City. At least five (5) of the members shall be residents of the city of Boise City. Members not residing in Boise City must
reside in Ada County and transact business in Boise City. The building official shall be an ex officio member of and shall act as secretary to said board but
shall have no vote upon any matter before the board. The Board of Appeals shall be appointed for a term of four (4) years by the governing body and shall
hold office at the pleasure of the Mayor and Boise City Council. The board may adopt rules of procedure for conducting its business and shall render all
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 342/503
decisions and findings in writing to the appellant with a duplicate copy to the building official.
R112.1.1 APPEALS TO THE BUILDING CODE BOARD OF APPEALS
A. APPLICATION FOR APPEAL
Any applicant for a permit, whose application has been rejected by the City, or any person who has been ordered by the City to modify, alter,
remove, or install any building code provisions as required by this code may within ten (10) calendar days thereafter, request an appeal by filing
notice in writing with the building official. The building official or designee shall deliver such notice to the board. The hearing shall be held within
thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of the notice of appeal or as otherwise agreed upon by parties to the appeal. At the hearing the board may, by a
majority vote, affirm, annul or modify the action of the City. If the actions of the City are modified or annulled, a permit shall be issued in
accordance with the determination of the board.
(Ord. 44-17, 12-19-2017, eff. 1-1-2018)
B. APPEAL FEE
Any person appealing a decision of the City shall include payment of a fee in an amount as established by the Boise City Council and listed on the
most current fee schedule. In the event that the appellant prevails, then the fee shall be refunded to the appellant.
(Ord. 44-17, 12-19-2017, eff. 1-1-2018; amd. 2019 Code)
C. APPEAL TO CITY COUNCIL
Any order, decision, or ruling of the board may be appealed, by filing notice in writing to the Boise City Council within ten (10) calendar days of
such order, decision, or ruling.
R112.1.2 APPEAL PROCEDURE
The Building Code Board of Appeals may receive all evidence on appeal in accordance with the following procedure:
A. The building official or designee shall present background information on the project in question, including relevant code sections and their
interpretation. The board may ask questions during or after each presentation.
B. Applicant shall be allowed to present any information or applicable code sections to support a reversal of the building official's decision. The
appellant shall have up to twenty (20) minutes to present evidence.
C. The chair shall open the hearing to receive public testimony. Each person wishing to provide public testimony shall be given up to five (5)
minutes to do so.
D. Following the close of public testimony, the building official or designee shall be allowed up to ten (10) minutes for rebuttal.
E. The appellant shall then have up to ten (10) minutes for rebuttal and any final comments.
F. The Chairman of the board may allocate equivalent additional time to the applicant and the Building Official or his designee if the clarity of the
issue at hand can be enhanced by receiving additional testimony.
G. Following the hearing, the board may deliberate and render a final decision by a roll call vote, may request more information before a final
decision is made, or may take the matter under advisement and reconvene at a reasonable time not to exceed fifteen (15) calendar days to make
or render a final decision. The final decision shall be in writing and a copy provided to the appellant and any parties of record. The decision by the
board may be appealed to the Boise City Council within ten (10) calendar days following the date of issuance of a written decision.
(Ord. 44-17, 12-19-2017, eff. 1-1-2018)
9-1-125: IRC BUILDING CODE AMENDMENT, SECTION R113.4, CRIMINAL PENALTIES:
Section R113.4 is repealed in its entirety and replaced as follows:
R113.4 Criminal Penalties. Any person, firm or corporation violating the provisions of this Code shall be deemed guilty of misdemeanor, and upon
conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars ($1000.00), by imprisonment for not more than one hundred eighty
(180) days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Each separate day or any portion thereof during which any violation of this Code occurs or continues
shall be deemed to constitute a separate offense, and upon conviction thereof shall be punishable as herein provided.
A. In the discretion of the building official, the City may charge the offender with an infraction in lieu of a misdemeanor. The infraction shall be
payable by a fine of three hundred dollars ($300.00). There shall be no right to a trial by jury for an infraction citation or complaint.
B. For purposes of trial by court or jury, the infraction described within this section shall not constitute a lesser included offense for any misdemeanor
citation or complaint.
C. A prosecuting attorney may reduce a misdemeanor charge under this chapter to an infraction as described herein, payable by a $300 fine, if the
defendant engages in corrective actions resulting in fully completed and permitted work.
(Ord. 44-17, 12-19-2017, eff. 1-1-2018)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 343/503
9-1-126: IRC BUILDING CODE AMENDMENT, SECTION R114, STOP WORK ORDER:
Repeal section R114 in its entirety and replace with the following:
R114.1 Authority. Whenever the building official finds any work regulated by this code being performed in a manner contrary to the provisions of this code
or in a dangerous or unsafe manner, the building official is authorized to issue a stop work order.
R114.2 Issuance. The stop work order shall be in writing and shall be given to the owner of the property involved, or to the owner's agent, or to the person
doing the work. Upon issuance of a stop work order, the cited work shall immediately cease. The stop work order shall state the reason for the order, and
the conditions under which the work in question will be permitted to resume.
R114.3 Unlawful Continuance. Any person that continues any work after having been served with a stop work order, except such work as that person is
directed to perform to remedy a violation or unsafe condition, shall be subject to penalties as prescribed by law.
(Ord. 44-17, 12-19-2017, eff. 1-1-2018)
9-1-127: IRC BUILDING CODE AMENDMENT, ADD SECTION R115, UNSAFE STRUCTURES AND EQUIPMENT AND SECTION
R115.1, CONDITIONS:
SECTION R115
UNSAFE STRUCTURES AND EQUIPMENT
R115.1 Conditions. Structures or existing equipment deemed unsafe shall be taken down and removed or made safe in accordance with provisions of the
Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings as adopted under the Dangerous Buildings Code of Boise City.
Notwithstanding other provisions of this code, whenever, in the opinion of the building official, there is an imminent danger due to an unsafe condition, the
building official shall have authority to summarily order temporary safeguard work to be performed in order to render the structure temporarily safe or to
warn the public of the dangerous condition. The temporary safeguard work required may include, but shall not be limited to placement of placards or
signage, erecting barrier tape, barricades, or fencing, securing openings, or other means as the code official deems necessary to address such
emergency.
(Ord. 44-17, 12-19-2017, eff. 1-1-2018)
9-1-128: IRC BUILDING CODE AMENDMENT, SECTION R202, DEFINITION FOR TOWNHOUSE:
TOWNHOUSE. A single-family dwelling unit constructed in a row of attached units separated by property lines and with open space on at least two sides.
(Ord. 44-17, 12-19-2017, eff. 1-1-2018)
9-1-129: IRC BUILDING CODE AMENDMENT, TABLE R301.2(1), CLIMATIC AND GEOGRAPHIC DESIGN CRITERIA:
TABLE R301.2(1)
CLIMATIC AND GEOGRAPHIC DESIGN CRITERIA
GROUND SNOW LOAD: 20 PSF.
Design roof load shall not be less than a uniform snow load of 25 psf.
WIND DESIGN SPEED (mph): 90
Wind speed from the basic wind speed map [Figure R301.2(4)A]. Wind exposure category shall be determined in accordance with Section R301.2.1.4
WIND DESIGN TOPOGRAPHIC EFFECTS: NO
In accordance with Section R301.2.1.5
SEISMIC DESIGN CATEGORY: C
In accordance with Section R301.2.2.1
WEATHERING: Severe
As determined from the Weathering Probability Map [Figure R301.2(3)]. The grade of masonry units shall be determined from ASTM C34, C55, C62, C73,
C90, C129, C145, C216 or C652.
FROST LINE DEPTH: 24 inches
TERMITE: Slight to Moderate
Based on history of local subterranean termite damage.
WINTER DESIGN TEMP: 10 degrees F
The outdoor design dry-bulb temperature shall be selected from the columns of 971/2 percent values for winter from Appendix D of the International
Plumbing Code or as determined by the Building Official.
ICE BARRIER UNDER LAYMENT REQUIRED: NO
In accordance with Sections R905.2.7.1, R905.4.3.1, R905.5.3.1, R905.6.3.1, R905.7.3.1 and R905.8.3.1, where there has been a history of local damage
from the effects of ice damming.
FLOOD HAZARDS: First Floodplain Ordinance effective December 12, 1983. Flood Insurance Study (FIS) February 19, 2003. Panel numbers (all with a
date of 2/19/2003) are: 0160 H, 0161 H, 0162 H, 0166 H, 0167 H, 0169 H, 0178 H, 0186 H, 0187 H, 0188 H, 0189 H, 0193 H, 0254 H, 0258 H, 0259 H,
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 344/503
0265 H, 0267 H, 0270 H, 0276 H, 0277 H, 0281 H, 0282 H, 0283 H, 0284 H, 0286 H, 0287 H, 0291 H, 0295 H, 0305 H, 0315 H.
AIR FREEZING INDEX: 894
Based on the 100-year return period air freezing index (BF-days) from Figure R403.3(2) or from the 100-year (99%) value on the National Climatic Data
Center data table "Air Freezing Index-USA Method (Base 32° Fahrenheit)" at www.ncdc.noaa.gov/fpsf.html.
MEAN ANNUAL TEMP: 51.1 degrees F
Based on the mean annual temperature from the National Climatic Data Center data table "Air Freezing Index-USA Method (Base 32°F)" at
www.ncdc.noaa.gov/fpsf.html.
(Ord. 44-17, 12-19-2017, eff. 1-1-2018)
9-1-130: IRC BUILDING CODE AMENDMENT, TABLE R302.1(1), EXTERIOR WALLS:
Table R302.1(1) shall be amended as follows:
TABLE R302.1(1)
EXTERIOR WALLS
Exterior Wall Element
Minimum Fire-
Resistance Rating
Minimum Fire Separation
Distance
Walls Fire-resistance rated 1 hour-tested in accordance with ASTM E 119 or UL 263 with exposure
from both sides
<3 feet
Not fire-resistance
rated
0 hours =3 feet
Projections Fire-resistance rated 1 hour on the undersidea,b =2 feet to <3 feet
Not fire-resistance
rated
0 hours =3 feet
Openings in
walls
Not allowed N/A <3 feet
25% maximum of wall
area
0 hours =3 feet to <5 feet
Unlimited 0 hours 5 feet
Penetrations All Comply with Section R302.4 <3 feet
None required =3 feet
For SI: 1 foot = 304.8 mm.
N/A = Not Applicable.
a. Roof eave fire-resistance rating shall be permitted to be reduced to 0 hours on the underside of the eave if fireblocking is provided from the wall top
plate to the underside of the roof sheathing.
b. Roof eave fire-resistance rating shall be permitted to be reduced to 0 hours on the underside of the eave provided that gable vent openings are not
installed.
(Ord. 44-17, 12-19-2017, eff. 1-1-2018)
9-1-131: IRC BUILDING CODE AMENDMENT, SECTION R302.2, TOWNHOUSES, EXCEPTIONS:
The exceptions to section R302.2 shall be deleted and replaced with two (2) exceptions as follows:
Exceptions:
1. When provided with an automatic fire sprinkler system pursuant to section R313.1, a common 1-hour fire-resistance-rated wall assembly tested in
accordance with ASTM E 119 or UL 263 is permitted for townhouses if such walls do not contain plumbing or mechanical equipment, ducts, or vents
in the cavity of the common wall. The wall shall be rated for fire exposure from both sides and shall extend to and be tight against exterior walls and
the underside of the roof sheathing. Penetrations of electrical outlet boxes shall be constructed in accordance with Section R302.4.
2. Two (2) 1-hour fire-resistance rated wall assemblies (as specified in Section R302.1) or a common 2-hour fire-resistance rated wall assembly
tested in accordance with ASTM E 119 or UL 263 are permitted for townhouses. If two (2) 1-hour fire-resistance rated walls are used, plumbing and
electrical installations within the wall cavity shall conform to fire-resistance penetration requirements in accordance with section R302.4 through
R302.4.2 for each of the two (2) 1-hour rated walls penetrated. The 2-hour fire-resistance rated common wall shall not contain plumbing or
mechanical equipment, ducts or vents within its wall cavity. The wall shall be rated for fire exposure from both sides and shall extend to and be tight
against the exterior walls and the underside of the roof sheathing. Penetrations of electrical outlet boxes shall be constructed in accordance with
section R302.4.
(Ord. 44-17, 12-19-2017, eff. 1-1-2018)
9-1-132: IRC BUILDING CODE AMENDMENT, SECTION R303.4, MECHANICAL VENTILATION:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 345/503
Repeal section R303.4 and replace with the following:
R303.4 Mechanical ventilation. Dwelling units shall be provided with whole-house mechanical ventilation in accordance with Section M1507.3.
(Ord. 44-17, 12-19-2017, eff. 1-1-2018)
9-1-133: IRC BUILDING CODE AMENDMENT, SECTION R309.3, FLOOD HAZARD AREAS:
R309.3 Flood Hazard Areas. All construction within flood hazard areas shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the Flood Hazard
regulations of the Boise Development Code in addition to this code. For buildings located in flood hazard areas as established by Table R301.2(1), garage
floors shall be:
1. Elevated to or above the design flood elevation as determined in accordance with Section R322; or
2. Located below the design flood elevation provided that the floors are at or above grade on not less than one side, are used solely for parking,
building access or storage, meet the requirements of Section R322 and are otherwise constructed in accordance with this code.
(Ord. 44-17, 12-19-2017, eff. 1-1-2018)
9-1-134: IRC BUILDING CODE AMENDMENT, SECTION R313.1, TOWNHOUSE AUTOMATIC FIRE SPRINKLER SYSTEMS
EXCEPTION:
The exception to section R313.1 shall be modified as follows:
Exception. Automatic residential fire sprinkler systems shall not be required in townhouses where either two (2) 1-hour fire-resistance rated walls or
a common two-hour fire-resistance rated wall, as specified in Exception 2 of section R302.2, is installed between dwelling units or when additions or
alterations are made to existing townhouses that do not have an automatic residential fire sprinkler system installed.
(Ord. 44-17, 12-19-2017, eff. 1-1-2018)
9-1-135: IRC BUILDING CODE AMENDMENT, SECTION R313.2, ONE- AND TWO-FAMILY DWELLINGS AUTOMATIC FIRE
SYSTEMS:
R313.2 One- And Two-Family Dwellings Automatic Fire Systems. Deleted.
(Ord. 44-17, 12-19-2017, eff. 1-1-2018)
9-1-136: IRC BUILDING CODE AMENDMENT, SECTION R315.2.2, ALTERATIONS, REPAIRS AND ADDITIONS, EXCEPTION 2:
Repeal exception 2 of section R315.2.2 Alterations, repairs and additions, and replace as follows:
2. Installation, alteration or repairs of electrical, plumbing, or mechanical systems are exempt from the requirements of this section.
(Ord. 44-17, 12-19-2017, eff. 1-1-2018)
9-1-137: IRC BUILDING CODE AMENDMENT, SECTION R322.1, FLOOD-RESISTANT CONSTRUCTION, GENERAL:
R322.1 Flood-Resistant Construction, General. All construction within flood hazard areas shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the
Flood Hazard regulations of the Boise Development Code in addition to this code. Buildings and structures constructed in whole or in part in flood hazard
areas, including A or V Zones and Coastal A Zones, as set forth in Table R301.2(1), and substantial improvement and restoration of substantial damage of
buildings and structures in flood hazard areas, shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the provisions contained in this section. Buildings or
structures that are located in more than one flood hazard area shall comply with the provisions associated with the most restrictive flood hazard area.
Buildings or structures located in whole or in part in identified floodways shall be designed and constructed in accordance with ASCE 24, where or if
allowed by the Flood Hazard regulations of the Boise Development Code.
(Ord. 44-17, 12-19-2017, eff. 1-1-2018)
9-1-138: IRC BUILDING CODE AMENDMENT, TABLE R602.7.5, MINIMUM NUMBER OF FULL HEIGHT STUDS AT EACH END
OF HEADERS IN EXTERIOR WALLS:
Delete table R602.7.5 Minimum Number of Full Height Studs at Each End of Headers in Exterior Walls and replace with the following table:
TABLE R602.7.5
MINIMUM NUMBER OF FULL HEIGHT STUDS
AT EACH END OF HEADERS IN EXTERIOR WALLSa
MAXIMUM
HEADER SPAN
(in feet)
ULTIMATE DESIGN
WIND SPEED AND EXPOSURE CATEGORY
< 140 MPH, Exposure B
or <130 MPH, Exposure C < 115 MPH Exposure Bb
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 346/503
4 1 1
6 2 1
8 2 1
10 3 2
12 3 2
14 3 2
16 4 2
18 4 2
a. For header spans in between those values given in the Table, use the minimum number of full height studs associated with the next highest span
value.
b. The tabulated minimum number of full height studs is applicable where jack studs are provided to support the header at each end in accordance
with Table R602.7.(1). Where a framing anchor is used to support the header in lieu of a jack stud in accordance with footnote d of Table R602.7(1),
the minimum number of full height studs at each end of the header shall be in accordance with requirements for wind speed < 140 MPH, Exposure
B.
(Ord. 44-17, 12-19-2017, eff. 1-1-2018)
9-1-139: IRC BUILDING CODE AMENDMENT, SECTION R602.10, WALL BRACING:
R602.10 Wall bracing. Buildings shall be braced in accordance with this section or, when applicable, section R602.12 or the most current version of APA
System Report SR-102 at the time of application for a permit as an alternate method. Where a building, or portion thereof, does not comply with one or
more of the bracing requirements in this section, those portions shall be designed and constructed in accordance with section R301.1.
(Ord. 44-17, 12-19-2017, eff. 1-1-2018)
9-1-140: IRC BUILDING CODE AMENDMENT, SECTION R903.1, GENERAL ROOF COVERING:
R903.1 General. Roof decks shall be covered with approved roof coverings secured to the building or structure in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter. Roof coverings shall be designed, installed and maintained in accordance with this code and the approved manufacturer's installation instructions
such that the roof covering shall serve to protect the building or structure. Roof covering requirements for hillside and Wildland Urban Interface areas are
to be as regulated by the Fire Prevention Code, of the Boise City Municipal Code.
(Ord. 44-17, 12-19-2017, eff. 1-1-2018)
9-1-141: IRC BUILDING CODE AMENDMENT, TABLE N1102.1.2, INSULATION AND FENESTRATION REQUIREMENTS BY
COMPONENT, ADD FOOTNOTES J AND K:
Add footnote j to the title of table N1102.1.2 - Insulation and Fenestration Requirements by Component. Add footnote j underneath table N1102.1.2 after
footnote i to read as follows:
j. For residential log home building thermal envelope construction requirements see section N1102.6.
Add footnote k to the Ceiling R-Value header of table N1102.1.2, and below table N1102.1.2 to read as follows:
k. The Ceiling R-Value in Climate Zone 5 may be reduced to R-38 when the Wood Frame Wall R-Value is increased to R-21 and the Fenestration UFactor
is reduced to 0.31.
(Ord. 44-17, 12-19-2017, eff. 1-1-2018)
9-1-142: IRC BUILDING CODE AMENDMENT, TABLE N1102.4.1.1, AIR BARRIER AND INSULATION INSTALLATION:
Add the criteria requirement for the "fireplace" component of table N1102.4.1.1 Air Barrier and Insulation Installation as follows:
TABLE N1102.4.1.1 (R402.4.1.1)
AIR BARRIER AND INSULATION INSTALLATION
COMPONENT CRITERIAa
Fireplace An air barrier shall be installed on fireplace walls.
MAXIMUM
HEADER SPAN
(in feet)
ULTIMATE DESIGN
WIND SPEED AND EXPOSURE CATEGORY
< 140 MPH, Exposure B
or <130 MPH, Exposure C < 115 MPH Exposure Bb
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 347/503
(Ord. 44-17, 12-19-2017, eff. 1-1-2018)
9-1-143: IRC BUILDING CODE AMENDMENT, SECTION N1102.4.1.2, TESTING:
N1102.4.1.2 (R402.4.1.2) Testing. The building or dwelling unit shall be tested and verified as having an air leakage rate not exceeding five air changes
per hour in Climate Zones 1 and 2, and four air changes per hour in Climate Zones 3 through 8. Testing shall be conducted in accordance with
ANSI/RESNET/ICC 380 and reported at a pressure of 0.2 inches w.g. (50 Pascals). Where required by the building official, testing shall be conducted by
an approved third party. A written report of the results of the test shall be signed by the party conducting the test and provided to the building official.
Testing shall be performed at any time after creation of all penetrations of the building thermal envelope.
(Ord. 44-17, 12-19-2017, eff. 1-1-2018)
9-1-144: IRC BUILDING CODE AMENDMENT, ADD SECTION N1102.6, RESIDENTIAL LOG HOME THERMAL ENVELOPE:
N1102.6 Residential Log Home Thermal Envelope. Residential log home construction shall comply with sections N1101 (General), N1102.4 (Air
Leakage), N1102.5 (Maximum Fenestration U-Factor and SHGC), N1103.1 (Controls), N1103.3.2 (Sealing), N1103.3.5 (Building Cavities), sections
N1103.4 through N1103.11 (referred to as the mandatory provisions), Section N1104 (Electrical Power and Lighting Systems), and either subsection i., ii.,
or iii. as follows:
i. Sections N1102.2 through N1102.3, N1103.3.1, N1104.1 and Table N1102.6;
ii. Section N1105 Simulated Performance Alternative (Performance); or
iii. REScheck (U.S. Department of Energy Building Codes Program).
(Ord. 44-17, 12-19-2017, eff. 1-1-2018)
9-1-145: IRC BUILDING CODE AMENDMENT, ADD TABLE N1102.6, LOG HOME PRESCRIPTIVE THERMAL ENVELOPE
REQUIREMENTS BY COMPONENT:
TABLE N1102.6
LOG HOME PRESCRIPTIVE THERMAL ENVELOPE REQUIREMENTS BY COMPONENT
5, 6-high
efficiency
equipment pathc
0.32 0.60 NR 49 5 30 15/19 10, 4 ft. 10/13
5 0.32 0.60 NR 49 8 30 10/13 10, 2 ft. 10/13
For SI = 1 foot = 304.8 mm
a. The fenestration U-factor column excludes skylights. The SHGC column applies to all glazed fenestration.
b. R-5 shall be added to the required slab edge R-values for heated slabs.
c. 90% AFUE natural gas or propane, 84% AFUE oil, or 15 SEER heat pump heating equipment (zonal electric resistance heating equipment such as
electric base board electric resistance heating equipment as the sole source for heating is considered compliant with the high efficiency equipment path).
d. "15/19" means R-15 continuous insulated sheathing on the interior or exterior of the home or R-19 cavity insulation at the interior of the basement wall.
"15/19" shall be permitted to be met with R-13 cavity insulation on the interior of the basement wall plus R-5 continuous insulated sheathing on the interior
or exterior of the home. "10/13" means R-10 continuous insulated sheathing on the interior or exterior of the home or R-13 cavity insulation at the interior
of the basement wall.
(Ord. 44-17, 12-19-2017, eff. 1-1-2018)
9-1-146: IRC BUILDING CODE AMENDMENT, SECTION N1103.3.3, DUCT TESTING (MANDATORY):
N1103.3.3 (R403.3.3) Duct testing (Mandatory). Ducts shall be pressure tested in accordance with ANSI/RESNET/ICC 380 to determine air leakage by
one of the following methods:
1. Rough-in test: Total leakage shall be measured with a pressure differential of 0.1 inch w.g. (25 Pa) across the system, including the manufacturer's
air handler enclosure if installed at the time of the test. All registers shall be taped or otherwise sealed during the test.
2. Postconstruction test: Total leakage shall be measured with a pressure differential of 0.1 inch w.g. (25 Pa) across the entire system, including the
manufacturer's air handler enclosure. Registers shall be taped or otherwise sealed during the test.
Exception: A duct air leakage test shall not be required where the ducts and air handlers are located entirely within the building thermal envelope.
Climate Zone
Fenestration
U-Factora
Skylight
U-Factor
Glazed
Fenestration
SHGC
Ceiling
RValue
Min. Average
LOG Size In
Inches
Floor
RValue
Basement
Wall RValued
Slab RValue
&
Depthb
Crawl Space
Wall R-Valued
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 348/503
A written report of the results of the test shall be signed by the party conducting the test and provided to the code official.
(Ord. 44-17, 12-19-2017, eff. 1-1-2018)
9-1-147: IRC BUILDING CODE AMENDMENT, SECTION N1106.3, ENERGY RATING INDEX:
N1106.3 (R406.3) Energy rating index. The Energy Rating Index (ERI) shall be determined in accordance with ANSI/RESNET/ICC 301.
(Ord. 44-17, 12-19-2017, eff. 1-1-2018)
9-1-148: IRC BUILDING CODE AMENDMENT, DELETE SECTION N1106.3.1, ERI REFERENCE DESIGN:
N1106.3.1 ERI Reference Design. Delete.
(Ord. 44-17, 12-19-2017, eff. 1-1-2018)
9-1-149: IRC BUILDING CODE AMENDMENT, TABLE N1106.4, MAXIMUM ENERGY RATING INDEX:
The Energy Rating Index value for Climate Zone 5 shall be amended to read as follows:
TABLE N1106.4 (R406.4)
MAXIMUM ENERGY RATING INDEX
CLIMATE ZONE ENERGY RATING INDEX
5 61
(Ord. 44-17, 12-19-2017, eff. 1-1-2018)
9-1-150: IRC BUILDING CODE AMENDMENT, SECTION N1106.5, VERIFICATION BY APPROVED AGENCY:
N1106.5 Verification by approved agency. Verification of compliance with Section N1106 shall be completed by a third party approved in accordance
with ANSI/RESNET/ICC 301.
(Ord. 44-17, 12-19-2017, eff. 1-1-2018)
9-1-151: IRC BUILDING CODE AMENDMENT, SECTION N1106.6, DOCUMENTATION:
N1106.6 (R406.6) Documentation. Documentation of the software used to determine the ERI and the parameters for the residential building shall be in
accordance with Sections N1106.6.1 through N1106.6.5.
(Ord. 44-17, 12-19-2017, eff. 1-1-2018)
9-1-152: IRC BUILDING CODE AMENDMENT, SECTION N1106.6.1, COMPLIANCE SOFTWARE TOOLS:
N1106.6.1 (R406.6.1) Compliance software tools. Software tools used for determining the ERI shall be Approved Software Rating Tools in accordance
with ANSI/RESNET/ICC 301.
(Ord. 44-17, 12-19-2017, eff. 1-1-2018)
9-1-153: IRC BUILDING CODE AMENDMENT, ADD SECTION N1106.6.4, SPECIFIC APPROVAL:
N1106.6.4 (R406.6.4) Specific approval. Performance analysis tools meeting the applicable sections of Section N1106 shall be approved. Documentation
demonstrating the approval of performance analysis tools in accordance with Section N1106.6.1 shall be provided to the code official.
(Ord. 44-17, 12-19-2017, eff. 1-1-2018)
9-1-154: IRC BUILDING CODE AMENDMENT, ADD SECTION N1106.6.5, INPUT VALUES:
N1106.6.5 (R406.6.5) Input values. When calculations require input values not specified by Sections N1102, N1103, N1104 and N1105, those input
values shall be taken from ANSI/RESNET/ICC 301.
(Ord. 44-17, 12-19-2017, eff. 1-1-2018)
9-1-155: IRC BUILDING CODE AMENDMENT, DELETE SECTION N1106.7, CALCULATION SOFTWARE TOOLS, INCLUDING
SUBSECTIONS N1106.7.1, MINIMUM CAPABILITIES, N1106.7.2, SPECIFIC APPROVAL AND N1106.7.3, INPUT VALUES:
N1106.7 Calculation Software Tools. Delete including subsections N1106.7.1, Minimum Capabilities, N1106.7.2, Specific Approval and N1106.7.3, Input
Values.
(Ord. 44-17, 12-19-2017, eff. 1-1-2018)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 349/503
9-1-156: IRC BUILDING CODE AMENDMENT, CHAPTER 44, REFERENCED STANDARDS:
The following referenced standards shall be added into chapter 44 of the code as follows:
ANSI/RESNET/ICC
Residential Energy Services Network, Inc.
P.O. Box 4561
Oceanside, CA 92052-4561
International Code Council
500 New Jersey Avenue, NW,
6th Floor
Washington, D.C. 20001
Standard reference
number
Title Referenced in code section
number
301-2014 Standard for the Calculation and Labeling of the Energy Performance of Low-Rise Residential
Buildings using an Energy Rating Index
N1106.3, N1106.5,
N1106.6.1, N1106.6.5
ANSI/RESNET/ICC
Residential Energy Services Network, Inc.
P.O. Box 4561
Oceanside, CA 92052-4561
International Code
Council
500 New Jersey
Avenue, NW, 6th Floor
Washington, D.C.
20001
Standard reference
number
Title Referenced in code
section number
380-2016 Standard for Testing Airtightness of Building Enclosures, Airtightness of Heating and Cooling Air
Distribution Systems, and Airflow of Mechanical Ventilation Systems
N1102.4.1.2,
N1103.3.3
(Ord. 44-17, 12-19-2017, eff. 1-1-2018)
9-1-157: IRC BUILDING CODE AMENDMENT, ADD APPENDIX V, TINY HOMES:
Add an additional appendix titled Appendix V Tiny Homes into the code with sections and provisions as follows:
SECTION AV101
GENERAL
AV101.1 Scope. This appendix shall be applicable to tiny houses used as single dwelling units. Tiny houses shall comply with this code except as
otherwise stated in this appendix.
SECTION AV102
DEFINITIONS
AV102.1 General. The following words and terms shall, for the purposes of this appendix, have the meanings shown herein. Refer to Chapter 2 of
this code for general definitions.
Escape and Rescue Roof Access Window. A skylight or roof window designed and installed to satisfy the emergency escape and rescue
opening requirements in Section R310.
Landing Platform. A landing provided as the top step of a stairway accessing a loft.
Loft. A floor level located more than 30 inches (762 mm) above the main floor and open to it on at least one side with a ceiling height of less than
6 feet 8 inches (2032 mm), used as a living or sleeping space.
Tiny House. A dwelling that is 400 square feet (37 m) or less in floor area excluding lofts.
SECTION AV103
CEILING HEIGHT
AV103.1 Minimum Ceiling Height. Habitable space and hallways in tiny houses shall have a ceiling height of not less than 6 feet 8 inches
(2032 mm). Bathrooms, toilet rooms, and kitchens shall have a ceiling height of not less than 6 feet 4 inches (1930 mm). Obstructions shall not
extend below these minimum ceiling heights including beams, girders, ducts, lighting and other obstructions.
Exception: Ceiling heights in lofts are permitted to be less than 6 feet 8 inches (2032 mm).
SECTION AV104
LOFTS
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 350/503
AV104.1 Minimum loft area and dimensions. Lofts used as a sleeping or living space shall meet the minimum area and dimension requirements of
Sections AV104.1.1 through AV104.1.3.
AV104.1.1 Minimum area. Lofts shall have a floor area of not less than 35 square feet (3.25 m).
AV104.1.2 Minimum dimensions. Lofts shall be not less than 5 feet (1524 mm) in any horizontal dimension.
AV104.1.3 Height effect on loft area. Portions of a loft with a sloping ceiling measuring less than 3 feet (914 mm) from the finished floor to the
finished ceiling shall not be considered as contributing to the minimum required area for the loft.
Exception: Under gable roofs with a minimum slope of 6:12, portions of a loft with a sloping ceiling measuring less than 16 inches (406 mm) from
the finished floor to the finished ceiling shall not be considered as contributing to the minimum required area for the loft.
AV104.2 Loft access. The access to and primary egress from lofts shall be any type described in Sections AR104.3 through AR104.6.
AV104.3 Stairways. Stairways accessing lofts shall comply with this code or with Sections AR104.3.1 through AR104.3.6.
AV104.3.1 Width. Stairways accessing a loft shall not be less than 17 inches (432 mm) in clear width at or above the handrail. The minimum width
below the handrail shall be not less than 20 inches (508 mm).
AV104.3.2 Headroom. The headroom in stairways accessing a loft shall be not less than 6 feet 2 inches (1880 mm), as measured vertically, from a
sloped line connecting the tread or landing platform nosings in the middle of their width.
Exception: The headroom for a landing platform, where stairways access lofts, shall be not less than 4 feet 6 inches (1372 mm).
AV104.3.3 Treads and Risers. Risers for stairs accessing a loft shall be not less than 7 inches (178 mm) and not more than 12 inches (305 mm) in
height. Tread depth and riser height shall be calculated in accordance with one of the following formulas:
1. The tread depth shall be 20 inches (508 mm) minus 4/3 of the riser height, or
2. The riser height shall be 15 inches (381 mm) minus 3/4 of the tread depth.
AV104.3.4 Landing Platforms. The top tread and riser of stairways accessing lofts shall be constructed as a landing platform where the loft ceiling
height is less than 6 feet 2 inches (1880 mm) where the stairway meets the loft. The landing platform shall be 18 inches to 22 inches (457 to
559 mm) in depth measured from the nosing of the landing platform to the edge of the loft, and 16 to 18 inches (406 to 457 mm) in height measured
from the landing platform to the loft floor.
AV104.3.5 Stairway Handrails. Handrails shall comply with Section R311.7.8.
AV104.3.6 Stairway Guards. Guards at open sides of stairways shall comply with Section R312.1.
AV104.4 Ladders. Ladders accessing lofts shall comply with Sections AV104.4.1 and AV104.4.2.
AV104.4.1 Ladder Size and capacity. Ladders accessing lofts shall have a rung width of not less than 12 inches (305 mm) and 10 inches (254 mm)
to 14 inches (356 mm) spacing between rungs. Ladders shall be capable of supporting a 200 pound (90.7 kg) load on any rung. Rung spacing shall
be uniform within 3/8-inch (9.5 mm).
AV104.4.2 Ladder Incline. Ladders shall be installed at 70 to 80 degrees from horizontal.
AV104.5 Alternating tread devices. Alternating tread devices accessing lofts shall comply with section R311.7.11, including the subsections, of this
code. The clear width at and below the handrails shall be not less than 20 inches (508 mm).
AV104.6 Ships Ladders. Ships ladders accessing lofts shall comply with section R311.7.12, including the subsections, of this code. The clear width
at and below handrails shall be not less than 20 inches (508 mm).
AV104.7 Loft Guards. Loft guards shall be located along the open side of lofts. Loft guards shall not be less than 36 inches (914 mm) in height or
one-half of the clear height to the ceiling, whichever is less.
SECTION AV105
EMERGENCY ESCAPE AND RESCUE OPENINGS
AV105.1 General. Tiny houses shall meet the requirements of Section R310 for emergency escape and rescue openings.
Exception: Escape and rescue roof access windows in lofts used as sleeping rooms shall be deemed to meet the requirements of Section R310
where installed such that the bottom of the opening is not more than 44 inches (1118 mm) above the loft floor, provided the escape and rescue roof
access window complies with the minimum opening area requirements of Section R310.
(Ord. 44-17, 12-19-2017, eff. 1-1-2018)
9-1-158: ADDITION OF MINIMUM STANDARDS FOR MODULAR NON-HUD STRUCTURES:
Modular non-HUD structures to be occupied within the city of Boise City shall adhere to the following:
All new manufactured (modular) (non-HUD) structures must bear the insignia from the State of Idaho Division of Building Safety and shall only be allowed
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 351/503
to be occupied for the use listing on the insignia.
To gain approval for an existing (modular) (non-HUD) structure, the structure must undergo procedures as required by the State of Idaho Division of
Building Safety and must bear the insignia prior to being allowed to be occupied for the use listed on the insignia, except for pre-HUD mobile homes
constructed prior to June 15, 1976, which shall comply with the Mobile Home Rehabilitation Act, Title 44, Chapter 25, Idaho Code prior to occupancy.
(Ord. 44-17, 12-19-2017, eff. 1-1-2018)
9-1-159: FIRE SPRINKLER AND ALTERNATIVE EXTINGUISHING SYSTEMS PLAN REVIEW/INSPECTION FEES:
A. Approval Required: Fire sprinkler and alternative extinguishing systems plans and associated required submittals shall be permitted and approved by
the Planning and Development Services and Fire Departments, before any related work begins.
B. Fees Assessed: The plan review fees shall be assessed as follows: (Ord. 47-17, 12-19-2017, eff. 1-1-2018)
1. A plan review fee in an amount established by the Boise City Council and listed on the most current fee schedule shall be assessed for fire sprinkler
systems and paid to the Planning and Development Services Department. Two (2) sprinkler heads (directly above and below) on an armover shall be
considered as one sprinkler head for fee purposes.
2. When the installation of sprinkler heads or nozzles are not involved or insignificant due to the type of work being permitted, a plan review fee in an
amount established by the Boise City Council and listed on the most current fee schedule equivalent to a percentage of the total bid price shall be
assessed, up to a maximum fee in an amount established by the City Council and listed on the most current fee schedule (whichever is larger), and
paid to the Planning and Development Services Department. (Ord. 44-17, 12-19-2017, eff. 1-1-2018; amd. 2019 Code)
C. Work Requiring Permit: Permits shall be issued for the following work:
1. New fire sprinkler and alternative extinguishing systems;
2. Additions, modification,s and changes to existing fire sprinkler and alternative extinguishing systems, underground lines and/or associated
equipment.
3. All fees shall be paid in full when the permit is issued. (Ord. 44-17, 12-19-2017, eff. 1-1-2018)
D. Additional Fees: The permit fee shall cover the cost of two (2) plan reviews and two (2) field inspections for each inspection category. An additional fee
in an amount established by the Boise City Council and listed on the most current fee schedule per review shall be assessed, beginning with the third
review, on re-submittals of denied plans and/or calculations. A fee in an amount established by the Boise City Council and listed on the most current
fee schedule shall be charged per hour for each additional field inspection performed because of noncompliance by the owner or the owner's agent.
(Ord. 44-17, 12-19-2017, eff. 1-1-2018; amd. 2019 Code)
E. Plan Modifications: Plan revisions submitted for approval after a permit and approved plans have been issued, shall be charged the normal permit fee,
based on the number of sprinklers or nozzles affected by the modification.
F. Application Package: All project plans and data submittals shall accompany a completed fire sprinkler permit application package, available from Boise
City's Planning and Development Services Department. (Ord. 44-17, 12-19-2017, eff. 1-1-2018)
9-1-160: FIRE ALARM SYSTEM PLAN REVIEW FEES AND INSPECTION FEES FOR EXISTING BUILDINGS AND ALARM
ALTERATIONS:
A. Approval Required: Fire alarm system plans and associated submittals as required by the International Fire Code and alarm system design standard(s)
shall be permitted and approved by the Planning and Development Services and Boise City Fire Department, before any related fire alarm system work
begins.
B. Fees Assessed: The plan review fees shall be assessed as follows: (Ord. 44-17, 12-19-2017, eff. 1-1-2018)
A plan review fee consisting of a base fee with an additional fee per alarm initiating device in an amount established by the Boise City Council and
listed on the most current fee schedule, shall be assessed for fire alarm systems and paid to the Planning and Development Services Department.
(Ord. 44-17, 12-19-2017, eff. 1-1-2018; amd. 2019 Code)
C. Work Requiring Permit: Permits shall be issued for the following work:
1. New fire alarm systems in existing buildings;
2. Additions, modifications, and changes to existing fire alarm systems, fire suppression connections, related supplies and/or equipment.
3. All fees shall be paid in full when the permit is issued. (Ord. 44-17, 12-19-2017, eff. 1-1-2018)
D. Additional Fees: The permit fee shall cover the cost of two (2) plan reviews and two (2) field inspections for each inspection category. An additional fee
in an amount established by the Boise City Council and listed on the most current fee schedule per review shall be assessed beginning with the third
review, on re-submittals of denied plans and/or calculations. A fee in an amount established by the Boise City Council and listed on the most current
fee schedule shall be charged per hour for each additional field inspection performed because of noncompliance by the owner or the owner's agent.
(Ord. 44-17, 12-19-2017, eff. 1-1-2018; amd. 2019 Code)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 352/503
E. Plan Modifications: Plan revisions submitted for approval after a permit and approved plans have been issued, shall be charged the normal permit fee,
plus the number of fire alarm initiating devices affected by the modification.
F. Application Package: All project plans and data submittals shall accompany a completed fire alarm permit application, package available from Boise
City's Planning and Development Services Department permit counter. (Ord. 44-17, 12-19-2017, eff. 1-1-2018)
Chapter 2
DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEE
9-2-1: SHORT TITLE:
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the BOISE CITY DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEE ORDINANCE. (Ord. 43-16, 12-13-2016, eff. 1-1-2017)
9-2-2: APPLICABILITY:
This chapter shall apply to all new development located within any impact fee service area for the City, as described by the most current capital
improvement plan and Impact Fee Study adopted by the City. (Ord. 43-16, 12-13-2016, eff. 1-1-2017)
9-2-3: FINDINGS; GENERAL PROVISIONS:
The City Council finds that, unless otherwise exempt, all new development creates an impact and therefore an increased demand for public services. As
such, those users who create the additional demand should bear the cost of new public facilities when new growth or development requires new public
facilities.
A. This chapter shall not be construed to subject any development to double payment of the same impact fees.
B. An impact fee shall not be invalid because the intended improvement for which the fee was paid results in an incidental benefit to owners or developers
within a service area other than the fee payer.
C. After payment of impact fees or the execution of an agreement for payment of impact fees, the City may not assess additional impact fees or increase
fees to be paid unless the number of service units increases or the scope of the development changes.
D. In the event of an increase in the number of service units or the schedule of the development changes, the additional impact fees assessed are limited
to the amount attributable to the additional service units or change in scope of the development. (Ord. 43-16, 12-13-2016, eff. 1-1-2017)
9-2-4: RULES OF CONSTRUCTION:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words, and derivations shall have the meanings given herein. When not inconsistent with
the context, words used in the present tense include the future tense, words in the plural number include the singular number, and words in the singular
number include the plural number. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory. Words used throughout this chapter, but not defined
herein, shall have their plain, ordinary, and common meaning. Words in any gender shall apply to the feminine, masculine and neuter genders. (Ord. 43-
16, 12-13-2016, eff. 1-1-2017)
9-2-5: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms, phrases and words shall have the meanings given herein:
AFFORDABLE HOUSING: Housing affordable to families whose incomes do not exceed eighty percent (80%) of the median income for the service areas
as defined in this chapter.
APPLICANT: Person or entity applying for a building permit or other approval that is otherwise subject to the provisions of this chapter.
ASSESSMENT: The development impact fee calculated for a particular project that is charged to the fee payer or developer.
BUILDING: Any structure having a roof and separated from another structure by space or by walls without communicating doors or windows or any similar
opening and erected for the purpose of providing support or shelter for persons, animals, things or property.
BUILDING PERMIT: An official document or certificate issued by the Boise City Building Division of Planning and Development Services, authorizing the
construction or siting of any building. For purposes of this chapter, the term "building permit" shall also include tie down permits for structures or buildings,
such as a mobile home, that do not require a building permit in order to be occupied.
CAPITAL IMPROVEMENTS: Any of the following facilities, including existing facilities, facility expansions or new facilities, that have a useful life of ten (10)
years or more, by new construction or other action, that are owned and operated by or on behalf of the City and described in the currently adopted capital
improvements plan including:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 353/503
A. Fire Capital Improvements: Buildings for fire and rescue and essential equipment.
B. Park And Recreation Capital Improvements: Parks, recreational areas, and related facilities, including trails and greenbelt improvements.
C. Police Capital Improvements: Buildings for police and essential equipment.
CAPITAL IMPROVEMENTS PLAN (CIP): A plan adopted and amended pursuant to the provisions of the Idaho Development Impact Fee Act, which
identifies capital improvements for which impact fees may be used as a funding source.
CITY: The City of Boise City, Idaho.
CITY COUNCIL: The duly constituted Governing Body of the City.
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN: The Boise City Comprehensive Plan known as "Blueprint Boise" as updated and amended from time to time pursuant to Idaho
Code title 67, chapter 65, and title 11 of this Code.
COUNTY: The County of Ada County, Idaho.
DEDICATION: The conveyance of property for governmental use, through donation of the property by the owner and acceptance by the City or other
applicable governmental agency pursuant to this chapter or other law.
DEVELOPER: Any person, corporation, organization or other legal entity undertaking development, including a party that undertakes the subdivision of
property pursuant to Idaho Code sections 50-1301 through 50-1334.
DEVELOPMENT: Any construction or installation of a building or structure, or any change in use of a building or structure, or any change in the use,
character or appearance of land, which creates additional demand and need for public facilities.
DEVELOPMENT APPROVAL: Any written authorization from the City or another governmental entity party, which authorizes the commencement of a
development.
DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEE: A fee calculated by the City and assessed on new development in order to pay for the proportionate share of the cost of
system improvements needed to serve new growth. This term is also referred to as an impact fee in this chapter and includes lump sum fees, capital
recovery fees, contributions in aid of construction, development fees and any other fee that functions as described. The term does not include the
following:
A. A charge or fee to pay the administrative, plan review, or inspection costs associated with permits required for development;
B. Connection or hookup charges;
C. Availability charges for drainage, sewer, water, or transportation charges for services provided directly to the development; or
D. Amounts collected from a developer in a transaction in which the governmental entity has incurred expenses in constructing capital improvements
for the development if the owner or developer has agreed to be financially responsible for the construction or installation of the capital improvements,
unless a written agreement is made pursuant to Idaho Code section 67-8209(3) for credit or reimbursement.
DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENT: A requirement attached to a development approval or other governmental action that approves or authorizes a
particular development project, including, but not limited to, a rezone, which requirement compels the payment, dedication or contribution of goods,
services, land or money as a condition of approval.
DWELLING UNIT OR ACCESSORY DWELLING UNIT: A building or portion of a building designed for or whose primary purpose is for residential
occupancy, and which consists of one or more rooms which are arranged, designed or used as living, cooking and sleeping quarters for one or more
persons.
ENCUMBER: To reserve funds for a specific expenditure or an identified project. The following constitute an encumbrance for purposes of this chapter:
A. Execution of a contract by the City for acquisition of land or capital equipment or toward the design or construction of an improvement; or
B. Adoption of a resolution by the City Council authorizing the commencement of eminent domain; or
C. Execution of an agreement for the rendering of services to the City, which are incidental and necessary to the acquisition of land, capital equipment,
or the design and construction of an improvement.
EXTRAORDINARY COSTS: Those costs incurred as a result of an extraordinary impact attributable to new development.
EXTRAORDINARY IMPACT: An impact which is reasonably determined by the City to: a) result in the need for police, fire or parks and recreation system
improvements, the cost of which will significantly exceed the sum of the development impact fees to be generated from the project; or b) result in the need
for system improvements which are not identified in the CIP.
FEE PAYER: A person or legal entity that pays or is required to pay a development impact fee. Taxing districts are expressly included within this definition
of "fee payer", unless the taxing district enters into a written agreement with Boise City that provides otherwise.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 354/503
IMPACT: The effect of development on the fire service network, police facilities, parks network or recreational facilities in a given area produced by the
additional population attracted by development for purposes of this chapter.
IMPACT FEE ADMINISTRATOR: The person designated to administer this chapter on behalf of the City.
IMPACT FEE STUDY: The most current "Capital Improvements Plan and Impact Fee Study" adopted by the City and as may be amended, that includes
the CIP updates, land use assumptions, methodology and impact fee calculations.
LAND USE: The primary category of use for any principal or accessory building, structure or use located on a development site for purposes of this
chapter.
LAND USE ASSUMPTIONS: A description of the service area and projections of land uses, densities, intensities and population in the service area over at
least a twenty (20) year period.
LEVEL OF SERVICE (LOS): A standardized measure of the relationship between service capacity and service demand provided by a public facility or
system of public facilities. The LOS contained in the impact fee study is expressly adopted and incorporated into this chapter.
MOBILE OR MANUFACTURED HOME: A manufactured structure as defined in Idaho Code section 39-4105(8) and (9).
MODULAR BUILDING: Any building or building component, other than a manufactured home, which is constructed according to standards contained in
the Idaho Building Code Act, as adopted by the City, which is of closed construction and is either entirely or substantially prefabricated or assembled at a
place other than the building site.
MULTI-UNIT: A structure that contains two (2) or more separate residential dwelling units, whether a single building or multiple buildings, which comprise
one complex.
NONRESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT: Any development project not providing for residential housing.
OWNER OF RECORD: The person or entity holding legal title to the real property, including the local, State or Federal government or any subdivision
thereof.
PRESENT VALUE: The total current monetary value of past, present or future payments, contributions or dedications of goods, services, materials,
construction or money.
PROJECT: A particular development on an identified parcel of land.
PROJECT IMPROVEMENTS: Site specific improvements and facilities that are planned, designed or built to provide service for a specific development
and that are necessary for the use and convenience of the occupants or users of the development.
PROPORTIONATE SHARE: The portion of the costs to provide system improvements which is reasonably and fairly related to the service demands and
needs of new development.
PUBLIC FACILITIES: Publicly owned parks, recreational facilities, open space, greenbelt and trails, including related park and trail improvements, fire
facilities and police facilities, including:
A. Wastewater collection, treatment and disposal facilities;
B. Stormwater collection, retention, detention, treatment and disposal facilities, flood control facilities, and bank and shore protection, and enhancement
improvements;
C. Landscaping associated with roads, streets and bridges, and the rights-of-way associated therewith;
D. Parks, open space and recreation areas, and related capital improvements; and
E. Public safety facilities, including law enforcement, fire, emergency medical and rescue, and streetlighting facilities.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE: A vehicular type unit primarily designed as temporary quarters for recreational, camping or travel use, which either has its
own motive power or is mounted on or drawn by another vehicle.
RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT: Any building designed to be used as housing, such as single-unit dwellings, accessory dwelling units, apartments,
condominiums, mobile homes or manufactured homes, intended for occupancy by one or more persons and not offering other services.
SERVICE AREAS: A defined geographic area identified by the City in the Comprehensive Plan, the CIP, or by an intergovernmental agreement between
the City and another governmental entity, for which development potential may create the need for capital improvements to be funded by impact fees.
SERVICE UNIT: A standardized measure of consumption, use, generation or discharge attributable to an individual unit of development calculated in
accordance with generally accepted engineering or planning standards for a particular category of capital improvements. The following service units are
used for the analysis and calculation of impact fees under this chapter:
A. Fire: Fire equivalent dwelling units, which each represent the average number of fire and emergency calls for service per development unit for each
land use category, as more fully described in the impact fee study.
B. Parks And Recreation: Residential population, which each represent the average number of persons per housing unit based on housing size, as
more fully described in the impact fee study.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 355/503
C. Police: Police equivalent dwelling units, which each represent the average number of police calls for service per development unit for each land use
category, as more fully described in the impact fee study.
SINGLE-UNIT ATTACHED DWELLING UNIT: A housing unit which shares a common wall with an adjoining unit. The common wall must extend from the
foundation through the attic.
SINGLE-UNIT DETACHED DWELLING UNIT: Conventional home where one family normally occupies one dwelling unit in one structure which may be
found in subdivisions or on single lots.
SYSTEM IMPROVEMENT COSTS: Costs incurred for construction or reconstruction of system improvements, including design, acquisition, engineering
and other costs in order to provide additional public facilities needed to serve new growth and development.
SYSTEM IMPROVEMENTS: Capital improvements to the parks and recreation, fire or police system designed to provide service within the specific service
area.
UNIT(S) OF DEVELOPMENT: A quantifiable increment of development activity dimensioned in terms of equivalent dwelling units or other appropriate
measurements identified by the impact fee study. (Ord. 43-16, 12-13-2016, eff. 1-1-2017)
9-2-6: REGIONAL PARK IMPACT FEE SERVICE AREA:
There is hereby established one regional park impact fee service area, to include all land within the City and its designated area of impact, the boundaries
of which are depicted by the map below and incorporated by reference herein and as may be amended from time to time.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 356/503
(Ord. 43-16, 12-13-2016, eff. 1-1-2017)
9-2-7: LOCAL PARK IMPACT FEE SERVICE AREAS:
There is hereby established local park impact fee service areas, to include certain land within the City and its designated area of impact, the boundaries of
which are depicted by the map below and incorporated by reference herein and as may be amended from time to time.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 357/503
(Ord. 43-16, 12-13-2016, eff. 1-1-2017)
9-2-8: FIRE IMPACT FEE SERVICE AREA:
There is hereby established one fire impact fee service area, to include all land within the City, the boundaries of which are depicted by the map below and
incorporated by reference herein and as may be amended from time to time.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 358/503
(Ord. 43-16, 12-13-2016, eff. 1-1-2017)
9-2-9: POLICE IMPACT FEE SERVICE AREA:
There is hereby established one police impact fee service area, to include all land within the City, the boundaries of which are depicted by the map below
and incorporated by reference herein and as may be amended from time to time.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 359/503
(Ord. 43-16, 12-13-2016, eff. 1-1-2017)
9-2-10: LAND USE ASSUMPTIONS:
Land use assumptions used in developing a CIP shall be based on the most recently adopted assumptions by the appropriate land use planning agency or
agencies.
A. Update: Land use assumptions for the City shall be updated at least every five (5) years commencing from the date of the adoption of the CIP(s).
Impact fees shall be recalculated in accordance with Idaho Code section 67-8206.
B. Assumptions: Amendment to the land use assumptions shall incorporate projections of changes in land uses, densities, intensities and population for
each service area for a period not less than twenty (20) years. (Ord. 43-16, 12-13-2016, eff. 1-1-2017)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 360/503
9-2-11: DETERMINATION OF SERVICE UNITS:
The number of service units for regional park, local park, fire and police impact fees shall be determined by using the land use and service unit
equivalency table(s) adopted by and contained within the currently adopted impact fee study. (Ord. 43-16, 12-13-2016, eff. 1-1-2017)
9-2-12: DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEES PER SERVICE UNIT:
A. Computation: The maximum impact fee per service unit for each service area shall be established by each category of capital improvements. The
maximum impact fee per service unit for each service area for each category of capital improvement shall be computed in the following manner:
1. For each category of capital improvements, calculate the total projected costs of capital improvements necessitated by and attributable to new
development in the service area identified in the impact fee CIP;
2. From such amount, subtract a credit in the amount of revenues, if any, including the payment of debt, to be generated by new service units during
the period the CIP is in effect, including the payment of debt, associated with the capital improvements in the plan;
3. Divide the resultant amount by the total number of service units anticipated within the service area based on land use assumptions for that service
area. (Ord. 43-16, 12-13-2016, eff. 1-1-2017)
B. New Development Schedules: The impact fees imposed on new development shall be calculated for each new service unit by using the impact fee per
service unit as set forth in schedules A, B, C, and D of this subsection.
SCHEDULE A - REGIONAL PARK IMPACT FEES
Less than 700 0.63 $250.00 $157.00
701 - 1,400 1.63 250.00 407.00
1,401 - 2,500 2.47 250.00 618.00
2,501 - 3,200 2.83 250.00 708.00
More than 3,200 3.00 250.00 750.00
SCHEDULE B - LOCAL PARK IMPACT FEES
Less than 700 $ 73.00 $0.00 $ 296.00 $ 310.00 $ 218.00 $ 228.00
701 - 1,400 188.00 0.00 767.00 804.00 565.00 589.00
1,401 - 2,500 285.00 0.00 1,163.00 1,218.00 855.00 893.00
2,501 - 3,200 327.00 0.00 1,331.00 1,396.00 979.00 1,022.00
More than 3,200 346.00 0.00 1,412.00 1,479.00 1,038.00 1,084.00
SCHEDULE C - FIRE IMPACT FEES
Less than 700 0.63 $209.00 $132.00
701 - 1,400 1.63 209.00 342.00
1,401 - 2,500 2.47 209.00 517.00
2,501 - 3,200 2.83 209.00 593.00
More than 3,200 3.00 209.00 628.00
Proposed Regional Park Impact Fee Schedule
Residential
Unit By Size
Persons/
Housing Unit Net Cost/Person
Cost/
Residential Unit
Local Park Impact Fee Schedule By Service Area
Residential
Unit By Size
Central
Bench Down-town
North
River
South
East/Barber
Valley
South
West
West
Bench
Fire Impact Fee Schedule
Residential
Unit By Size
Persons/
Housing Unit Net Cost/Person
Cost/
Residential Unit
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 361/503
Non-Residential
Fire EDU/
1,000 Sq. Ft. Net Cost/EDU
Cost/
1,000 Sq. Ft.
Industrial 0.15 $238.00 $ 36.00
Retail 1.02 238.00 243.00
Office 1.32 238.00 315.00
SCHEDULE D - POLICE IMPACT FEES
Less than 700 0.66 $97.00 $ 61.00
701 - 1,400 1.63 97.00 157.00
1,401 - 2,500 2.47 97.00 239.00
2,501 - 3,200 2.83 97.00 273.00
More than 3,200 3.00 97.00 290.00
Non-Residential
Police EDU/
1,000 Sq. Ft. Net Cost/EDU
Cost/
1,000 Sq. Ft.
Industrial 0.32 $110.00 $ 36.00
Retail 2.73 110.00 300.00
Office 1.14 110.00 125.00
(Ord. 29-18, 8-28-2018, eff. 10-1-2018)
9-2-13: ASSESSMENT AND PAYMENT OF DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEES:
A. Payment Required: Prior to issuance of a building permit, the fee payer shall pay impact fees, in accordance with this chapter. The Impact Fee
Administrator shall rely upon the information contained in the building permit application(s), planning application(s), or other planning entitlement(s)
documents associated with the development.
1. The fee payers shall pay all impact fees prior to the issuance of a building permit, unless otherwise agreed to in writing by the City and the fee payer.
No construction shall commence nor shall the City issue a building permit unless and until the fee payer has satisfied the provisions of this chapter.
2. Completed applications for building permits received within one hundred twenty (120) days of the effective date of any amendment to this chapter
that affects the impact fee calculation, will be exempt from that portion of the amendment. The complete application must include permitted plans
signed and sealed by a State licensed engineer or architect, if required, that shows all site work, and complies with all applicable zoning,
architectural, structural, electrical, mechanical, plumbing and environmental requirements.
3. Applications for building permits filed prior to the effective date of any amendment to this chapter, but which expire or are revoked, shall be subject to
the provisions of the most current ordinance in effect at the time of reapplication. In the event that an amendment results in a change in the amount
of impact fees charged for a particular category of public facility, the fee payer shall pay the impact fee amount in effect upon the date of his or her
reapplication.
4. If a building permit expires or is revoked and development or construction does not commence, the owner of record shall be entitled to a refund of
previously paid impact fees for that development as set forth by section 9-2-21 of this chapter.
5. The owner of record shall not receive a refund for proposed development activity resulting in a negative fee calculation or in cases in which final City
approval has not occurred.
B. Expansion, Change Of Use: If development results in either the expansion of an existing nonresidential land use, a change from a nonresidential land
use type to a different nonresidential land use type, or a change from a residential to nonresidential land use type, then an impact fee shall be
assessed only for the additional impact attributable to the expansion, change or more intensive use.
C. Removal, Demolish Of Building; Replacement Structure: When a building or structure will be removed or demolished, the fee payer shall pay an impact
fee based upon the difference between the fee that would have been paid for the previous structure and the fee for new structure on the site; provided,
that the prior structure was removed or demolished not more than ten (10) years prior to the application for a building permit and documentation of its
previous existence and size is provided to the Impact Fee Administrator. In all other cases, the replacement structure will be treated as new
development.
Fire Impact Fee Schedule
Residential
Unit By Size
Persons/
Housing Unit Net Cost/Person
Cost/
Residential Unit
Police Impact Fee Schedule
Residential
Unit By Size
Persons/
Housing Unit Net Cost/Person
Cost/
Residential Unit
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 362/503
D. Nonconformance With Land Use Category: If the proposed development does not conform to a land use category identified by the most current
adopted impact fee study, then the Impact Fee Administrator shall apply the land use category that most closely resembles the proposed use.
E. Modular, Manufactured Or Recreational Vehicle: An impact fee will be assessed for installation of a modular building, manufactured home or
recreational vehicle unless the fee payer demonstrates:
1. A modular building, manufactured home or recreational vehicle legally occupied the site prior to the effective date of this chapter; or
2. An impact fee had been paid previously for the installation of a modular building, manufactured home or recreational vehicle on that same site.
Lawful storage of a recreational vehicle does not constitute an installation for purposes of this chapter.
F. Extraordinary Impact: If the City Council determines that a proposed development activity would create an extraordinary impact on the City's public
facilities system, resulting in the City's inability to accommodate the development without excessive or unscheduled public expenditures, the City
Council may refuse to approve the proposed development activity and may recommend to the other affected government agencies that the project not
be approved. In the alternative, the City Council may calculate a pro rata share per service unit of the extraordinary impact and charge an impact fee
greater than the fee indicated by use of the fee schedule.
G. Individual Assessment: An individual assessment of impact fees is permitted when the fee payer demonstrates by clear and convincing evidence that
the established impact fee is inappropriate.
1. Written application for an individual assessment shall be made to the Impact Fee Administrator prior to receipt of building permits or other necessary
approvals or entitlements from the City. The individual assessment process shall consider of studies, data and any other relevant information
submitted by the fee payer supporting adjustment of the impact fee. Late applications for individual assessment of impact fees may be considered for
a period of sixty (60) days after the receipt of a building permit only if the fee payer demonstrates that the facts supporting the application were not
known or discoverable prior to receipt of the building permit and that undue hardship would result if the application is not considered.
2. The Impact Fee Administrator shall render a written decision regarding the individual assessment within thirty (30) days of receipt of the application.
The decision by the Impact Fee Administrator shall include an explanation of the calculation of the impact fee and an explanation of factors
considered under Idaho Code section 67-8707, and shall specify the system improvement(s) for which the impact fee is intended to be used. The
decision of the Impact Fee Administrator shall establish the impact fee for the development for one year from the date of the final decision. (Ord. 43-
16, 12-13-2016, eff. 1-1-2017)
9-2-14: COLLECTION AND PENALTIES:
The City may utilize the following means and methods to ensure the payment of impact fees:
A. Interest: Charge interest on any unpaid portions of the impact fee with interest at the highest legally allowable rate and a penalty of five percent (5%) for
each thirty (30) day period payment is late;
B. Building Permit Withheld: Withholding the building permit until the impact fee is paid;
C. Utility Service Withheld: Withholding utility services until the impact fee is paid; or
D. Lien: Creation of a lien for failure to pay the impact fee following the procedures set forth in Idaho Code title 45, chapter 5. (Ord. 43-16, 12-13-2016, eff.
1-1-2017)
9-2-15: IMPACT FEE OFFSETS AND CREDITS:
A fee payer shall receive credit or reimbursement for the present value of any system improvement, the value of dedication of real property to the City, or
other contribution required by the City from the developer for system improvements of the category for which the impact fee is being collected, including
system improvements paid for pursuant to a local improvement district.
A. Limitations: All offsets and credits against impact fees shall be subject to the following limitations and shall be granted based on this chapter:
1. No offset or credit shall be given for the dedication or construction of project improvements or site related facilities.
2. A fee payer shall not receive an offset or credit in excess of that amount to be collected from the assessed impact fee.
3. The unit costs used to calculate the offsets or credits shall not exceed those assumed for the capital improvements included in the CIP(s) for the
category of facility within the service area for which the impact fee is imposed.
4. An offset or credit shall lapse ten (10) years after receipt of the first building permit issued after the effective date of this chapter or within such period
as may be otherwise agreed to by written agreement.
5. The City will not reimburse the property owner or fee payer for an offset or credit when no impact fees for the new development can be collected
pursuant to this chapter or for any amount exceeding the total impact fees due for the new development for the category of capital improvement.
6. The amount of any offset or credit shall not include the amount attributable to participation by the City in the development.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 363/503
B. Application: An offset or credit associated with a plat shall be applied to an impact fee at the time of application for the first building permit for the
subject property and will continue to be applied until the offset or credit is exhausted for that development. (Ord. 43-16, 12-13-2016, eff. 1-1-2017)
9-2-16: EXEMPT DEVELOPMENT ACTIVITIES:
A. Claim Of Exemption: A fee payer shall claim an exempt development activity upon application for a building permit.
B. Activities Specified: The following development activities are exempt from the payment of impact fees:
1. Construction of publicly owned buildings or structures, which are solely for governmental purposes, unless the City determines that the development
activity will create an extraordinary burden on public facilities owned or operated by the City;
2. Rebuilding or replacing a structure destroyed or damaged by fire or other catastrophe, with a new structure which does not increase the impact over
that attributable to the destroyed or damaged structure; provided, that the structure is rebuilt and ready for occupancy within two (2) years of its
destruction;
3. The remodel or repair of a structure that does not increase the number of service units;
4. Replacing an existing use on the same site, provided the number of units does not increase;
5. Placing a temporary construction trailer or office on a site;
6. Alteration or expansion of an existing dwelling unit where that alteration or expansion does not increase the number of service units;
7. Construction of accessory buildings or structures typical to residential uses, such as tennis courts or clubhouses, which will not result in an increase
in the number of service units or the fee payer can demonstrate that the use does not create a significant impact on the capacity of system
improvements. (Ord. 43-16, 12-13-2016, eff. 1-1-2017)
9-2-17: AFFORDABLE HOUSING IMPACT FEE RELIEF PROGRAM:
Applicants seeking relief pursuant to the terms of this program, as set forth below, shall make written application to the Impact Fee Administrator.
Reserved. (Ord. 43-16, 12-13-2016, eff. 1-1-2017)
9-2-18: ESTABLISHMENT OF ACCOUNTS:
A. Specified: To ensure that impact fees will benefit the appropriate development, the City will establish separate interest bearing impact fee trust accounts
for each category of capital improvement within each service area for which the impact fee is collected.
B. Earned Interest: Interest earned shall be credited to the account on which it was earned and shall be used solely for the purposes specified in the CIP.
C. Accounting; Time Limit For Expending Funds: The City shall establish adequate financial and accounting controls to ensure that impact fees are utilized
solely for purposes authorized by this chapter. Disbursement of funds shall be authorized by the City at such times as are reasonably necessary to
carry out the purposes and intent of this chapter. Impact fees shall be expended within a reasonable period of time, but not to exceed a maximum of
eight (8) years, unless extended as provided by subsection D of this section from the date the fees were collected, on a first-in, first-out basis (FIFO).
Funds shall be deemed expended for purposes of this chapter when payment for a capital cost has been approved by the City.
D. Extension Of Time Limit: The City may hold the impact fees for longer than eight (8) years, but no more than eleven (11) years from the date the fees
were collected, if it identifies in writing:
1. A reasonable cause why the fees should be held longer than the eight (8) years; and
2. An anticipated date by which the fees will be expended.
E. Refunds: If it is determined that the impact fees have not been expended for capital facilities identified by the CIP within the authorized time frame and
any permitted extensions, then such fees, including interest shall be refunded as set forth by this chapter.
F. Annual Financial Report: A financial report on the impact fee trust accounts shall be provided annually to the Mayor and Council. The report shall
include:
1. The amount of all development impact fees collected, appropriated or spent during the preceding year by category of public facility and service area;
2. The percentage of tax and revenue other than impact fees collected appropriated or spent for system improvements during the preceding year by
category of public facility and service area;
3. The length of time that unexpended impact fees have been held and the expiration date of those impact fees. (Ord. 43-16, 12-13-2016, eff. 1-1-
2017)
9-2-19: EXPENDITURE OF IMPACT FEES:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 364/503
A. Permitted Expenditures: Except as otherwise provided, impact fees, including accrued interest, shall only be expended on public facilities identified in
the CIP for the relevant service area. Impact fees may be expended for, but not limited to, the construction contract price, surveying and engineering
fees, and land acquisition costs for public facilities. Impact fees may also be used to pay the principal and interest payments (including sinking fund
payments) on bonds or other borrowed revenues used to acquire, expand or improve public facilities. Expenditures may be made to purchase
additional land from a fee payer where such purchase is consistent with the purpose of this chapter.
B. Prohibited Expenditures: Impact fees collected pursuant to this chapter shall not be used to pay for any of the following:
1. Construction, acquisition or expansion of projects or assets other than capital improvements or facility expansions identified in the CIP(s);
2. Repair, operation or maintenance of existing or new capital improvements or facility expansion;
3. Upgrade, update, expansion or replacement of existing capital improvements to provide better service to existing development;
4. Upgrade, update, expansion or replacement of existing capital improvements to serve existing development in order to meet stricter safety,
efficiency, environmental or regulatory standards; and
5. Administrative and operating costs incurred by the City. (Ord. 43-16, 12-13-2016, eff. 1-1-2017)
9-2-20: APPEALS:
A. Appeal Of Administrative Decisions By Fee Payer: The City shall contract with qualified independent individuals to sit as hearing officers in order to
consider administrative appeals filed under this chapter. Except for the determination of an individual assessment, a fee payer may appeal a final
decision of the Impact Fee Administrator by filing a written notice of administrative appeal with the City Clerk within thirty (30) days of: 1) a written
decision by the Impact Fee Administrator; or 2) the acceptance of payment of the impact fee under protest. The appeal shall contain a written
explanation of the appeal and documentation to be considered by the Hearing Officer. A fee payer may pay an impact fee under protest in order to
obtain a building permit and shall not be precluded from exercising the right of appeal as provided herein.
1. Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, a decision of the Impact Fee Administrator may be appealed by the developer or fee payer to the
Hearing Officer for the following reasons:
a. The applicability of an impact fee to the new development;
b. The method of calculating the amount of the impact fee;
c. The availability or the amount of the offset or credit;
d. The application of the offset or credit against the impact fee due; or
e. The amount of a refund due.
2. The burden of proof shall be on the fee payer to demonstrate that the Impact Fee Administrator erred in his/her decision. Following a hearing on the
appeal, the Hearing Officer shall issue a written decision within thirty (30) days of the conclusion of the hearing. The written decision of the Hearing
Officer shall constitute the final decision.
3. The City Clerk shall schedule the appeal before the Hearing Officer as soon as practical. The Hearing Officer may affirm, reject, or revise the
decision of the Impact Fee Administrator and shall issue a written decision providing findings of fact and conclusions of law supporting the decision.
The written decision of the Hearing Officer shall be mailed to the City and the fee payer, certified mail, return receipt requested.
B. Protest Of Expenditure By Interested Person: Any person with standing may protest the expenditure of impact fees within two (2) years of the
expenditure by filing a protest with the City Clerk. The City Clerk shall set the matter for hearing before the City Council within thirty (30) days of receipt
of the protest. The protesting party shall identify the impact fee expenditure to be protested and the basis of the protest. The City Council shall render a
decision regarding the protest within thirty (30) days of the close of the hearing on the matter.
C. Appeal Of An Individual Assessment: Appeals of the Impact Fee Administrator's determination of individual assessment shall be made to the City
Council by the filing of an appeal with the City Clerk within ten (10) days of the decision of the Impact Fee Administrator. The appeal shall contain a
written explanation of the appeal and documentation to be considered by the City Council.
1. The burden of proof shall be on the fee payer to demonstrate that the Impact Fee Administrator erred in their decision.
2. The City Clerk shall schedule the appeal before the City Council as soon as practical. The City Council may affirm, reject or revise the decision of the
Impact Fee Administrator. Following a hearing on the appeal, the City Council shall issue a written decision within thirty (30) days of the conclusion of
the hearing. The written decision of the City Council shall constitute the final decision.
D. Mediation: At any time during the appeal process, the fee payer and the City may voluntarily enter into mediation with respect to any disagreement
related to the impact fee for a proposed development. Mediation shall be conducted by a qualified independent party selected by mutual agreement.
The cost of such mediation will be shared equally by the fee payer or property owner and the City.
E. Judicial Review: Any party of record aggrieved by the decision of the Hearing Officer or the City Council may, within twenty eight (28) days of receipt of
the Hearing Officer's decision, seek judicial review by filing a petition in the District Court in the manner provided by Idaho Code title 67, chapter 52.
(Ord. 43-16, 12-13-2016, eff. 1-1-2017)
9-2-21: REFUNDS:
The City shall refund development impact fees upon request as set forth below:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 365/503
A. Erroneous Payment: If a fee payer has paid an impact fee erroneously, the fee payer shall be entitled to a refund of the fee paid with interest.
B. Payment Under Protest: If a fee payer has paid an impact under protest in which a subsequent review of the payment or individual assessment
concludes that the fee exceeded the proportionate share to which the City was entitled, the property owner of record shall be entitled to a refund of the
fee paid with interest. Only upon written authorization from the property owner may the refund be issued to another designated party, if the developer or
fee payer is not the property owner.
C. Nonoccurrence Of Development: If a fee payer has paid an impact fee and has obtained a building permit or any other permit for a development or
extension thereto, and the permit or extension for which the fee was paid later expires without the possibility of further extension, and the development
activity for which the fee was imposed did not occur and no impact was resulted, then the property owner of record shall be entitled to a refund of the
fee paid, with interest. Only upon written authorization from the property owner may the refund be issued to another designated party, if the developer
or fee payer is not the property owner.
D. Failure Of City To Appropriate And Expend: If the City, after collecting the fee when service is not available, fails to appropriate and expend the
collected development impact fee pursuant to Idaho Code section 67-8210(4) or this chapter, the following shall apply:
1. The monies eligible for refund shall be deposited into a refund trust account. The funds shall not be spent.
2. To expedite the refund process and reduce the associated administrative costs, monies eligible for refund shall be aggregated into ninety (90) day
blocks. For the purpose of eligibility for refund, money shall be deemed spent in the order in which it was deposited into the appropriate trust fund
FIFO.
3. The City will send by certified mail to the current owner of each affected property as disclosed by the most current Property Tax roll maintained by
the Ada County Assessor's Office.
E. Interest: Interest shall be paid at one-half (1/2) the legal rate as set forth in Idaho Code section 28-22-104 from the date on which the fee was paid. (Ord.
43-16, 12-13-2016, eff. 1-1-2017)
9-2-22: UPDATE OF CAPITAL PLANS AND REVISION OF FEES:
Prior to assessing new or amended impact fees, the City shall prepare and adopt an updated CIP for each category of capital improvements.
A. Surcharge: There shall be a nonrefundable surcharge of one percent (1%) of the assessed impact fee for the cost of preparing or updating the CIP(s)
which is attributable to determining the associated impact fee. This surcharge is not an impact fee and cannot be reduced by any credits.
B. Preparation By Qualified Professions: The CIP shall be prepared by qualified professions in fields relating to finance, engineering, planning, and
transportation in consultation with the Development Impact Fee Advisory Committee.
C. Amending Schedules: Schedules may be amended without revised land use assumptions and CIP(s) at any time prior to the required update provided
in subsection B of this section; provided, that they are amended according to changes in construction costs from an approved index.
D. CIP For Each Category: The City shall prepare a CIP for each category of necessary public facility for which an impact fee will be charged that
evaluates the need for capital facilities for new development in accordance with Idaho Code section 67-8208.
E. Number Adopted: More than one CIP and associated impact fee study may be adopted, so long as no more than one of each is effective for each
category of necessary public facility at any one time. Multiple categories of necessary public facilities may be included in a single CIP and its
associated impact fee study.
F. Reservation Of Capacity: The City may reserve capacity in a CIP to serve one or more planned future developments, including capacity reserved
through a development agreement. All reservations of existing capacity must be disclosed in the CIP at the time it is adopted.
G. Summary: The impact fee study shall summarize the contents of the CIP(s), and provide the following information:
1. Maps of the proposed service area(s) within which an impact fee is to be assessed.
2. The number of existing and projected equivalent dwelling units for each service area, based upon the land use assumptions.
3. Information regarding all necessary public facilities for which impact fees are to be assessed.
4. Schedules of the proposed impact fees for each necessary public facility, for each service area, on a per equivalent dwelling unit basis, including
details of other revenue to be applied. (Ord. 43-16, 12-13-2016, eff. 1-1-2017)
9-2-23: CERTIFICATION:
A. Application: A developer may request a written certification of the impact fee schedule or individual assessment which shall establish the impact fee for
a particular development, so long as there is no material change to the particular development as identified in the individual assessment application or
the impact fee schedule the certification shall be binding. A certification may be applied for in the following manner:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 366/503
1. Written application may be made to the Impact Fee Administrator not later than sixty (60) days from preliminary plat approval by the City Council.
Late applications for certification of the impact fee schedule shall not be considered unless the fee payer makes a showing that the facts supporting
such application were not known or discoverable within such sixty (60) day period and that undue hardship would result if the application is not
considered.
B. Written Certification: The Impact Fee Administrator shall provide the applicant with a written certification of the impact fee schedule or individual
assessment for the particular project within thirty (30) days of the date of application for certification. The certification shall establish the impact fee for
the particular project for a period of one year from the date of certification, so long as there is no material change to the particular project as identified in
the individual assessment application or the impact fee schedule. The certification shall include an explanation of the factors considered under section
9-2-5 of this chapter, and shall specify the system improvement(s) for which the impact fee is intended to be used. (Ord. 43-16, 12-13-2016, eff. 1-1-
2017)
9-2-24: VESTED RIGHTS:
Nothing in this chapter shall limit or modify the rights of any person to complete any development for which a lawful building permit was issued prior to the
effective date of this chapter and on which there has been good faith reliance and a substantial change of position. (Ord. 43-16, 12-13-2016, eff. 1-1-2017)
9-2-25: OTHER POWERS AND RIGHTS NOT AFFECTED:
A. Construction By Developer: The City shall not require a developer to construct reasonable project improvements in conjunction with a development
project.
B. Private Agreements: Nothing in this chapter shall prevent or prohibit private agreements between property owners or developers and the City in regard
to the construction or installation of system improvements or providing for credits or reimbursements for system improvement costs incurred by a
developer, including inter-project transfers of credits or providing for reimbursement for project improvements which are used or shared by more than
one development project.
C. Extraordinary Impact: The City shall not be obligated to approve development which results in extraordinary impact.
D. Reduction In Level Of Service: The City shall not be obligated to approve any development request which may reasonably be expected to reduce levels
of service below minimum acceptable levels as established herein.
E. Orderly Development: This chapter does not create any additional right to develop real property or diminish the power of the City in regulating the
orderly development of real property within the service area.
F. Eminent Domain: Nothing in this chapter shall limit the use by the City of the power of eminent domain or supersede or conflict with requirements or
procedures authorized in the Idaho Code for local improvement districts or general obligation bond issues. (Ord. 43-16, 12-13-2016, eff. 1-1-2017)
Chapter 3
SPECIAL DESIGN STANDARDS FOR TYPE V CONSTRUCTION
9-3-1: PURPOSE:
A. The purpose of this chapter is to provide certain minimum standards and requirements to safeguard life or limb, health, property and public welfare by
regulating and controlling the design, construction, use, occupancy and location of mixed use, high density housing located in the downtown core within
the City Fire Department's response zone.
B. The provisions of this chapter may be used to design and construct five-story, type VA, mixed use, high density housing over a type IA podium style
building. Buildings designed and constructed under this chapter shall comply with all provisions of this chapter and other codes and ordinances as
adopted by the City. The provisions of this chapter provide an equivalent level of protection to the standards set forth in the International Building Code
as adopted by the City. The building official and Fire Code official are hereby authorized and directed to enforce the provisions of this chapter, including
rendering interpretations to clarify intent and purpose. Any appeals of decisions or determinations made by the code officials may be made to the
Board of Appeals created under the International Building Code amendments in chapter 1 of this title. (Ord. 21-16, 7-19-2016)
9-3-2: APPLICABLE AREA:
The requirements of this chapter shall be applicable to new structures, constructed after the effective date of adoption, located in the downtown core within
the City Fire Department's response zone as illustrated in attachment 4-A of this section. Design and construction of the new structures covered by this
chapter shall also comply with the International Building Code as adopted in chapter 1 of this title and other applicable codes adopted by the City. Where a
provision in this chapter is in conflict with chapter 1 of this title, title 5, chapter 12 of this Code, or other adopted codes, the provisions of this chapter shall
apply.
ATTACHMENT 4-A
CITY FIRE DEPARTMENT'S RESPONSE ZONE
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 367/503
(Ord. 21-16, 7-19-2016)
9-3-3: CONSTRUCTION AND OCCUPANCY:
A. Single Construction: Single construction buildings complying with this chapter may be a maximum of five (5) stories of type VA construction when all of
the following conditions are met:
1. The below grade building is constructed of type IA construction and is separated from the type VA construction above grade upper building with a
horizontal assembly having a minimum three (3) hour fire resistance rating. Openings in the horizontal assembly are to be protected in accordance
with the provisions in subsection B1 of this section; and
2. The below grade building contains only Group S-2 occupancy, enclosed parking garage, used exclusively for the parking and storage of private
motor vehicles, and the above grade upper building contains only Group R-2 occupancy; and
Exceptions:
a. An exterior assembly area that serves the residential use with a total occupant load less than three hundred (300) when located on the floor at
grade directly above the three (3) hour horizontal assembly of the below grade building.
b. The above grade upper building may include B occupancy rooms or B occupancy assembly use areas that are accessory to the residential use of
not more than ten percent (10%) of each floor area, provided the total occupant load of the sum of all B occupancy areas on each floor is less than
fifty (50). An occupied roof is considered a floor level but not a story.
c. Entry lobbies, mechanical rooms, waste and recycling collection, bicycle storage and similar uses incidental to the operation of the building shall
be permitted in the below grade building and in the above grade upper building.
3. The maximum above grade upper building shall not be more than five (5) stories nor have an overall building height exceeding seventy feet (70')
above the lowest fire apparatus access road as defined in the International Fire Code and this chapter; and
4. The structure is located in the City Fire Department's response zone as illustrated in section 9-3-2 of this chapter.
B. Mixed Construction: A structure may be divided into two (2) separate and distinct buildings, upper and lower, for the purpose of determining area
limitations, continuity of firewalls, limitation of number of stories and type of construction, when all of the following conditions are met:
1. The lower building is constructed of type IA construction and is separated from the upper building with a horizontal assembly having a minimum
three (3) hour fire resistance rating. Openings in the horizontal assembly having a minimum three (3) hour fire resistance rating shall be protected by
shaft, stairway, ramp or escalator enclosures extending above and below such openings. The walls of such enclosures shall have not less than two
(2) hour fire resistance rating and openings therein shall be protected by opening protection having a minimum one and one-half (11/2) hour fire
protection rating; and
Exception: Where the walls of such enclosures extending below the horizontal assembly having a minimum three (3) hour fire resistance rating to the
foundation are provided with a fire resistance rating of not less than three (3) hours with openings therein protected as required for walls forming a
three (3) hour fire barrier, the enclosure walls extending above such floor used as the horizontal assembly having a minimum three (3) hour fire
resistance rating shall be permitted to have a one hour fire resistance rating, provided:
a. The upper building is not required to be of type IA construction; and
b. The enclosure walls do not enclose an exit stairway, elevator, ramp or an escalator required to have enclosure walls with not less than two (2) hour
fire resistance rating; and
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 368/503
c. The one hour enclosure connects less than four (4) stories and has opening protectives above the horizontal assembly with a fire protection rating
of not less than one hour.
2. The upper building contains only Group R-2 occupancy; and
Exceptions:
a. An exterior assembly area that serves the residential use with a total occupant load less than three hundred (300) when located on the floor
directly above the three (3) hour horizontal assembly of the lower building.
b. The upper building may include B occupancy rooms or B occupancy assembly use areas that are accessory to the residential use of not more
than ten percent (10%) of each floor area, provided the total occupant load of the sum of all B occupancy areas on each floor is less than fifty (50).
An occupied roof is considered a floor level but not a story.
c. Entry lobbies, mechanical rooms, waste and recycling collection, bicycle storage and similar uses incidental to the operation of the building shall
be permitted.
3. The lower building contains only occupancies of Group A, B, M, R or S-2 enclosed or open parking garage, used exclusively for the parking and
storage of private motor vehicles; and
Exception: Entry lobbies, mechanical rooms, waste and recycling collection, bicycle storage and similar uses incidental to the operation of the
building shall be permitted.
4. The maximum upper building shall not exceed five (5) stories in height. The finish floor level of the highest occupied level in the upper building shall
not exceed seventy five feet (75') above the lowest fire apparatus access road as defined in the IFC and this chapter; and
5. The structure is located in the City Fire Department's response zone as illustrated in section 9-3-2 of this chapter.
C. Construction Types: Type IA and type VA construction shall be as specified in the International Building Code as adopted by the City. (Ord. 21-16, 7-19-
2016)
9-3-4: UPPER BUILDING AREA, HEIGHT, NUMBER OF STORIES AND OTHER REQUIREMENTS:
A. Applicability: The area, height, number of stories and other requirements listed below for the upper building with both single construction and mixed
construction methods constructed under this chapter shall comply with this section.
B. Conditions Specified: The upper building, containing Group R-2 occupancies with accessory uses as described in section 9-3-3 of this chapter, building
area, building height, including allowance of the number of stories to be increased up to a maximum of five (5) stories, shall comply with the following
conditions:
1. The tabular area increases for a sprinklered building in IBC chapter 5 are not permitted; however the tabular allowable area for a nonsprinklered
building of Group R-2 occupancy of type VA construction may be increased by twenty five percent (25%) per floor over the area value listed in the
allowable area table of the IBC. This area increase is calculated separately and is added in addition to any other area increases allowed for frontage
increase and single occupancy, multi-story buildings in chapter 5 of the IBC; and
2. The building shall be sprinklered in accordance with National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) Standard 13; and
3. For mixed construction, the R-2 occupancy area may be increased to seventy feet (70') in height, provided the finished floor of the highest occupied
level does not exceed seventy five feet (75') and the overall building height does not exceed ninety five feet (95') measured from the lowest fire
apparatus access road to the building. For single construction, the maximum overall building height shall not exceed seventy feet (70') in height
above the lowest fire apparatus access road; and
4. The structure shall be located in the City Fire Department's response zone as illustrated in section 9-3-2 of this chapter; and
5. The exit access travel distance specified in chapter 10 of the IBC shall be reduced by forty percent (40%) for Group R-2 occupancy; and
6. Unless otherwise required to be a higher rating by the Code, all exterior walls shall be constructed with a minimum of a one hour fire resistive wall
assembly rated for exposure to fire from both sides. The exterior wall finish materials per chapter 14 of the IBC shall be of noncombustible material
as described in chapter 7 of the IBC; and
7. Pressurized interior exit stairways shall be provided in accordance with the requirements of the IBC for every required exit stairway. All required exit
stairways shall provide roof access.
Exception: The Fire Code official is authorized to reduce the number of roof access stairways or pressurized interior exit stairways to not less than
two (2). (Ord. 21-16, 7-19-2016)
9-3-5: COMMERCIAL KITCHEN GREASE DUCTS AND EXHAUST EQUIPMENT:
Commercial kitchen grease ducts and exhaust equipment shall comply with the requirements of the International Mechanical Code. Ducts that serve type I
hoods and penetrate a floor shall be in a shaft enclosure of not less than two (2) hour fire resistance rated construction. (Ord. 21-16, 7-19-2016)
9-3-6: EARLY ASSISTANCE MEETING:
As early as practicable in the design process, the applicant shall have an early assistance meeting with Planning and Development Services, Fire
Department and other applicable City departments. (Ord. 21-16, 7-19-2016)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 369/503
9-3-7: ADDITIONAL INSPECTIONS:
In addition to the required inspections and special inspections specified in the International Building Code and International Fire Code, Planning and
Development Services shall require the following additional inspections for buildings constructed pursuant to this chapter:
A. Structural Observation: Structural observation shall be provided by the engineer of record. Reports of the structural observation shall be provided to the
City structural building inspector periodically during framing.
B. Special Inspection: Special inspection shall be provided for fire resistant penetrations and joints as specified in the IBC and to enhance attention on the
key elements of the lateral force resisting systems of the building, including, but not limited to, the following:
1. The grade of structural wood panels used in the shear walls and horizontal diaphragms; and
2. The nail size and pattern of the shear walls and horizontal diaphragms; and
3. The framing, location and length of all shear walls; and
4. The hold down installations at all shear wall locations; and
5. The diaphragm chord, drag strut and related details; and
6. The base plate bolting; and
7. The blocking to top plate nailing. (Ord. 21-16, 7-19-2016)
The special inspector shall be employed by the owner or the registered design professional acting as the owner's agent, and shall comply with the
provisions of chapter 17 of the International Building Code. (Ord. 21-16, 7-19-2016; amd. 2019 Code)
C. Continuous Inspection: The permit holder shall coordinate an inspection schedule with the City Structural Building Inspection Division to monitor daily
construction activity.
D. Fire Alarms And Fire Sprinklers: Fire alarms and fire sprinkler systems shall be inspected, tested and maintained in accordance with NFPA 25 and
NFPA 72 on at least a semiannual basis. Inspection reports shall be submitted to the Fire Code official within thirty (30) days of completion. (Ord. 21-
16, 7-19-2016)
Chapter 4
PLUMBING CODE
9-4-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to provide standards for the installation of plumbing, drainage, medical gas and vacuum systems and to provide for the
qualification and licensing of persons engaged in the business of plumbing, or laboring at the trade of plumbing. (Ord. 44-13, 11-19-2013, eff. 1-1-2014)
9-4-2: CODE ADOPTED:
All the rules, regulations and ordinances of a general and permanent character relating to and applying to the qualifications and licensing of persons
engaged in the business of plumbing, or laboring at the trade of plumbing, as said rules, regulations and ordinances are printed and contained in a book in
Code form designated and entitled Idaho State Plumbing Code, being the most current edition printed and published under the authority of the State of
Idaho, and as adopted by the State in Idaho Code title 54, chapter 26, together with rules and regulations, excepting the deletion of Idaho State Plumbing
Code chapter 13, Medical Gas Systems, as adopted by the State, be, and the same hereby are, ratified and adopted as the Plumbing Code of the City,
and as ratified and adopted shall be the rules, regulations and ordinances governing the installation or alteration of plumbing and drainage systems and
the qualification and licensing of persons engaged in the business of plumbing, or laboring at the trade of plumbing, except as the said rules, regulations
and ordinances are changed, altered and amended by this chapter. One copy of the aforesaid Idaho State Plumbing Code, duly certified by the City Clerk,
together with said rules and regulations, excepting deletion of Idaho State Plumbing Code chapter 13, Medical Gas Systems, adopted by the State
Department of Building Safety, Plumbing Division, shall be filed for use and examination by the public in the Office of the City Clerk. (Ord. 44-13, 11-19-
2013, eff. 1-1-2014)
9-4-3: APPLICATION AND SCOPE:
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all new construction, relocated buildings, and to any alterations, repairs or reconstruction of existing buildings.
(Ord. 44-13, 11-19-2013, eff. 1-1-2014)
9-4-4: IDAHO STATE PLUMBING CODE AMENDMENT, DEPARTMENT HAVING JURISDICTION, SECTION 102.1:
Section 102.1 of the Idaho State Plumbing Code is hereby repealed and reenacted to read as follows:
Section 102.1. Department Having Jurisdiction. The Department of Planning and Development Services, as supervised by the Director, and the City as
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 370/503
herein defined.
(Ord. 44-13, 11-19-2013, eff. 1-1-2014)
9-4-5: IDAHO STATE PLUMBING CODE AMENDMENT, DUTIES OF THE AUTHORITY HAVING JURISDICTION, SECTION
102.2.1:
Section 102.2.1 of the Idaho State Plumbing Code is hereby amended as follows:
Section 102.2.1. Duties Of The Authority Having Jurisdiction. The City shall maintain public office hours necessary to efficiently administer the provisions
of this Code and amendments thereto and shall perform the following duties:
A. Require submission and review of specifications, drawings, descriptions, and/or diagrams necessary to show clearly the character, kind and extent
of work covered by applications for a permit and upon approval issue the permit applied for.
B. Keep a permanent, accurate account of all fees for permits issued and other monies collected and received as provided by this Code, the names
of the persons upon whose account the same were paid, the date and amount thereof, together with the location or premises to which they relate.
C. Administer and enforce the provisions of this Code in a manner consistent with the intent hereof and inspect all plumbing and drainage work
authorized by any permit to assure compliance with provisions of this Code, or amendments thereto, and approving or condemning said work in
whole or in part as conditions required.
D. Upon request, issue a Certificate of Completion for any work approved.
E. Condemn and reject all work done or being done or materials used or being used which do not in all respects comply with the provisions of this
Code and amendments thereto.
F. Order changes in workmanship and/or materials essential to obtain compliance with all provisions of this Code.
G. Investigate any construction or work regulated by this Code and issue such notices and orders as provided in this Code.
H. Keep a complete record of all the essential transactions of the office.
I. Transfer all fees collected to the proper authority provided by law to receive such funds.
(Ord. 44-13, 11-19-2013, eff. 1-1-2014)
9-4-6: IDAHO STATE PLUMBING CODE AMENDMENT, RIGHT OF ENTRY, SECTION 102.2.2:
Section 102.2.2 of the Idaho State Plumbing Code is hereby repealed and reenacted as follows:
Section 102.2.2. Right Of Entry. City inspectors and/or agents shall carry proper credentials of their respective office, upon exhibition of which they shall
have the right of entry, during usual business hours, to inspect any and all buildings and premises in the performance of their duties.
(Ord. 44-13, 11-19-2013, eff. 1-1-2014)
9-4-7: IDAHO STATE PLUMBING CODE AMENDMENT, HEALTH AND SAFETY, SECTION 101.5.2:
Section 101.5.2 of the Idaho State Plumbing Code is hereby amended as follows:
Section 101.5.2. Health And Safety.
A. Whenever compliance with all the provisions of this Code fails to eliminate or alleviate a nuisance or any other dangerous or unsanitary condition
which may involve health or safety hazards, the owner or his agent shall install such additional plumbing and drainage facilities or shall make such
repairs or alterations as may be ordered by the City.
B. Any portion of a plumbing system found by the City to be unsanitary as defined herein is hereby declared to be a nuisance.
C. Whenever it is brought to the attention of the City that any unsanitary conditions exist or that any construction or work regulated by this Code is
dangerous, unsafe, unsanitary, a nuisance or a menace to life, health or property or otherwise in violation of this Code, the City shall conduct an
investigation. Upon determining such information to be fact, the City shall order any owner or authorized agent using or maintaining any such
condition or person responsible for the use or maintenance to discontinue the use or maintenance. The City shall order the owner or authorized
agent to repair, alter, change, remove or demolish same as he may consider necessary for the proper protection of life, health or property. Every
such order shall be in writing, addressed to the owner or authorized agent and shall specify the date or time for compliance with such order.
D. Refusal, failure or neglect to comply with any provision of this Code shall be considered a violation of this Code.
E. When any plumbing system is maintained in violation of this Code and in violation of any notice issued pursuant to the provisions of this section or
where a nuisance exists in any building or on a lot on which a building is situated, the City shall institute any appropriate action or proceeding in any
court of competent jurisdiction to prevent, restrain, correct or abate the violation of nuisance.
(Ord. 44-13, 11-19-2013, eff. 1-1-2014)
9-4-8: IDAHO STATE PLUMBING CODE AMENDMENT, PERMIT REQUIRED, SECTION 103.1.1:
Section 103.1.1 of the Idaho State Plumbing Code is hereby repealed and replaced as follows:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 371/503
Section 103.1.1. Permit Required.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to install, remove, alter, repair or replace or cause to be installed, removed, altered, repaired or replaced any
plumbing, gas or drainage piping work or any fixture or water heating or treating equipment in a building or premises without first obtaining a permit
to do such work from the City.
B. A separate permit shall be obtained for each building or structure.
(Ord. 44-13, 11-19-2013, eff. 1-1-2014)
9-4-9: IDAHO STATE PLUMBING CODE AMENDMENT, EXEMPT WORK, SECTION 103.1.2:
Section 103.1.2 of the Idaho State Plumbing Code is hereby repealed and replaced as follows:
Section 103.1.2. Work Not Requiring Permit. No permit shall be required for stopping of leaks in drains, soil, waste or vent pipe, provided, however, that
should any trap, drain pipe, soil, waste or vent pipe be or become defective and it becomes necessary to remove and replace the same with new material
in any part or parts, the same shall be considered new work and a permit shall be procured and inspection made as herein before provided. No permit
shall be required for the clearing of stoppages or the repairing of leaks in pipes, valves or fixtures, when such repairs do not involve or require the
replacement or rearrangement of valves, pipes or fixtures.
(Ord. 44-13, 11-19-2013, eff. 1-1-2014)
9-4-10: TO WHOM PERMITS MAY BE ISSUED:
No permit shall be issued to any person to do or cause to be done any work regulated by this Code, except to a person holding a valid Idaho State
plumbing contractor's Certificate of Competency, or to any person who:
A. Performs plumbing work in a single or duplex family dwelling, including accessory buildings, quarters and grounds in connection with such
dwellings; provided, that such person is the owner or contract purchaser; and provided, further, that such person shall comply with the minimum
standards, rules and regulations applicable to plumbing practices by this chapter;
B. Installs, for private or business purposes, water pipes used for lawn sprinkling systems and water softeners; provided, however, that such
installations must be in compliance with all of the provisions of this chapter;
C. Installs water or sewer drain service lines on private or public property up to a point not less than three feet (3') from the nearest building lines;
provided, however, that such installations shall be in compliance with all of the provisions of this chapter;
D. Installs bulk systems, as defined in 2005 NFPA 99 (3.3.19); provided, however, that all such installations shall be in compliance with all of the
provisions of this chapter. An employee of a bulk system installer is not required to have a journeyman plumbing license. (Ord. 44-13, 11-19-2013,
eff. 1-1-2014)
9-4-11: APPLICATION FOR PERMIT:
Any person legally entitled to apply for and receive a permit shall make such application on forms provided for that purpose. He or she shall give a
description of the character of the work proposed to be done, and the location, ownership, occupancy and use of the premises in connection therewith.
The City may require plans, specifications or drawings and such other information as he may deem necessary. The City may require such plans to be
stamped by a licensed engineer. If the City determines that the plans, specifications, drawings, description or information furnished by the applicant are in
compliance with this chapter, a permit shall be issued upon billing of the required fee. (Ord. 44-13, 11-19-2013, eff. 1-1-2014)
9-4-12: IDAHO STATE PLUMBING CODE AMENDMENT, PLANS AND SPECIFICATIONS, SECTION 103.2.2:
Section 103.2.2 of the Idaho State Plumbing Code is hereby amended to include the following:
Section 103.2.2. Plans And Specifications. Any person legally entitled to apply for and receive a permit shall make such application on forms provided for
that purpose. A description of the character of the work proposed shall be provided, and the location, ownership, occupancy and use of the premises in
connection therewith. The City may require plans, specifications or drawings and such other information as deemed necessary. Construction documents
shall be drawn to scale and shall be of sufficient clarity to indicate the location, nature and extent of the work proposed and show in detail that the work
conforms to the provisions of this Code. The City may require such plans to be stamped by an Idaho State licensed engineer. Engineers who stamp
plumbing drawings for review by the City must have a registered stamp that complies with current provisions of Idaho Code title 54, chapter 12, Engineers
and Surveyors. If the City determines that the plans, fees, specifications, drawings, description and information furnished by the applicant are in
compliance with this Code, a permit shall be issued.
Exceptions: The Code official shall have the authority to waive the submission of construction documents, calculations or other data if the nature of the
work applied for is such that the reviewing of construction documents is not necessary to determine compliance with this Code.
(Ord. 44-13, 11-19-2013, eff. 1-1-2014)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 372/503
9-4-13: IDAHO STATE PLUMBING CODE AMENDMENT, PERMIT FEES, SECTION 103.4.1:
Section 103.4.1 of the Idaho State Plumbing Code is amended to read as follows:
Section 103.4.1. Permit Fees. Fees shall be assessed in accordance with the provisions of this section and as set forth in the fee tables depicted within
subsections B, C and D of this section.
A. Cost Of Permit. Every applicant for a permit to do work regulated by this Code shall state in writing on the application form provided for that
purpose the character of work proposed to be done and the amount and kind in connection therewith, together with such further information as may
be required. Such applicant shall pay a fee for each permit issued at the time of issuance in accordance with the following schedule and at the rate
provided for each classification shown herein.
Any person who shall commence any work for which a permit is required by this Code without first having obtained a permit therefor shall, if
subsequently permitted to obtain a permit, pay a special investigation fee equivalent to and in addition to the permit fee fixed by this section for such
work; provided, however, that this provision shall not apply to emergency work when it shall be proved to the satisfaction of the City that such work
was urgently necessary and that it was not practical to obtain a permit before the commencement of the work. In all such cases, a permit must be
obtained as soon as it is practical to do so, and if there is an unreasonable delay in obtaining such permit, a special investigation fee as herein
provided shall be charged.
For the purpose of this section, a sanitary plumbing outlet on or to which a plumbing fixture or appliance may be set or attached shall be construed to
be a fixture. Fees for reconnection and retest of existing plumbing systems in relocated buildings shall be based on the number of plumbing fixtures,
gas systems, water heaters, etc., involved.
(Ord. 9-15, 3-10-2015, eff. 5-1-2015)
B. Schedule Of Fees; Residential. Fees, in such amounts as established by the City Council, are established and required for all plumbing permits
for residential properties, including the inspection of water service piping to and waste discharge piping from such residential buildings.
C. Schedule Of Fees; Commercial Plumbing Permit Fees. Fees, in such amounts as established by the City Council, are required and established for
all plumbing permits for commercial or industrial properties, including an inspection fee for water service piping to and sewer and storm sewer
discharge piping from such commercial or industrial buildings.
D. Other Administrative Fees. Other administrative fees, in such amounts as established by the City Council, are required for both commercial and
residential projects where applicable.
(Ord. 9-15, 3-10-2015, eff. 5-1-2015; amd. 2019 Code)
9-4-14: IDAHO STATE PLUMBING CODE AMENDMENT, FEE REFUNDS, SECTION 103.4.5:
Section 103.4.5 of the Idaho State Plumbing Code is amended as follows:
Section 103.4.5. Permit Fees. The Code official may authorize the refunding of fees as follows:
1. The full amount of any fee paid hereunder which the City incorrectly required and collected. (Ord. 9-15, 3-10-2015, eff. 5-1-2015)
2. A minimum fee, in such amount as established by the City Council, shall be charged to the permit applicant requesting the refund of permit fees when
work has not commenced on a permit issued in accordance with this Code.
3. A minimum administrative fee, in such amount as established by the City Council, shall be charged to the permit applicant requesting the refund of plan
review fees when review work as not commenced on a permit application accepted in accordance with this Code. (Ord. 9-15, 3-10-2015, eff. 5-1-2015;
amd. 2019 Code)
4. After work has commended on a plan review or permit, a refund will not be given.
5. The Code official shall not authorize the refunding of any fee paid, except upon written application filed by the original permittee not later than one
hundred eighty (180) days after the date of permit payment.
(Ord. 9-15, 3-10-2015, eff. 5-1-2015)
9-4-15: STATE LICENSING REQUIREMENTS:
A. Plumbing Contractor: It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct, carry on or engage in the business of plumbing, or act in the capacity of a plumbing
contractor, without first having obtained a valid State plumbing contractor's Certificate of Competency as required by Idaho Code title 54, chapter 26.
B. Journeyman Plumber: It shall be unlawful for any person to labor at the trade of plumbing in the capacity of a journeyman plumber without first having
obtained a valid State journeyman plumber's Certificate of Competency as required by Idaho Code title 54, chapter 26.
C. Apprentice Plumber: It shall be unlawful for any person to labor at the trade of plumbing in the capacity of an apprentice plumber without first having
obtained a valid State apprentice's Certificate of Competency as required by Idaho Code title 54, chapter 26. (Ord. 44-13, 11-19-2013, eff. 1-1-2014)
9-4-16: IDAHO STATE PLUMBING CODE AMENDMENT, AUTHORITY HAVING JURISDICTION, SECTION 203:
Section 203 of the Idaho State Plumbing Code is hereby amended to add the following definitions:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 373/503
A. Authority Having Jurisdiction; Boise City: The Director of the Department of Planning and Development Services or his or her authorized
representative.
B. Assistants: The chief plumbing inspector and/or all assistant plumbing inspectors shall hold a valid Certificate of Competency issued by the State
of Idaho and shall be appointed in accordance with the pertinent provisions of the Boise City Code.
(Ord. 44-13, 11-19-2013, eff. 1-1-2014)
9-4-17: IDAHO STATE PLUMBING CODE AMENDMENT, NUISANCE, SECTION 216:
Section 216 of the Idaho State Plumbing Code is hereby repealed and reenacted to read as follows:
Section 216. Nuisance. Nuisance includes, but is not limited to:
A. Any public nuisance known at common law or in equity jurisprudence.
B. Whenever any work regulated by this Code is dangerous or detrimental to life, health or property.
C. An inadequate or unsafe water supply or sewage disposal system.
D. Cesspools and privies placed or which now exist are hereby declared to be public nuisances and must be removed within thirty (30) days
whenever there is a public main, lateral or trunk sewer line constructed adjacent to the property on which said cesspool or privy is located and said
main, lateral or line is certified and accepted by the City engineer as being completed and ready for use.
(Ord. 44-13, 11-19-2013, eff. 1-1-2014)
9-4-18: PROTECTION FROM FREEZING:
To allow for protection from freezing, all water service lines shall be a minimum of thirty six inches (36") below finish grade, building sewer shall be a
minimum of twenty four inches (24") below finish grade. (Ord. 44-13, 11-19-2013, eff. 1-1-2014)
9-4-19: PLUMBING, MECHANICAL AND FUEL GAS BOARD:
There is hereby created a Plumbing, Mechanical and Fuel Gas Board, hereinafter referred to as "the board", to be composed of seven (7) members
appointed by the Mayor by and with the advice and consent of the Council. City residency of at least four (4) of the members is required. Members not
residing in the City must reside in Ada County and transact business in the City. The terms of office shall be four (4) years and if a vacancy occurs, the
Mayor with the consent of the Council, shall appoint a member to fill such unexpired term. The board shall organize and select one of its members as
Chairperson, and the members of the board shall serve and act without compensation, except that their actual and necessary expenses shall be allowed
by the Council. The Secretary, who is hereby designated to be the Director of Planning and Development Services, or his or her designated
representative, shall keep a record of all meetings, appeals and proceedings of the board and shall perform all services that may be required.
A. Board Duties: It shall be the responsibility and duty of the board to:
1. Submit to the Mayor and Council proposed regulations and amendments thereto, governing the design, construction, installation, improvement,
expansion and alteration of plumbing, mechanical and fuel gas systems.
2. Submit to the Mayor and Council proposed standards and procedures for the quality and weight of materials, fixtures, appliances and devices used
in, or entering into, and the method of, construction of plumbing, mechanical and fuel gas systems.
3. Submit to the Mayor and Council proposed regulations and amendments thereto, prescribing the standards and procedures for inspecting plumbing,
mechanical and fuel gas systems.
4. Independently review, whenever requested, the administration and enforcement of the minimum standards, regulations and procedures prescribed
by this Code.
B. Appeal Process: Any applicant for a permit, whose application has been rejected by the City, or any person who has been ordered by the City to modify,
alter, remove or install any plumbing, mechanical or fuel gas system, as defined in this chapter, may within ten (10) days thereafter, request an appeal
by filing notice in writing with the City. The City shall deliver such notice to the board, who shall fix and establish a time, date and place of hearing within
fifteen (15) days from the date of the receipt of notice and cause a copy of the notice of hearing to be mailed to the appealing parties. At the hearing,
the board may, by a majority vote, affirm, annul or modify the action of the City. If the actions of the City are modified or annulled, a permit shall be
issued accordingly.
C. Standard Of Review: The board may:
1. Modify or waive the requirements of this chapter in particular cases wherever any rules are shown to be impracticable and when it is shown that
equivalent or safer construction can be more readily accomplished in other ways; and
2. Determine whether or not the City erred in its interpretation or application of the Code provisions. (Ord. 44-13, 11-19-2013, eff. 1-1-2014)
D. Appeal Fee: Any person appealing the decision of the City shall attach to the written request for appeal a certified check in such amount as established
by the City Council made out in favor of the City. In the event the appeal is granted, the appeal fee shall be returned to the appellant. (Ord. 44-13, 11-
19-2013, eff. 1-1-2014; amd. 2019 Code)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 374/503
E. Appeal To City Council: Any order, decision or ruling of the board may be appealed to the City Council within ten (10) days of such order, decision or
ruling. (Ord. 44-13, 11-19-2013, eff. 1-1-2014)
9-4-20: APPEAL PROCEDURE:
The Plumbing, Mechanical and Fuel Gas Board may receive all evidence on appeal, in accordance with the following procedure:
A. The chief inspector or designee shall present background information on the project in question, including relevant Code sections and their
interpretation. The board may ask questions during or after each presentation.
B. Applicant shall be allowed to present any information or applicable Code sections to support a reversal of the chief inspector's decision. The applicant
shall have up to twenty (20) minutes to present such evidence.
C. The Chairperson shall open the hearing to receive public testimony. Each person wishing to provide public testimony shall be given up to five (5)
minutes to do so.
D. Following the close of public testimony, the chief inspector or designee shall be allowed up to ten (10) minutes for rebuttal.
E. The applicant then shall have up to ten (10) minutes for rebuttal and any final comments.
F. The Chairperson of the board may allocate equivalent additional time to the applicant and the chief inspector or his or her designee if the clarity of the
issue at hand can be enhanced by receiving additional testimony.
G. Thereafter, the board may deliberate and render a final decision by a roll call vote, may request more information before a final decision is made, or
may take the matter under advisement and reconvene at a reasonable time not to exceed fifteen (15) days to make their final decision. The final
decision shall be in writing and a copy provided to the applicant and any parties of record. The decision by the board may be appealed to the City
Council within ten (10) calendar days following the date of issuance of a written decision. (Ord. 44-13, 11-19-2013, eff. 1-1-2014)
9-4-21: IDAHO STATE PLUMBING CODE AMENDMENT, VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES, SECTION 102.3:
Section 102.3 of the Idaho State Plumbing Code is repealed and replaced with the following:
Section 102.3. Violations And Penalties. Boise City has the authority to file a complaint for criminal or civil penalties or both for any violation of this chapter.
If both criminal and civil penalties are filed regarding a same or similar offense on the same site or by the same person, such action shall not be
considered to be double jeopardy.
These penalties shall apply to any person who performs or authorizes another to perform any plumbing work in violation of this Code. The filing of criminal
or civil charges in no way relieves anyone who performs or authorizes another to perform plumbing work from complying with this Code.
A. Criminal Penalties. Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this Code shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon
conviction thereof, shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), or by imprisonment for a period not to exceed one
hundred eighty (180) days, or by both fine and imprisonment. Each separate day or any portion thereof during which any violation of this Code
occurs or continues shall be deemed to constitute a separate offense, and upon conviction thereof shall be punishable as herein provided.
B. Civil Penalties. Any person or its agent violating any provision of this Code may have civil penalties assessed against them. Notice of said
penalties shall be served upon the violator personally by a City Code Enforcement Officer. If personal service is not made, service may be
effectuated by certified mail to the last known business address or residential address of the violator. A new violation may be filed for each day the
violation continues. The violation will have a date by which the civil penalty shall be paid and if it is not paid by that date, the City may pursue
collections through court and ask the court to reimburse for all costs and fees associated with collecting the penalty. Civil penalties may be issued
pursuant to the following guidelines:
1. If the violation does not create a serious life safety hazard, the City shall warn the person violating the Code.
2. If the violation continues or a subsequent violation is discovered, the City may issue a civil penalty.
3. If the violation creates a serious life safety hazard, then a civil penalty may be imposed even though a prior warning was not given.
Civil penalties shall be issued in the following cases:
1. Plumbing Contractor. Any person who acts or purports to act as a plumbing contractor, as defined by Idaho Code title 54, chapter 26 and/or
IDAPA rules, without a valid Idaho State plumbing contractor license shall be subject to a civil penalty of not more than five hundred dollars
($500.00) for the first offense and a civil penalty of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each offense thereafter.
2. Plumbing Journeyman. Any person who acts or purports to act as a plumbing journeyman, as defined by Idaho Code title 54, chapter 26 and/or
IDAPA rules, without a valid Idaho State plumbing journeyman license shall be subject to a civil penalty of not more than two hundred dollars
($200.00) for the first offense and a civil penalty of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each offense thereafter.
3. Plumbing Apprentice. Any person who acts or purports to act as a plumbing apprentice, as defined by Idaho Code title 54, chapter 26 and
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 375/503
IDAPA rules, without a valid Idaho State plumbing apprentice license shall be subject to a civil penalty of not more than two hundred dollars
($200.00) for the first offense and a civil penalty of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each offense thereafter.
4. Supervision. Any contractor failing to provide supervision of plumbing apprentices in accordance with Idaho Code title 54, chapter 26 and/or
IDAPA rules shall be subject to a civil penalty of not more than two hundred dollars ($200.00) for the first offense and a civil penalty of not more
than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each offense thereafter.
5. Performance Outside The Scope Of License. Any specialty plumbing contractor, as defined by Idaho Code title 54, chapter 26 and/or IDAPA
rules, who performs work outside of the scope of the specialty license shall be subject to a civil penalty of not more than two hundred dollars
($200.00) for the first offense and one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each offense thereafter.
6. Corrections. Any person who fails to make corrections in the time allotted in the notice of violations on any plumbing installation and where no
extension has been requested or granted shall be subject to a civil penalty of not more than two hundred dollars ($200.00) for the first offense and
not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each offense thereafter.
7. Fees And Permits. Any person failing to acquire a plumbing permit and/or to pay applicable fees shall be subject to a civil penalty of not more
than two hundred dollars ($200.00) for the first offense and a civil penalty of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each offense
thereafter.
(Ord. 44-13, 11-19-2013, eff. 1-1-2014)
9-4-22: CIVIL PENALTIES APPEAL PROCEDURE:
A. Upon receipt of written notice of a civil penalty, the violator shall, within ten (10) days, pay the penalty or file a written request for a hearing with the
Plumbing, Mechanical and Fuel Gas Board, hereafter referred to as "the board". Such written notice shall be accompanied by a check in such amount
as established by the City Council made payable to the City. If the civil penalty imposed against the applicant is overturned by the board, the review fee
shall be returned. Notice of the public hearing for the review hearing shall be given by the department mailing the notice to the last known address
provided by the applicant. Upon issuance of the decision, applicant shall have fourteen (14) calendar days within which to pay the civil penalty.
B. When determining if a civil penalty is warranted, the board shall consider the following:
1. If the violation created a serious life safety hazard, did the City warn the person or his agent of the violating the Code prior to issuing a civil penalty.
2. Did the violation continue or was a subsequent violation discovered, that warranted the City to issue a civil penalty.
3. Did the violation create a serious life safety hazard, so that the City was warranted in issuing a civil penalty even though a prior warning was not
given.
4. Did the person or his agent regularly take out permits, and thus should have had knowledge of what the Code required.
5. Did the person or his agent received adequate warning notice of the Code violation or a similar Code violation.
6. Does the person or his agent regularly violate the Code. (Ord. 44-13, 11-19-2013, eff. 1-1-2014)
9-4-23: APPEAL OF BOARD DECISIONS:
The decision by the Plumbing, Mechanical and Fuel Gas Board may be appealed to the City Council within ten (10) calendar days following the date of
issuance of a written decision. If the City Council renders a final decision imposing the civil penalty against the appellant, the appellant shall have fourteen
(14) calendar days from such decision within which to pay the civil penalty. (Ord. 44-13, 11-19-2013, eff. 1-1-2014)
Chapter 5
ELECTRICAL CODE
9-5-1: TITLE:
All ordinances of a general and permanent character about and showing rules for the installation and maintenance of electrical wiring, equipment,
apparatus or fixtures and other similar work, as hereinafter set out, shall be known and appointed as the Boise City Electrical Code, is cited as such, and
will be referred to herein as "this Code". (1952 Code § 4-05-01)
9-5-2: PURPOSE:
This Code shall provide:
A. The practical safeguarding of persons and buildings and their contents from hazards arising from the use of electrical energy for light, heat, power,
communications, signaling, signs, electrical equipment installations, elevators, dumbwaiters, moving walks and other purposes.
B. The administration and enforcement of this Code through permits and inspections; for interpretation of the rules. (1952 Code § 4-05-02)
9-5-3: SCOPE:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 376/503
This Code shall cover all electrical installations not under the direct control and regulation of the Idaho Public Utilities Commission or an agency of the
Federal government.
A. Covered: The regulations of this Code shall apply to all electrical wiring, equipment, apparatus and fixtures installed, used, maintained, rented, leased
or offered for sale or distribution within or on public and private buildings and other premises, including yards, carnival and parking lots and industrial
substations; also conductors that connect the installations to a supply of electrical energy; also mobile homes, motor homes, recreational vehicles and
mobile home and recreational vehicle parks; also investigation of fires caused by electrical installations.
B. Not Covered: This Code does not cover the following:
1. Installations in ships, watercraft, other than floating buildings, railway rolling stock, aircraft or automotive vehicles other than mobile homes and
recreational vehicles;
2. Installations underground in mines and self-propelled mobile surface mining machinery and its attendant electrical trailing cable;
3. Installations of railways for generation, transformation, transmission or distribution of power used exclusively for operation of rolling stock or
installations used exclusively for signaling and communications purposes;
4. Installations of communications equipment under the exclusive control of communications utilities located outdoors or in building spaces used
exclusively for such installations; and
5. Installations under the exclusive control of an electric utility where such installations:
a. Consist of service drops or service laterals, and associated metering; or
b. Are located in legally established easements, rights-of-way, or by other agreements either designated by or recognized by public service
commissions, utility commissions or other regulatory agencies having jurisdiction for such installations; or
c. Are on property owned or leased by the electric utility for the purpose of communications, metering, generation, control, transformation,
transmission or distribution of electric energy. (1952 Code § 4-05-03)
9-5-4: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and phrases used in this chapter shall have the following meanings unless a different meaning clearly appears from the context:
AUTHORITY HAVING JURISDICTION: Planning and Development Services Department, its Director and designees.
CHIEF ELECTRICAL INSPECTOR: An electrical inspector employed by the City responsible for administering the requirements of this Code.
ELECTRICAL INSPECTOR: An individual meeting the requirements of this chapter and authorized to perform electrical inspections.
PERSON: A person, firm, association or corporation. (1952 Code § 4-05-04)
9-5-5: ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT:
A. The administration, interpretation and enforcement of this Code shall be under the jurisdiction and control of the Planning and Development Services
Department. The Director hereby appoints and designates the chief electrical inspector to administer the interpretations and/or applications of this
Code as necessary.
B. The Director shall be responsible for a complete record of all electrical work done, permits issued, examinations given and all other official work to be
required by this Code. (1952 Code § 4-05-05)
9-5-6: ELECTRICAL CODE ADOPTED:
A. Except as otherwise herein required, the 2008 National Electrical Code is adopted as the minimum standard for all electrical wiring within the City.
B. From and after the effective date hereof, all installations in the City of wires and equipment to convey electric current and installations of apparatus to be
operated by such current, except as hereinafter provided, shall be made in accordance with the National Electrical Code (NEC), as approved by the
American National Standards Institute and as amended, revised, compiled and published from time to time and as such revisions are approved by the
State Electrical Board and the City Electrical Board of Appeal. The National Electrical Code shall take effect as of July 1 of the following year of
adoption by said boards. All City amendments to the Electrical Code as well as all electrical policies and board minutes shall be posted by the City. The
posting shall state the effective date of the amendment or policy. (1952 Code § 4-05-06)
9-5-7: ELECTRICAL INSPECTOR:
The chief electrical inspector and/or all assistant electrical inspectors hereinafter appointed shall be skilled in electrical installations with not less than four
(4) years experience as a journeyman electrician and possess a State journeyman's license.
A. Inspectors employed by the department shall take and pass, before the end of their probationary period, the inspector's test, which is designated and
selected by the State Electrical Board.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 377/503
B. No inspector employed by the department and assigned to the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter shall be engaged or financially interested in
an electrical business, trade, practice or work, or the sale of any supplies connected therewith, nor shall he act as an agent, directly or indirectly, for
any person, firm, partnership, association or corporation so engaged, within the City limits.
C. This does not relieve the inspector from abiding by any Code, rule or policy of the City. (1952 Code § 4-05-07)
9-5-8: DUTIES OF ELECTRICAL INSPECTORS:
A. Enforcement: Electrical inspectors are hereby authorized, empowered and required to enforce the provisions of this Code.
B. Inspections: Electrical inspectors are hereby authorized and it shall be their duty to inspect the installations and alterations of electrical wiring,
equipment, apparatus and fixtures covered by this Code. (1952 Code § 4-05-08)
9-5-9: INTERPRETATIONS:
A. Final Decision With Board Of Appeal: When questions about the interpretation and/or application of this Code arise, final decision will rest with the
Board of Appeal under procedures specified in this Code. No Board member shall participate in an appeal proceeding in which he or his employer,
employee, business partner, business associate, or any person related to him may have an economic interest in any manner in the particular appeal.
B. City Council Appeal: Technical and administrative rulings of the chief electrical inspector, building official or the Electrical Board shall be appealed
directly to City Council. (1952 Code § 4-05-09)
9-5-10: BOARD OF APPEAL (ELECTRICAL):
A. Membership; Residency: The Board of Appeal shall consist of seven (7) members appointed by the Mayor and confirmed by the Council, who, by
experience and training, shall be qualified in the electrical industry, administrative authority enforcing the provisions of this Code and upon the safety of
installations and equipment regulated by this Code. City residency of at least four (4) of the members is required. Members not residing in the City must
reside in Ada County and transact business in the City. To transact business, the Board member must own or work at a business in the City.
B. Appointment: The members of the Board shall be appointed to serve a four (4) year term. No member of the Board shall sit in on a hearing in which he
has a conflict of interest. Any member of the Board may be removed by the Mayor for malfeasance in office, incapacity or neglect of duty.
C. Vacancies: Vacancies occurring on the Board shall be filled by the Mayor and confirmed by the Council for the unexpired term for which the vacancy
occurs.
D. Organization:
1. At the first meeting of the Board, after the adoption of this Code, and every term, the Board shall elect a Chairperson from their members, who shall
preside at all meetings. At meetings where a Chairperson is elected, a Vice Chairperson shall also be elected by a majority vote of members present.
The Vice Chairperson shall assume all the duties of the Chairperson in the absence of the Chairperson. The term of office for the Vice Chairperson
shall be the same as that of the Chairperson. At the end of the Chairperson's term, a vote shall be taken to determine if the Vice Chairperson shall
succeed the Chairperson.
2. They shall adopt such rules needed for the proper and efficient discharge of their official duties. The Director of the Planning and Development
Services shall provide a Secretary for the Board. The Board shall meet: a) to hear appeals; b) at the discretion of the Chairperson; and/or c) for the
adoption of a new edition of the National Electrical Code.
E. Minutes: All meetings shall be taped. Further, the Secretary shall cause minutes to be taken. Minutes shall be approved by the Board. Minutes and
tapes shall be posted and maintained for at least one year. (Ord. 16-13, 6-4-2013)
9-5-11: DUTIES OF BOARD OF APPEAL:
A. Meetings: The Board shall meet at the call of the Chairperson or notice from the chief electrical inspector of any charge, complaint or appeal. The
quorum of the Board may, by majority vote, affirm or annul, whichever may, in the exercise of its discretion, seem appropriate, the charges in the
complaint or the action of the electrical inspector.
B. Advisory Technical Opinions: The City Electrical Appeals Board shall also render advisory technical opinions regarding potential Code amendments
and/or changes. (1952 Code § 4-05-11)
9-5-12: APPEAL PROCEDURE:
Any charge, complaint or appeal shall be brought before the Board of Appeal as follows: (1952 Code § 4-05-12)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 378/503
A. Orders: Any person who has been ordered by an electrical inspector to repair, change or correct any electrical wiring, equipment, apparatus or fixture
may, within fifteen (15) days thereafter, appeal therefrom by giving to the chief electrical inspector a notice in writing of such appeal and shall attach to
the written appeal a check in such amount as established by the City Council, made payable to the City. Such notice shall immediately be sent to the
Chairperson of the Board who shall set the time and place for hearing and instruct the Secretary of the Board to notify the appellant of the time and
place set for the hearing. Notice to the appellant shall be contacted at least ten (10) days prior to the hearing date. Appearance by appellant at the
hearing shall be deemed a waiver of notice. The chief electrical inspector shall set up a hearing as soon as possible after receiving a charge, complaint
or appeal, but in no instance shall an appeal be scheduled longer than thirty (30) days after receipt.
B. Administrative Decisions: Decisions of the administrative authority enforcing this Code or interpretations of the rules, the disapproval of equipment,
materials or wiring methods, or the denial of the "special permission" contemplated in several of the rules, may, within fifteen (15) days thereafter, be
appealed, by giving to the chief electrical inspector, notice in writing of such appeal. Such written notice shall be accompanied by a check in such
amount as established by the City Council, made payable to the City. Such notice shall immediately be sent to the Chairperson of the Board, who shall
set the time and place for hearing and instruct the Secretary of the Board to notify the appellant of the time and place set for the hearing. Notice to the
appellant shall be contacted at least ten (10) days prior to the hearing date. Appearance by appellant at the hearing shall be deemed a waiver of
notice. (1952 Code § 4-05-12; amd. 2019 Code)
C. Evidence: The Electrical Board may receive all evidence on appeal, in accordance with the following procedure:
1. The chief electrical inspector or designee shall present background information on the project in question, relevant Code sections and justification for
the City's interpretation. The Board may ask questions during or after each presentation.
2. Appellant shall present his/her grounds, reasoning and applicable Code sections to support a reversal of the chief electrical inspector's decision. The
appellant shall have up to twenty (20) minutes to present such evidence.
3. The Chair shall open the hearing for public testimony. Each person wishing to provide public testimony shall be given up to five (5) minutes to do so.
4. Following the close of public testimony, the chief electrical inspector or designee shall be allowed up to ten (10) minutes for rebuttal.
5. The applicant then shall have up to ten (10) minutes for rebuttal and any final comments.
6. The Chairperson of the Board may allocate equivalent additional time to the applicant and the chief inspector or his designee if the clarity of the
issue at hand can be enhanced by receiving additional testimony.
7. The Board may request more information before a final decision is made. Also, the Board may take the matter under advisement and reconvene in a
reasonable time not to exceed fifteen (15) days to make their final decision.
8. Thereafter, the Board may deliberate and render a final decision by a roll call vote, may request more information before a final decision is made, or
may take the matter under advisement and reconvene at a reasonable time not to exceed fifteen (15) days to make their final decision. The final
decision shall be in writing and a copy provided to the applicant and any parties of record. The decision by the Board may be appealed to the City
Council ten (10) calendar days following the date of issuance of a written decision. (1952 Code § 4-05-12)
9-5-13: RIGHT OF APPEAL TO CITY COUNCIL FOR ADMINISTRATIVE ACTIONS:
If the Board of Appeal affirms and/or changes the administrative action of an electrical inspector, the licensee aggrieved or the appellant may, within ten
(10) days thereafter, appeal to the City Council. (1952 Code § 4-05-13)
9-5-14: CODE PRIORITY:
Whenever the requirements of this Code are of a higher, more stringent standard than other related codes as adopted and amended by the City, then the
standards of this Code shall take precedence. (1952 Code § 4-05-14)
9-5-15: LICENSE REQUIRED:
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in, carry on or represent himself, the business of electrical contractor or specialty contractor, or to
supervise or labor at the trade of journeyman electrician or specialty journeyman electrician within the City without being in possession of an electrical
contractor's license or journeyman electrician license or specialty contractor's license or specialty journeyman license issued by the State Electrical
Bureau. The specialty contractor's license and specialty journeyman license shall be limited to the particular trade involved as required by the State
Electrical Bureau.
B. A journeyman electrician or specialty journeyman shall not engage in or represent himself as an electrical contractor. (1952 Code § 4-05-15)
9-5-16: PROPERTY OWNER'S EXEMPTION:
A. Specified: A property owner of a one-family or two-family dwelling, including accessory buildings and grounds about such dwellings, may install, alter or
replace electrical wiring, equipment, apparatus or fixtures in or on said property or structures, provided the proper electrical permit has been issued for
the work and inspections are made as required by this Code.
B. When Contractor Required: The property owner's exemption is void, and all work must be done by a licensed electrical contractor when:
1. A property owner securing an electrical permit hires or asks for the assistance of another person, with or without pay.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 379/503
2. A licensed electrical or specialty contractor lends his or her license to a property owner for securing an electrical permit or when a licensed
journeyman electrician or specialty journeyman electrician performs work with or without pay under another person's property owner's permit.
C. Voiding Property Owner Permit: The electrical section/chief electrical inspector is hereby authorized to void a homeowner electrical permit if:
1. The person taking out the permit is not the owner of record on the deed of said property;
2. The property owner has two (2) or more reinspections; and/or
3. The property owner receives physical assistance from others. (1952 Code § 4-05-16)
9-5-17: UNLAWFUL ELECTRICAL PROCEDURES:
It shall be unlawful for any person, as principal, agent, officer, servant or employee thereof, regardless of whether they are receiving compensation for
performing the act or not, to perform any of the following:
A. Install or alter any electrical wiring, equipment, apparatus or fixture, without first securing an electrical permit.
B. Maintain, permit to be maintained or permit to exist upon premises which is owned or controlled by any of the above, any electrical wiring, equipment,
apparatus or fixture which does not conform to the requirements of this Code.
C. Hinder, impede or interfere with an electrical inspector in the discharge of his authority or duty, or to refuse, fail or neglect to follow or conform to any
provisions or requirements of this Code.
D. To energize any electrical wiring, equipment, apparatus or fixtures which have been installed, altered or repaired, until the inspection approval has been
posted. (1952 Code § 4-05-17)
9-5-18: ELECTRICAL PERMIT REQUIRED:
A. Permit Required: Before any person installs or alters any electrical wiring, equipment, apparatus or fixture, they shall file a permit application with the
electrical section.
B. Exception For Emergency Work: If immediate alteration or installation of electrical wiring, equipment, apparatus or fixtures is necessary for reasons of
public safety and/or welfare and an electrical permit cannot first be obtained without further endangering the public safety and/or welfare, such
alteration or installation may be made without first obtaining the electrical permit therefor, but the required electrical permit shall be obtained during the
next business day after such alteration or installation shall have been made. (1952 Code § 4-05-18)
9-5-19: QUALIFIED PERMIT APPLICANT:
A. Required: No electrical permit shall be issued to any person to do or cause to be done any electrical work regulated by this Code, except to a person
holding a valid contractor's license as required by this Code.
B. Exception: Electrical permits may be issued to property owners as provided by this Code. (1952 Code § 4-05-19)
9-5-20: APPLICATION FOR PERMIT:
Any person legally entitled to apply for and receive an electrical permit shall file a permit application with the Planning and Development Services
Department. (1952 Code § 4-05-20)
9-5-21: PERMIT REQUIREMENTS:
Permittee shall meet the following requirements:
A. Shall inform the department prior to beginning work by submitting a permit application.
B. Any person who commences any work on an electrical system before obtaining the necessary permit, shall be subject to a special investigation fee. The
investigation shall be completed and the investigation fee shall be paid before a permit may be issued for such work. The investigation fee shall be
required regardless of whether or not a permit is subsequently issued. The investigation fee shall be equal to the amount of the permit fee required by
this Code. The payment of such investigation fee shall not exempt any person from compliance with all provisions of this Code, nor shall payment of
this fee serve as an exemption from any penalty prescribed by law. (1952 Code § 4-05-21)
9-5-22: ISSUANCE OF ELECTRICAL PERMIT:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 380/503
A. Issuance: Upon the receipt of a properly completed electrical permit application containing all required information and upon payment of the proper
permit fee, the electrical section shall issue the electrical permit.
B. Void, Expiration: Permits could be voided or expired if the work authorized by the permit is not started within one hundred eighty (180) days from the
date of issuance of the permit or if work is suspended or abandoned for one hundred eighty (180) days after work is started, such permit shall
thereupon become expired and no electrical wiring, equipment, apparatus or fixtures shall thereafter be installed or altered in or on the premises
specified in the original permit until and unless a new application shall have been made, the fee paid and a new permit issued. The one hundred eighty
(180) days of suspension or abandonment shall be measured from the last required inspection that was requested by the permit applicant and
approved/failed by the inspector.
C. Denial Of Permit: An electrical permit may be denied to any person when corrections with the installation or alteration of electrical wiring, equipment,
apparatus or fixtures installed, altered or repaired by such person under a previously issued electrical permit for work at this location has not been
made within the requirements of this Code after a correction notice has been posted. The electrical section shall notify the person by mail at least five
(5) days before denial of a permit and shall list the permit numbers involved. Notice shall be considered given upon delivery of the mail to the last
known address. (1952 Code § 4-05-22)
9-5-23: UNLAWFUL TO CONCEAL:
It shall be unlawful for any person to cover up or in any way conceal any electrical wiring, cables, conduits or other equipment until the same has been
inspected and approved by an electrical inspector. (1952 Code § 4-05-23)
9-5-24: INSPECTION REQUIRED:
A. Notification: It shall be the duty of the permittee to notify the electrical section when the electrical work is ready for inspection or reinspection.
B. Approval Notice: When the electrical inspector finds the work to be in compliance with this Code, he shall post on the front window or where the work is
being done, his inspection approval thereof. The notice shall contain date and permit number.
C. Correction Notice: When the electrical inspector finds that the work does not comply with this Code, he shall post his correction notice on the front
window of the structure or where the work is being done; such notice shall clearly show by Code section number the violations to be corrected. It shall
be the duty of the permittee to notify the electrical section when the work is ready for reinspection.
D. No Access Notice: When the electrical inspector cannot gain access to the work that is being done, he will post a no access notice at front of structure
or job and a reinspection fee will be required.
E. Installations Without Inspection: If an electrical installation is found to have been made without an electrical inspection, the person, firm, association or
corporation responsible shall be required to expose as much of the concealed work as the electrical inspector deems necessary to verify compliance
with this Code. (1952 Code § 4-05-24)
9-5-25: ROUGH-IN INSPECTION:
A. Required: All electrical wiring, equipment, apparatus or fixtures shall be inspected for compliance with this Code. Rough-in inspections shall include all
mechanical installations, application or use of wiring methods, grounding and circuit protection, service equipment, distribution and protection,
conductor capacity, general and special use equipment.
B. Partial Inspection: When only part of the work is ready for inspection, a partial rough-in inspection may be requested to allow the work of other crafts to
proceed without delay. Only that part of the electrical work inspected under a partial rough-in inspection may be covered or concealed thereafter. It
shall be the duty of the permittee to schedule partial rough-in inspections so that the work may proceed without delay. (1952 Code § 4-05-25)
9-5-26: TRIM-OUT (FINAL) INSPECTION:
When the electrical work documented in the permit is ready to be placed in service, the completed system shall be inspected and/or tested for compliance
with this Code. Trim-out inspections shall cover the installation and/or connection of devices, cover plates, fixtures, utilization equipment (ranges, water
heater, etc.), heating and/or cooling equipment, service equipment and distribution panels. (1952 Code § 4-05-26)
9-5-27: TEMPORARY SERVICE CONNECTION:
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, association or corporation to use, cause or permit to be used, a temporary service connection for carnivals,
displays, holiday decorative lighting, firework stands, experimental or developmental work, demolition work, construction, remodeling and similar purposes,
without first following the requirements of this Code and the National Electrical Code. (1952 Code § 4-05-27)
9-5-28: ENFORCEMENT THROUGH DISCONNECTION OF POWER:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 381/503
A. Violation Unlawful: It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, association or corporation to install electrical wiring, equipment, apparatus or fixtures in
violation of any rule or provision of this Code, or to use, cause or permit to be used any electrical installation that is hazardous to life or property within
the City.
B. Disconnection: If the electrical inspector shall find any part of any electrical wiring, equipment, apparatus or fixture in, on or about any building or
premises in the City to have been installed or altered without an electrical permit or not in compliance with the rules of this Code or if any electrical
wiring, equipment, apparatus or fixture is found to be immediately hazardous to life and property, the electrical inspector shall have the right and
authority to cause such installation to be disconnected and to place a written correction notice upon the disconnected installation. The inspector shall,
at the same time, give notice of such disconnection to the owner or occupant of the building or premises and/or to the person using electric current
carried by the disconnected installation that the disconnection has been made.
C. Notice: Such notice shall be made by the most reasonably effective means and a written notice shall be posted at the primary entrance of each affected
occupant.
D. Use Prohibited After Disconnect: It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, association or corporation to use, cause or permit to be used any electric
current in or through electrical wiring, equipment, apparatus or fixtures ordered disconnected by the electrical inspector in accordance with this section.
It will be unlawful to attach other wires for the supply of the electrical current to such disconnected installation. It shall also be unlawful to remove, break
or deface any written correction placed by the inspector on a disconnected installation as ordered by the inspector in accordance with this section.
(1952 Code § 4-05-28)
9-5-29: RESPONSIBILITY:
Regardless of any approval issued by the City, the owner or authorized agent shall have ultimate responsibility to comply with all articles of this Code. The
City officials, employees or agents shall not be held liable by reason of the issuance of any permit, inspection or by reason of any final inspection approval
issued by the electrical inspector. (1952 Code § 4-05-29)
9-5-30: SCHEDULE OF FEES:
The electrical fee schedule will be kept on file at the Planning and Development Services front counter, City Clerk's Office or on the Planning and
Development Services website. All electrical fees shall be reviewed by the Electrical Board and then be set and approved only by the City Council. (1952
Code § 4-05-30)
9-5-31: SPECIAL CODE REQUIREMENTS:
In addition to the provisions specified in this section, the Director of the Planning and Development Services Department may require other safeguards
based on special conditions that may be present in a particular installation. These safeguards include, but are not limited to, the following:
A. Disconnect And Panel Locations: Main circuit disconnecting switches and/or distribution panels shall not be installed in a bathroom, shower room, toilet
room or next to a washbasin, laundry tub, janitor's tub or other location thought unsafe by the inspector.
B. Electric Fences: No electric fence wires shall hereafter be erected, constructed, maintained or allowed to remain as part of any fence within the present
or future corporate limits of the City.
C. Unfused Conductors: All unfused conductors shall be installed in a raceway (rigid metal conduit or IMC) when inside a building or structure for
underground service only. Raceway shall not be longer than four feet (4'). All meter bases shall be between five and one-half feet (51/2') and six feet
(6') measured from grade. Multi-metered base measurements shall be from the top meter base to grade.
D. Commercial Type Buildings: Commercial, educational, institutional and industrial buildings shall be wired in a raceway approved from the current edition
of the NEC or metal clad interlocking armored cables (not to include apartments of 9 or more units). (1952 Code § 4-05-31)
9-5-32: CODE VIOLATION NOT TO BE RETAINED:
When altering a pre-existing electrical wire, equipment, apparatus or fixture, or adding any new wiring, the existing electrical wiring in close proximity shall
be in accordance with the present Code. (1952 Code § 4-05-32)
9-5-33: APPROVAL OF PRODUCTS AND MATERIALS:
All materials, devices, fittings, equipment, apparatus and fixtures installed or used in the installations covered by this Code or which are supplied with
electric energy by attachment to such installations, shall be approved as hereinafter defined:
A. Accepted Testing Laboratory: Materials, devices, fittings, equipment, apparatus, fixtures and appliances tested, examined and certified (listed) by an
accepted testing laboratory and so labeled, shall be accepted by the Planning and Development Services Department as approved. The Planning and
Development Services Department shall maintain up to date listings of the products and equipment approved by such testing laboratories as well as an
updated list of accepted testing laboratories.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 382/503
B. Uncertified Products: Products which are not certified (listed) but are considered safe by the electrical inspector, may be approved provisionally and
such approval shall apply only to the stock or products inspected, or a third party testing laboratory shall give the product a field evaluation or a field
inspection. Such approval shall not be given for types of products which are regularly certified (listed) or when such certification (listing) does not
include the proposed use. The above mentioned products shall be inspected before installation.
C. Assembled Equipment Or Products: Equipment and/or products assembled from materials, devices, fittings, equipment, apparatus, etc. (which are
approved listed), may be provisionally approved by the electrical inspector, on a limited basis for testing purposes and/or submission for certification
and listing, provided such equipment or product is installed (for testing purposes) under an electrical permit issued by the Planning and Development
Services Department.
D. Special Built To Order Equipment: The Director of the Planning and Development Services Department may approve special built to order equipment;
provided, that:
1. The equipment is not to be displayed or offered for sale.
2. The equipment is inspected during the construction phase and installed only after an electrical permit is obtained pursuant to the provisions of this
Code.
3. Each unit must be inspected and approved under this provision. (1952 Code § 4-05-33)
9-5-34: STOP WORK ORDER:
A. Issuance: Upon notice from the Code official that any electrical work is being done contrary to the provisions of this Code or in a dangerous or unsafe
manner, such work shall immediately cease. Such notice shall be in writing and shall be given to the owner of the property, or to the owner's agent, or
to the person doing the work. If the parties are not present at the time, the stop work order shall be posted on the front of the building or at the job site.
The notice shall state the conditions under which work is authorized to resume.
B. Emergencies: Where an emergency exists, the Code official shall not be required to give a written notice prior to stopping the work.
C. Unlawful Continuance: Any person who shall continue any work in or about the structure after having been served with a stop work order, except such
work as that person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be subject to penalties as prescribed by law. (1952 Code § 4-
05-34)
9-5-35: CRIMINAL AND CIVIL PENALTIES:
The City has the authority to file a complaint for criminal or civil penalties, or both, for any violation of this chapter. Criminal and civil penalties are designed
to serve different purposes in this chapter. If both criminal and civil penalties are filed regarding a same or similar wrongdoing on the same site or by the
same person, such action shall not be considered to be double jeopardy. These penalties shall apply to any person who performs or authorizes another to
perform any electrical work in violation of this Code. The filing of criminal or civil charges in no way relieves anyone who performs or authorizes another to
perform electrical work from complying with this Code. (1952 Code § 4-05-35)
A. Criminal Penalty: Any person violating or authorizing another to violate any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon
conviction thereof, may be subject to penalty as provided in section 1-4-1 of this Code. A new violation may be filed for each day the violation
continues. (1952 Code § 4-05-35; amd. 2019 Code)
B. Civil Penalty:
1. Authorized: Any person or its agent violating any provision of this Code may have civil penalties assessed against them. Notice of said penalties
shall be served upon the violator or service may be effectuated by certified mail to the last known business address or residential address of the
violator. A new violation may be filed for each day the violation continues. The violation will have a date when the violation shall be paid by, if it is not
paid by that date, the City shall pursue collections through court and will ask the court to reimburse for all costs associated with collecting the penalty.
2. Guidelines: Civil penalties shall be issued pursuant to the following guidelines:
a. If the violation does not create a serious life safety hazard, the City shall send a warning to the person violating this Code.
b. If the violation continues or a subsequent violation is discovered, the City may issue civil penalties.
c. If the violation creates a serious life safety hazard, then a civil penalty may be imposed even though a prior warning was not given.
3. Scope Of Penalty: A civil penalty shall be issued in the following cases:
a. Electrical Contractor: Any person who acts or purports to act as an electrical contractor, as defined by section 9-5-15 of this chapter, without a
valid State electrical contractor's license shall be subject to a civil penalty of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for the first offense and a
civil penalty of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each offense thereafter.
b. Employees: Any person who knowingly employs a person who does not hold valid State electrical license as required by section 9-5-15 of this
chapter, to perform electrical installations, shall be subject to a civil penalty of not more than two hundred dollars ($200.00) for the first offense and
a civil penalty of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each offense thereafter.
c. Journeyman To Apprentice Ratio: Any electrical contractor employing electricians in violation of the journeyman to apprentice ratio established by
the State board shall be subject to a civil penalty of not more than two hundred dollars ($200.00) for the first offense and a civil penalty of not more
than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each offense thereafter.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 383/503
d. Supervision: Any contractor failing to provide constant and continuous on the job supervision of apprentice electricians by a qualified journeyman
electrician shall be subject to a civil penalty of not more than two hundred dollars ($200.00) for the first offense and a civil penalty of not more than
one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each offense thereafter.
e. Performance Outside Scope Of License: Any specialty electrical contractor or specialty electrical journeyman, as defined in the State Electrical
Code, performing electrical installations, alterations or maintenance outside the scope of the specialty electrical license, shall be subject to a civil
penalty of not more than two hundred dollars ($200.00) for the first offense and a civil penalty of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00)
for each offense thereafter.
f. Corrections: Any person who fails to make corrections in the time allotted in the notice on any electrical installation and where no extension has
been requested or granted, shall be subject to a civil penalty of not more than two hundred dollars ($200.00) for the first offense and a civil penalty
of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each offense thereafter.
g. Fees And Permits: Any person failing to acquire a permit and/or to pay applicable fees or properly post an electrical permit shall be subject to a
civil penalty of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for the first offense and a civil penalty of not more than one thousand dollars
($1,000.00) for each offense thereafter. (1952 Code § 4-05-35)
9-5-36: APPEAL OF CIVIL PENALTY:
Upon notice of a civil penalty, the notified party shall within ten (10) days comply with the penalty or file a written request for a hearing for appeal with the
Electrical Board. Such written notice shall be accompanied by a check for one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) made payable to the City. When determining
if a civil penalty is warranted, the board shall consider the following:
A. If the violation does not create a serious life safety hazard, did the City send warning to the person or his agent violating the Code prior to issuing a civil
penalty?
B. Did the violation continue or was a subsequent violation discovered, that warranted the City to issue a civil penalty?
C. Did the violation create a serious life safety hazard, so that the City was warranted in issuing a civil penalty even though a prior warning was not given?
D. Did the person or his agent regularly take out permits, and thus should have had knowledge of what the Code required?
E. Did the person or his agent receive adequate warning notice of the Code violation or a similar Code violation?
F. Does the person or his agent regularly violate the Code? (1952 Code § 4-05-36)
9-5-37: APPEAL OF BOARD DECISIONS:
The decision by the Electrical Board may be appealed to the City Council within ten (10) calendar days following the date of issuance of a written decision.
If the City Council renders a final decision imposing the civil penalty against the appellant, the appellant shall have fourteen (14) calendar days from such
decision within which to pay the civil penalty. (1952 Code § 4-05-37)
Chapter 6
UNIFORM HOUSING CODE
9-6-1: CODE ADOPTED:
The ordinances of a general and permanent character relating to and establishing rules and regulations for the construction, maintenance and use of all
buildings and structures, or portions thereof, to be used for human habitation, and similar work relating to the construction, maintenance and use of
buildings or structures as said ordinances are printed and contained in a book in Code form designated and entitled "Uniform Housing Code", 1976 edition,
printed under the authority of the International Conference of Building Officials, three (3) copies of which are on file in the Office of the City Clerk, be, and
the same hereby are, ratified, approved and adopted as the Uniform Housing Code of the City. (1952 Code § 4-08-01)
9-6-2: AMENDMENTS:
A. Section H-201 is hereby amended as follows:
Sec. H-201.
a. Authority. The Building Director is hereby authorized and directed to administer and enforce all of the provisions of this Code.
b. Right Of Entry. Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce any of the provisions of this Code, or whenever the Building Director or
his authorized representative has reasonable cause to believe that there exists in any building or upon any premises, any condition which makes
such building or premises substandard as defined in section H-202 of this Code, the Building Director or his authorized representative may enter
such building or premises at all reasonable times to inspect the same or to perform any duty imposed upon the Building Director by this Code;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 384/503
provided, that if such building or premises be occupied, he shall first present proper credentials and demand entry; and if such building or premises
be unoccupied, he shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other persons having charge or control of the building or premises
and demand entry. If such entry is refused, the Building Director or his authorized representative shall have recourse to every remedy provided by
law to secure entry.
c. Responsibilities Defined. Every owner remains liable for violations of duties imposed upon him by this Code even though an obligation is also
imposed on the occupants of his building, and even though the owner has, by agreement, imposed on the occupant the duty of furnishing required
equipment or of complying with this Code.
Every owner, or his agent, in addition to being responsible for maintaining his building in a sound structural condition, shall be responsible for
keeping that part of the building or premises which he occupies or controls in a clean, sanitary, and safe condition including the shared or public
areas in a building containing two (2) or more dwelling units.
Every owner shall, where required by this Code, the health ordinance or the Health Officer, furnish and maintain approved devices, equipment, or
facilities for the prevention of insect and rodent infestation, and where infestation has taken place, shall be responsible for the extermination of any
insects, rodents, or other pests when such extermination is not specifically made the responsibility of the occupant by law or ruling.
Every occupant of a dwelling unit, in addition to being responsible for keeping in a clean, sanitary and safe condition that part of the dwelling or
dwelling unit or premises which he occupies and controls, shall dispose of all his rubbish, garbage, and other organic waste in a manner required by
the health ordinance and approved by the Health Officer.
Every occupant shall, where required by this Code, the health ordinance or the Health Officer, furnish and maintain approved devices, equipment or
facilities necessary to keep his premises safe and sanitary.
B. Section H-203 is hereby amended to read as follows:
Sec. H-203. Housing Advisory And Appeals Board.
In order to provide for final interpretation of the provisions of this Code and to hear appeals provided for hereunder, there is hereby established a
Housing Advisory and Appeals Board consisting of the Mayor and Council. Appeals to the Board shall be processed in accordance with the
provisions contained in section H-1201 of this Code and the Board shall render all decisions and findings in writing to the appellant with a copy to
the Building Director.
C. Section H-204 is hereby amended to read as follows:
Sec. H-204. Violations.
No person, firm or corporation, whether as owner, lessee, sublessee, or occupant, shall erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve,
remove, demolish, equip, use, occupy, or maintain any building or premises or cause or permit the same to be done, contrary to or in violation of
any of the provisions of this Code or any order issued by the Building Director pursuant to the provisions of this Code.
Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this Code shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and such person shall be deemed
guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or portion thereof during which any violation of any provisions of this Code is committed,
continued or permitted, and upon the conviction of any such violation such person shall be punishable by a fine of not more than one thousand
dollars ($1,000.00) or by imprisonment of not more than one hundred eighty (180) days, or by such fine and imprisonment.
D. Section H-401 is hereby amended to read as follows:
Sec. H-401. Definitions.
For the purpose of this Code, certain abbreviations, terms, phrases, words, and their derivatives shall be construed as specified in chapters 4 and
33 of the Uniform Building Code.
Efficiency Living Unit. Efficiency living unit is any room having cooking facilities used for combined living, dining, and sleeping purposes and
meeting the requirements of section H-503b, Exception.
Health Officer. Health Officer shall be the legally designated head of the Department of Health of this City.
Hot Water. Hot water shall be water at a temperature of not less than one hundred twenty degrees (120°)F.
Nuisance. The following shall be defined as nuisances:
a. Any public nuisance known at common law or inequity jurisprudence.
b. Any attractive nuisance which may prove detrimental to children whether in a building, on the premises of a building, or upon an unoccupied
lot. This includes any abandoned wells, shafts, basements, or excavations; abandoned refrigerators and motor vehicles; or any structurally
unsound fences or structures; or any lumber, trash, fences, debris, or vegetation which may prove a hazard for inquisitive minors.
c. Whatever is dangerous to human life or is detrimental to health, as determined by the Health Officer.
d. Overcrowding a room with occupants.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 385/503
e. Insufficient ventilation or illumination.
f. Inadequate or unsanitary sewage or plumbing facilities.
g. Uncleanliness, as determined by the Health Officer.
h. Whatever renders air, food, or drink unwholesome or detrimental to the health of human beings, as determined by the Health Officer.
Occupied Space. The total area of all buildings or structures on any lot or parcel of ground projected on a horizontal plane excluding permitted
projections as allowed by this Code.
Rooming House. See lodging house.
Superficial Floor Area. The superficial floor area shall mean the net floor area within the enclosing walls of the room in which the ceiling height is
not less than five feet (5'), excluding built-in equipment such as wardrobes, cabinets, kitchen units, or fixtures.
Uniform Building Code. Shall mean the Uniform Building Code, volume I, 1970 edition, published by the International Conference of Building
Officials.
E. Section H-503 be amended to read as follows:
Sec. H-503. Room Dimensions.
a. Ceiling Heights. Habitable rooms, bathrooms, toilet rooms and laundry rooms shall have a ceiling height of not less than seven feet six inches
(7'6"); except that ceiling heights in habitable rooms, bathrooms, toilet rooms and laundry rooms in H & I occupancies constructed and erected
prior to the passage of this ordinance may be less than seven feet six inches (7'6") when approved by the building inspector. Hallways, corridors,
bathrooms and toilet rooms shall have a ceiling height of not less than seven feet (7') measured to the lowest projection from the ceiling.
If any room in a building has a sloping ceiling, the prescribed ceiling height for the room is required in only one-half (1/2) the area thereof.
No portion of the room measuring less than five feet (5') from the finished floor to the finished ceiling shall be included in any computation of the
minimum area thereof.
If any room has a furred ceiling, the prescribed ceiling height is required in two-thirds (2/3) the area thereof, but in no case shall the height of the
furred ceiling be less than seven feet (7').
b. Superficial Floor Area. Every dwelling unit shall have at least one room which shall have not less than one hundred twenty (120) square feet of
superficial floor area. Every room which is used for both cooking and living or both living and sleeping purposes shall have not less than one
hundred fifty (150) square feet of superficial floor area. Every room used for sleeping purposes shall have not less than ninety (90) square feet of
superficial floor area. Where more than two (2) persons occupy a room used for sleeping purposes the required superficial floor area shall be
increased at the rate of fifty (50) square feet for each occupant in excess of two (2).
Exception: Nothing in this section shall prohibit the use of an efficiency living unit meeting the following requirements:
1. The unit shall have a living room of not less than two hundred twenty (220) square feet of superficial floor area. An additional one hundred
(100) square feet of superficial floor area shall be provided for each occupant of such unit in excess of two (2).
2. The unit shall be provided with a separate closet.
3. The unit shall be provided with a kitchen sink, cooking appliance and refrigeration facilities each having a clear working space of not less than
thirty inches (30") in front. Light and ventilation conforming to this Code shall be provided.
4. The unit shall be provided with a separate bathroom containing a water closet, lavatory, and bathtub or shower.
c. Width. No habitable room shall be less than seven feet (7') in any dimension and no water closet space less than thirty inches (30") in width
and shall provide a clear space in front of the water closet not less than twenty four inches (24").
F. Section H-303 is amended to read as follows:
Sec. H-303.
a. All buildings or structures within the scope of this Code and all construction or work for which a permit is required shall be subject to inspection
by the building official in accordance with and in the manner provided by this Code and sections 340 and 305 of the Uniform Building Code.
(1952 Code § 4-08-02)
b. In addition to any other fee authorized by the Uniform Building Code, an inspection fee in such amount as established by the City Council for
each existing dwelling unit for which an inspection is requested by the Federal Housing Authority and the Veterans' Administration shall be
assessable to and payable by the owner and seller of such existing dwelling unit.
(1952 Code § 4-08-02; amd. 2019 Code)
c. All housing inspections of existing dwelling units so requested by the Federal Housing Authority and the Veterans' Administration shall be
processed as provided for in chapter 3 of the Uniform Building Code of Boise City.
(1952 Code § 4-08-02)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 386/503
Chapter 7
MECHANICAL, FUEL GAS AND RESIDENTIAL CODES
9-7-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to provide standards for the installation of all industrial and nonindustrial type heating, ventilation and air conditioning
systems in the City limits and to provide for the qualification and licensing of persons engaged in the mechanical and fuel gas installation industry. The
further purpose is to ensure that installation of all industrial and nonindustrial type heating, ventilation and air conditioning systems in the City limits shall
be in accordance with the most current edition of the International Mechanical Code, the International Fuel Gas Code, and parts V and VI of the
International Residential Code, as published by the International Code Council, Inc., and as adopted by the State, together with rules and regulations
adopted by the State. This chapter is adopted in accordance with Idaho Code section 54-5001 et seq. (1952 Code § 4-09-01)
9-7-2: MECHANICAL, FUEL GAS AND RESIDENTIAL CODES ADOPTED:
The most current edition of the International Mechanical Code, with appendix A, the most current edition of the International Fuel Gas Code with appendix
A, B, C and D, and parts V and VI of the most current edition of the International Residential Code with appendix A, B, C and D, published under the
authority of the International Code Council, Inc., as adopted by the State, together with rules and regulations adopted by the State, are ratified and
adopted except to the extent that said rules and regulations are hereby changed, altered and/or amended by this chapter; and together, these shall be
known as the Mechanical Code of the City. (1952 Code § 4-09-01)
9-7-3: PUBLIC EXAMINATION OF CODE:
One copy each of the current editions of the International Mechanical Code, the International Fuel Gas Code and the International Residential Code,
together with said rules and regulations adopted by the State; shall be filed for use and examination by the public in the Office of the City Clerk. (1952
Code § 4-09-02)
9-7-4: AUTHORITY HAVING JURISDICTION:
The administration, interpretation and enforcement of each of these codes shall be under the jurisdiction and control of the Department of Planning and
Development Services. The Director hereby appoints and designates the chief mechanical inspector of the Mechanical Division to administer and interpret
the codes. (1952 Code § 4-09-03)
9-7-5: INTERNATIONAL MECHANICAL CODE/INTERNATIONAL FUEL GAS CODE AMENDMENT, SECTION 104.3.1,
LICENSING REQUIREMENTS:
International Mechanical Code/International Fuel Gas Code section 104.3.1 is a new section and reads as follows:
Section 104.3.1 Licenses. Any person or entity engaged in the business, trade, practice or work involving mechanical or fuel gas systems within Boise City
shall hold a valid certificate of competency issued by the State of Idaho, Division of Building Safety.
Exception: A license shall not be required for such work performed in a single-family residence or duplex when the installations are performed by the
owner or contract purchaser; provided, further, that no person or entity shall engage in work beyond that specifically authorized by said license.
(1952 Code § 4-09-04)
9-7-6: INTERNATIONAL MECHANICAL CODE/INTERNATIONAL FUEL GAS CODE AMENDMENT, SECTION 106.3.1,
CONSTRUCTION DOCUMENTS:
International Mechanical Code/International Fuel Gas Code section 106.3.1 is hereby repealed and reenacted to read as follows:
Section 106.3.1 Construction Documents. Any person legally entitled to apply for and receive a permit shall make such application on forms provided for
that purpose. A description of the character of the work proposed shall be provided, and the location, ownership, occupancy and use of the premises in
connection therewith. The City may require plans, specifications or drawings and such other information as deemed necessary. Construction documents
shall be drawn to scale and shall be of sufficient clarity to indicate the location, nature and extent of the work proposed and show in detail that the work
conforms to the provisions of this Code. Construction documents for buildings more than two (2) stories in height shall indicate where penetrations will be
made for mechanical systems, and the materials and methods for maintaining required structural safety, fire resistance rating and fireblocking. The City
may require such plans to be stamped by an Idaho State licensed engineer. Engineers who stamp mechanical drawings for review by the City must have a
registered stamp that complies with current provisions of Idaho State Statute, title 54, chapter 12, Engineers and Surveyors. If the City determines that the
plans, fees, specifications, drawings, description and information furnished by the applicant are in compliance with this Code, a permit shall be issued.
Exceptions: The Code official shall have the authority to waive the submission of construction documents, calculations or other data if the nature of the
work applied for is such that the reviewing of construction documents is not necessary to determine compliance with this Code.
(1952 Code § 4-09-05)
9-7-7: INTERNATIONAL MECHANICAL CODE/INTERNATIONAL FUEL GAS CODE AMENDMENT, SECTION 106.5.2, FEE
SCHEDULE:
International Mechanical Code/International Fuel Gas Code section 106.5.2 is amended to read as follows:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 387/503
Section 106.5.2 Fee Schedule.
A. Schedule Of Fees: Residential. The residential mechanical permit fees shall be in such amounts as established by the City Council.
B. Schedule Of Fees: Commercial. The commercial mechanical permit fees shall be in such amounts as established by the City Council.
C. Other Administrative Fees. Other administrative fees, in such amounts as established by the City Council, are required for both commercial and
residential projects, where applicable.
(Ord. 7-15, 3-10-2015, eff. 5-1-2015; amd. 2019 Code)
9-7-8: INTERNATIONAL MECHANICAL CODE/INTERNATIONAL FUEL GAS CODE AMENDMENT, SECTION 106.5.3, FEE
REFUNDS:
International Mechanical Code/International Fuel Gas Code section 106.5.3 is amended to read as follows:
1. The full amount of any fee paid hereunder which the City incorrectly required and collected.
(Ord. 7-15, 3-10-2015, eff. 5-1-2015)
2. A minimum administrative fee, in such amount as established by the City Council, shall be charged to the permit applicant requesting the refund of
permit fees when work has not commenced on a permit issued in accordance with this Code.
3. A minimum administrative fee, in such amount as established by the City Council, shall be charged to the permit applicant requesting the refund of
plan review fees when review work has not commenced on a permit application accepted in accordance with this Code.
(Ord. 7-15, 3-10-2015, eff. 5-1-2015; amd. 2019 Code)
4. After work has commenced on a plan review or permit, a refund will not be given.
5. The Code official shall not authorize the refunding of any fee paid, except upon written application filed by the original permittee not later than one
hundred eighty (180) days after the date of fee payment.
(Ord. 7-15, 3-10-2015, eff. 5-1-2015)
9-7-9: INTERNATIONAL MECHANICAL CODE/INTERNATIONAL FUEL GAS CODE AMENDMENT, SECTION 109, PLUMBING,
MECHANICAL AND FUEL GAS BOARD:
International Mechanical Code/International Fuel Gas Code section 109 is amended to read as follows:
Section 109 Plumbing, Mechanical And Fuel Gas Board. There is hereby created a Plumbing, Mechanical and Fuel Gas Board hereinafter referred to as
"the board" to be composed of seven (7) members appointed by the Mayor by and with the advice and consent of the Council. Boise City residency of at
least four (4) of the members is required. Members not residing in Boise City must reside in Ada County and transact business in Boise City. The terms of
office shall be four (4) years and if a vacancy occurs, the Mayor with the consent of the Council shall appoint a member to fill such unexpired term. The
board shall organize and select one of its members as Chairman, and the members of the board shall serve and act without compensation except that
their actual and necessary expenses shall be allowed by the Council. The Secretary, who is hereby designated to be the Director of Planning and
Development Services or his designated representative, shall keep a record of all meetings, hearings and proceedings of the board and shall perform all
services that may be required.
(Ord. 16-13, 6-4-2013)
A. Board Duties. It shall be the responsibility and duty of the board:
1. To submit to the Mayor and Council proposed regulations and amendments thereto, governing the design, construction, installation,
improvement, expansion and alteration of plumbing, mechanical and fuel gas systems.
2. To submit to the Mayor and Council proposed standards and procedures for the quality and weight of materials, fixtures, appliances and devices
used in, or entering into, and the method and construction of plumbing, mechanical and fuel gas systems.
3. To submit to the Mayor and Council proposed regulations and amendments thereto, prescribing the standards and procedures for inspecting
plumbing, mechanical and fuel gas systems.
4. To independently review, whenever requested, the administration and enforcement of the minimum standards, regulations and procedures
prescribed by this ordinance.
B. Appeal Process. Any applicant for a permit, whose application has been rejected by the City, or any person who has been ordered by the City to
modify, alter, remove or install any plumbing, mechanical or fuel gas system as defined in this Boise City Code may, within ten (10) days thereafter,
request an appeal by filing notice in writing with the City. The City shall deliver such notice to the board, who shall fix and establish a time, date and
place of hearing within fifteen (15) days from the date of the receipt of notice and cause a copy of the notice to be mailed to the appealing parties. At
the hearing, the board may, by a majority vote, affirm, annul or modify the action of the City. If the actions of the City are modified or annulled, a
permit shall be issued accordingly.
C. Standard Of Review. The board may: 1) modify or waive the requirements of this Code in particular cases wherever any rules are shown to be
impracticable and when it is shown that equivalent or safer construction can be more readily accomplished in other ways; and 2) determine whether
or not the City erred in its interpretation or application of the Code provisions.
(1952 Code § 4-09-08)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 388/503
D. Appeal Fee. Any person appealing from the decision of the City shall attach to the request for review a certified check, in such amount as
established by the City Council, made out in favor of Boise City. In the event such appeal is granted, said fee shall be returned to the appellant.
(1952 Code § 4-09-08; amd. 2019 Code)
E. Appeal To City Council. Any order, decision or ruling of the board may be appealed to the City Council within ten (10) days of such order, decision
or ruling.
(1952 Code § 4-09-08)
9-7-10: APPEAL PROCEDURE:
The Plumbing, Mechanical and Fuel Gas Board may receive all evidence on appeal, in accordance with the following procedure:
A. The chief inspector or designee shall present background information on the project in question, including relevant Code sections and their
interpretation. The board may ask questions during or after each presentation.
B. Applicant shall be allowed to present any information or applicable Code sections to support a reversal of the chief inspector's decision. The applicant
shall have up to twenty (20) minutes to present such evidence.
C. The Chairperson shall open the hearing to receive public testimony. Each person wishing to provide public testimony shall be given up to five (5)
minutes to do so.
D. Following the close of public testimony, the chief inspector or designee shall be allowed up to ten (10) minutes for rebuttal.
E. The applicant then shall have up to ten (10) minutes for rebuttal and any final comments.
F. The Chairperson of the board may allocate equivalent additional time to the applicant and the chief inspector or his designee if the clarity of the issue at
hand can be enhanced by receiving additional testimony.
G. Thereafter, the board may deliberate and render a final decision by a role call vote, may request more information before a final decision is made, or
may take the matter under advisement and reconvene at a reasonable time not to exceed fifteen (15) days to make their final decision. The final
decision shall be in writing and a copy provided to the applicant and any parties of record. The decision by the board may be appealed to the City
Council within ten (10) calendar days following the date of issuance of a written decision. (1952 Code § 4-09-09)
9-7-11: INTERNATIONAL MECHANICAL CODE/INTERNATIONAL FUEL GAS CODE AMENDMENT, SECTION 108.4,
VIOLATION AND PENALTY:
International Mechanical Code/International Fuel Gas Code section 108.4 is amended to read as follows:
Section 108.4 Violation And Penalty. Boise City has the authority to file a complaint for criminal or civil penalties or both for any violation of this chapter. If
both criminal and civil penalties are filed regarding a same or similar wrong doing on the same site or by the same person, firm, association, or corporation
such action shall not be considered to be double jeopardy.
These penalties shall apply to any person, firm, association, or corporation who performs or authorizes another to perform any mechanical/HVAC/fuel gas
work in violation of this Code. The filing of criminal or civil charges in no way relieves any person, firm, association, or corporation who performs or
authorizes another to perform mechanical/HVAC/fuel gas work from complying with this Code.
A. Criminal Penalties: Any person, firm or corporation violating, causing a violation or permitting a violation of any of the provisions of this Code shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined in an amount not exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or by imprisonment for
a period not exceeding one hundred eighty (180) days or both fine and imprisonment. A new violation may be filed for each day or portion thereof that the
violation continues.
(1952 Code § 4-09-10; amd. 2019 Code)
Chapter 8
SOLID FUEL HEATING APPLIANCES
9-8-1: OBJECTIVE:
The objective of this chapter is to protect air quality resources vital to public health, safety and economic future of the City by controlling emissions from
solid fuel and refuse burning. (1952 Code § 4-06-01)
9-8-2: APPLICABILITY AND CONSTRUCTION:
A. Applicability: The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all areas of the City. (1952 Code § 4-06-02)
B. Construction: Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as conflicting with any other section of this Code. (1952 Code § 4-06-20)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 389/503
9-8-3: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and derivations shall have the meanings given herein. The word "shall" is always
mandatory not merely directory.
AIR POLLUTION: The presence in the outdoor atmosphere of any contaminant or combinations thereof in such quality or of such nature and duration and
under such conditions as would be injurious to human health or welfare, to animal or plant life, or to property, or to interfere unreasonably with the
enjoyment of life or property.
AIR QUALITY INDEX (AQI): A national system used to report local, daily air pollution levels to the public. Monitored air pollution levels are converted to a
uniform scale ranging from 0 (good) to 500 (hazardous) with the pollutant that has the highest ambient concentration determining the AQI.
BUILDING: Any structure, dwelling, office, industrial plant, garage or barn, whether publicly or privately owned, or any other structure as defined by the
International Building Code as adopted by the City in section 9-1-2 of this title.
BURN DOWN: That period of time following an air pollution alert, required for the cessation of combustion within any solid fuel heating appliance included
within this chapter.
CLEAN BURNING APPLIANCE: A solid fuel heating appliance that the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) has certified to meet acceptable
emission performance standards.
ECONOMIC HARDSHIP: Fifty percent (50%) or less of the Boise City median income as established by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban
Development (HUD).
OPEN BURNING: The combustion of any material not contained in a heating appliance or incinerator.
PM-2.5: Airborne particles 2.5u or less in diameter.
PM-10: Airborne particles 10u or less in diameter.
PERSON: Any individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company, organization, or governmental entity.
REFUSE: All solid wastes, garbage and rubbish, including, but not limited to, cardboard, plastic, rubber, styrofoam, petroleum products, food stuff,
Christmas trees, yard debris or chemically treated wood.
REFUSE INCINERATOR: Any device designed or operated to reduce the volume of refuse. Natural gas fired pathological incinerators are excluded.
SOLID FUEL: Any form of untreated wood or coal.
SOLID FUEL HEATING APPLIANCE: A. An enclosed device designed for solid fuel combustion that meets all of the following criteria:
1. An air to fuel ratio averaging less than thirty five to one (35:1);
2. Firebox volume less than twenty (20) cubic feet;
3. Minimum burn rate less than five (5) kg./hr.; and
4. Maximum weight of less than eight hundred kilograms (800 kg).
B. Explicitly excluded are furnaces, boilers, cookstoves and open fireplaces. (1952 Code § 4-06-03)
9-8-4: AIR QUALITY DESIGNATIONS AND WOOD BURNING BAN CRITERIA:
A. Monitoring: The quality of the City's air shall be determined by monitoring pollutant levels with equipment and methods approved by the State
Department of Environmental Quality (DEQ).
B. AQI Value: In order to prevent the existence of air quality that is unhealthful, a wood burning ban will be declared whenever the State DEQ reports an
AQI value of 74 or greater for any pollutant measured by an approved monitor within the Treasure Valley and air stagnation conditions are forecasted to
continue for at least twenty four (24) hours. (1952 Code § 4-06-04)
9-8-5: BURNING SOLID FUEL OR REFUSE:
A. No person shall cause or allow refuse or coal to be burned in a solid fuel heating appliance designed for wood fuel.
B. No person shall cause or allow a refuse incinerator to be operated contrary to design specifications and manufacturer's instructions. (1952 Code § 4-06-
06)
9-8-6: WOOD BURNING BAN; ADDITIONAL RESTRICTIONS:
At the onset and during the pendency of a wood burning ban, the following additional restrictions apply:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 390/503
A. Operation Prohibited: No person shall cause or allow, after a three (3) hour "burn down" period, the operation of a solid fuel heating appliance or open
fireplace, unless an exemption has been granted by Planning and Development Services.
B. Incinerator: No person shall cause or allow the operation of a solid waste incinerator.
C. Open Burning: No person shall cause or allow open burning of refuse. (1952 Code § 4-06-07)
9-8-7: EXEMPTIONS TO WOOD BURNING BAN:
A. Conditions: Planning and Development Services shall grant exemptions from this chapter if it is determined by the Planning and Development Services
Director or designee that:
1. A solid fuel heating appliance is the sole source of heat for the building in which it is situated; or
2. An economic hardship exists.
B. Hearing Upon Denial Of Exemption: Any person denied an exemption under this chapter shall be provided, at the option of the applicant for exemption,
a hearing before the Public Works Commission as provided for in this chapter. (1952 Code § 4-06-08)
9-8-8: SOLID FUEL HEATING APPLIANCE INSTALLATION:
A. Certification Required: It shall be unlawful on or after July 1, 1987, for any person in the City to advertise for sale, offer to sell, or sell, for installation in
any new or existing building, or to install or allow to be installed in any new or existing building, a solid fuel heating appliance which has not been
certified as clean burning by the United States Environmental Protection Agency (EPA).
B. List Maintained: Planning and Development Services shall maintain a list of appliances certified to be clean burning by the U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency. (1952 Code § 4-06-09)
9-8-9: DENIAL OF EXEMPTION:
A. Notification: Upon a showing of sufficient cause to believe that grounds exist for denial of an exemption or the rules and regulations of the Planning and
Development Services, as provided for in this chapter, the Director or designee may deny said exemption by notifying the applicant by certified mail,
personal service or substituted service of the grounds for said denial and of the applicant's opportunity to appeal said denial to the Public Works
Commission.
B. Failure To Receive Notice: Failure of a person to actually receive a notice sent or served, shall not invalidate the denial.
C. Application For Hearing: The applicant, upon receiving notice of the denial, may appeal said denial by making application for a hearing before the Public
Works Commission within ten (10) working days of receipt of above notice. (1952 Code § 4-06-10)
9-8-10: DENIAL HEARING AND DETERMINATION BY COMMISSION:
The hearing shall be before the Public Works Commission. At such hearing, the Public Works Commission may:
A. Approve the denial by the Director or designee; or
B. Allow the issuance of the exemption with modifications or conditions as the commission may impose, such modifications or conditions to be reasonably
related to the use of the exemption. (1952 Code § 4-06-11)
9-8-11: APPEAL OF DECISION OF COMMISSION:
The decision of the Public Works Commission may be appealed to the City Council by filing written notice of the appeal to the City Clerk within fifteen (15)
days of the date the commission decision is received. (1952 Code § 4-06-12)
9-8-12: PENALTY:
The violation of any of the provisions of this chapter, or the failure or omission to perform any duty imposed by the provisions of this chapter, is hereby
declared unlawful and punishable as a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be subject to penalty as provided in section 1-4-1 of this Code.
(1952 Code § 4-06-19; amd. 2019 Code)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 391/503
Chapter 9
ENERGY CONSERVATION CODE
9-9-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to establish minimum regulations for energy-efficient buildings using prescriptive and performance based provisions. The
provisions of this code shall regulate the design of building envelopes for adequate thermal resistance and low air leakage, including the design and
selection of mechanical systems, service water-heating, electrical equipment, power, and lighting systems in order to enhance the efficient use of energy in
new and existing building construction. (Ord. 43-17, 12-19-2017, eff. 1-1-2018)
9-9-2: CODE ADOPTED:
All rules, regulations, and ordinances applying to the design, construction, quality of materials, erection, installation, alteration, repair, location, relocation,
replacement, addition to, use or maintenance of the building envelope, building mechanical systems, service water-heating, electrical, power, and lighting
systems, established by the 2015 edition of the International Energy Conservation Code (IECC), published under the authority of the International Code
Council, Inc., is ratified and adopted, except to the extent that those said rules and regulations are hereby changed, altered, or amended by this code. One
copy of the 2015 edition of the International Energy Conservation Code shall be filed for use and examination by the public in the Office of the City Clerk.
All provisions in this chapter shall be effective as of January 1, 2018. (Ord. 43-17, 12-19-2017, eff. 1-1-2018)
9-9-3: IECC ENERGY CODE AMENDMENT, SECTION C101.1, TITLE:
C101.1 Title. The 2015 Edition of the International Energy Conservation Code, and amendments pursuant to this ordinance, shall be known as the Energy
Conservation Code of Boise City. The Energy Conservation Code of Boise City may be cited or referred to in this chapter as the "code."
(Ord. 43-17, 12-19-2017, eff. 1-1-2018)
9-9-4: IECC ENERGY CODE AMENDMENT, ADD SECTION C101.5.2, INDUSTRIAL, ELECTRONIC, AND MANUFACTURING
EQUIPMENT:
C101.5.2 Industrial, electronic and manufacturing equipment. Buildings or portions thereof that are heated or cooled exclusively to maintain a required
operating temperature for industrial, electronic, or manufacturing equipment shall be exempt from the provisions of this code. Such buildings or portions
thereof shall be separated from connected conditioned space by building thermal envelope assemblies that comply with this code. If this condition or use is
abandoned, then that building or portion thereof shall be subject to the requirements of this code.
(Ord. 43-17, 12-19-2017, eff. 1-1-2018)
9-9-5: IECC ENERGY CODE AMENDMENT, SECTION C107, FEES:
Section C107 shall be deleted in its entirety.
(Ord. 43-17, 12-19-2017, eff. 1-1-2018)
9-9-6: IECC ENERGY CODE AMENDMENT, SECTION C108, STOP WORK ORDER:
Section C108 shall be repealed in its entirety and replaced with the following:
C108 Stop work order. Whenever the code official identifies any work regulated by the Energy Conservation Code of Boise City being performed in a
manner contrary to the provisions of this code or in a dangerous or unsafe manner, then the building official is authorized to issue a stop work order in
accordance with Section 115 of the International Building Code or Section R114 of the International Residential Code as adopted by the Building Code of
Boise City.
(Ord. 43-17, 12-19-2017, eff. 1-1-2018)
9-9-7: IECC ENERGY CODE AMENDMENT, SECTION C109, BOARD OF APPEALS, APPEAL PROCESS:
Section C109 shall be repealed in its entirety and replaced with the following:
(Ord. 43-17, 12-19-2017, eff. 1-1-2018)
C109 Board of appeals process. Any person, firm, association or corporation desiring to appeal an order, decision, or determination made by the building
official with respect to an application or interpretation of this code shall file a written appeal with the code official within ten (10) calendar days from the
date the order, decision, or determination was issued. The party appealing a decision of the City shall include payment of a fee in the amount established
by the Boise City Council and listed on the most current fee schedule at time of filing the written appeal request. In the event the appealing party prevails,
then the fee shall be returned to the appellant.
(Ord. 43-17, 12-19-2017, eff. 1-1-2018; amd. 2019 Code)
Recognizing that the Energy Conservation Code of Boise City is multi-disciplinary, the building official shall schedule the appeal before the appeals board
of the most relevant discipline to the issue being appealed. Depending upon the issue raised on appeal, an energy conservation code appeal may be
heard by the Building Code Board of Appeals, the Electrical Board of Appeal, or the Plumbing, Mechanical, or Fuel Gas Board as established by Boise
City Code. Ten (10) calendar days prior to the appeal hearing, the appellant shall be notified as to which board will hear the appeal and will be given a
copy of the ordinance governing appeals to that board. The ordinance which governs the relevant board shall govern the conduct and procedure of the
hearing. The hearing shall be held within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of the notice of appeal or as otherwise agreed upon by the parties to the
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 392/503
appeal. Any order, decision, or ruling of the board of appeals may be appealed by filing notice in writing to the City Council within ten (10) calendar days of
such order, decision or ruling.
(Ord. 43-17, 12-19-2017, eff. 1-1-2018)
9-9-8: IECC ENERGY CODE AMENDMENT, SECTION C110, VIOLATIONS:
C110 Violations. Violations of any provision of the Energy Conservation Code of Boise City shall be subject to enforcement under Section 114 of the
International Building Code or Section R113 of the International Residential Code as adopted by the Building Code of Boise City.
(Ord. 43-17, 12-19-2017, eff. 1-1-2018)
9-9-9: IECC ENERGY CODE AMENDMENT, SECTION C201.3, TERMS DEFINED IN OTHER CODES:
C201.3 Terms defined in other codes. Terms that are not defined in this code but are defined in the editions in the International Building Code,
International Residential Code, National Electrical Code, International Fire Code, International Fuel Gas Code, International Mechanical Code, or the Idaho
State Plumbing Code terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them as in those codes respectively.
(Ord. 43-17, 12-19-2017, eff. 1-1-2018)
9-9-10: IECC ENERGY CODE AMENDMENT, SECTION C202, GENERAL DEFINITIONS, CODE OFFICIAL:
CODE OFFICIAL. The building official as defined and established by the International Building Code as incorporated into the Building Code of Boise City
shall be referred to as the code official under this code. The code official shall be responsible for administering and enforcing this code.
(Ord. 43-17, 12-19-2017, eff. 1-1-2018)
9-9-11: IECC ENERGY CODE AMENDMENT, SECTION C403.3, ECONOMIZERS (PRESCRIPTIVE), ADD EXCEPTION 10:
Adding exception number 10 to section C403.3, Economizers (Prescriptive) which shall read as follows:
10. Systems requiring special outside air filtration and treatment for the reduction and treatment of unusual outdoor contaminants that make an air
economizer infeasible.
(Ord. 43-17, 12-19-2017, eff. 1-1-2018)
9-9-12: IECC ENERGY CODE AMENDMENT, SECTION R101.1, TITLE:
R101.1 Title. The 2015 Edition of the International Energy Conservation Code, and amendments pursuant to this ordinance, shall be known as the Energy
Conservation Code of Boise City. The Energy Conservation Code of Boise City may be cited in this chapter as the "code."
(Ord. 43-17, 12-19-2017, eff. 1-1-2018)
9-9-13: IECC ENERGY CODE AMENDMENT, SECTION R107, FEES:
Section R107 shall be repealed in its entirety and replaced as follows:
R107 Fees. The fees for residential inspection(s) verifying compliance with the Energy Conservation Code of Boise City shall be assessed in accordance
with Table No. 1-A of the Building Code in Boise City.
(Ord. 43-17, 12-19-2017, eff. 1-1-2018)
9-9-14: IECC ENERGY CODE AMENDMENT, SECTION R108, STOP WORK ORDER:
Section R108 shall be repealed in its entirety and replaced with the following:
R108 Stop work order. Whenever the code official identifies any work regulated by the Energy Conservation Code of Boise City being performed in a
manner contrary to the provisions of this code or in a dangerous or unsafe manner, then the building official is authorized to issue a stop work order in
accordance with Section 115 of the International Building Code or Section R114 of the International Residential Code as adopted by the Building Code of
Boise City.
(Ord. 43-17, 12-19-2017, eff. 1-1-2018)
9-9-15: IECC ENERGY CODE AMENDMENT, SECTION R109, BOARD OF APPEALS PROCESS:
Section R109 shall be repealed in its entirety and replaced with the following:
(Ord. 43-17, 12-19-2017, eff. 1-1-2018)
R109 Board of appeals process. Any person, firm, association or corporation desiring to appeal an order, decision, or determination made by the building
official with respect to an application or interpretation of this code shall file a written appeal with the code official within ten (10) calendar days from the
date the order, decision, or determination was issued. The party appealing a decision of the City shall include payment of a fee in an amount established
by the Boise City Council and listed on the most current fee schedule at time of filing the written appeal request. In the event the appealing party prevails,
then the fee shall be returned to the appellant.
(Ord. 43-17, 12-19-2017, eff. 1-1-2018; amd. 2019 Code)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 393/503
Recognizing that the Energy Conservation Code of Boise City is multi-disciplinary, the building official shall schedule the appeal before the appeals board
of the most relevant discipline to the issue being appealed. Depending upon the issue raised on appeal, an energy conservation code appeal may be
heard by the Building Code Board of Appeals, the Electrical Board of Appeal, or the Plumbing, Mechanical, or Fuel Gas Board as established by Boise
City Code. Ten (10) calendar days prior to the appeal hearing, the appellant shall be notified as to which board will hear the appeal and will be given a
copy of the ordinance governing appeals to that board. The ordinance which governs the relevant board shall govern the conduct and procedure of the
hearing. The hearing shall be held within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of the notice of appeal or as otherwise agreed upon by the parties to the
appeal. Any order, decision, or ruling of the board of appeals may be appealed by filing notice in writing to the City Council within ten (10) calendar days of
such order, decision or ruling.
(Ord. 43-17, 12-19-2017, eff. 1-1-2018)
9-9-16: IECC ENERGY CODE AMENDMENT, SECTION R110, VIOLATIONS:
R110 Violations. Violations of any provision of the Energy Conservation Code of Boise City shall be subject to enforcement under Section 114 of the
International Building Code or Section R113 of the International Residential Code as adopted by the Building Code of Boise City.
(Ord. 43-17, 12-19-2017, eff. 1-1-2018)
9-9-17: IECC ENERGY CODE AMENDMENT, SECTION R201.3, TERMS DEFINED IN OTHER CODES:
R201.3 Terms defined in other codes. Terms that are not defined in this code but are defined in the editions in the International Building Code,
International Residential Code, National Electrical Code, International Fire Code, International Fuel Gas Code, International Mechanical Code, or the Idaho
State Plumbing Code terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them as in those codes respectively.
(Ord. 43-17, 12-19-2017, eff. 1-1-2018)
9-9-18: IECC ENERGY CODE AMENDMENT, SECTION R202, GENERAL DEFINITIONS, CODE OFFICIAL:
CODE OFFICIAL. The building official as defined and established by the International Building Code as incorporated into the Building Code of Boise City
shall be referred to as the code official under this code. The code official shall be responsible for administering and enforcing this code.
(Ord. 43-17, 12-19-2017, eff. 1-1-2018)
9-9-19: IECC ENERGY CODE AMENDMENT, TABLE R402.1.2, INSULATION AND FENESTRATION REQUIREMENTS BY
COMPONENT, ADD FOOTNOTES J AND K:
Add footnote j to the title of table R402.1.2 - Insulation and Fenestration Requirements by Component. Add footnote j underneath table R402.1.2 after
footnote i to read as follows:
j. For residential log home building thermal envelope construction requirements see section R402.6.
Add footnote k to the Ceiling R-Value header of table R402.1.2, and below table R402.1.2 to read as follows:
k. The Ceiling R-Value in Climate Zone 5 may be reduced to R-38 when the Wood Frame Wall R-Value is increased to R-21 and the Fenestration UFactor
is reduced to 0.31.
(Ord. 43-17, 12-19-2017, eff. 1-1-2018)
9-9-20: IECC ENERGY CODE AMENDMENT, TABLE R402.4.1.1, AIR BARRIER AND INSULATION INSTALLATION:
Add the criteria requirement for the "fireplace" component of table R402.4.1.1 Air Barrier and Insulation Installation as follows:
TABLE R402.4.1.1 (N1102.4.1.1)
AIR BARRIER AND INSULATION INSTALLATION
COMPONENT CRITERIAa
Fireplace An air barrier shall be installed on fireplace walls.
(Ord. 43-17, 12-19-2017, eff. 1-1-2018)
9-9-21: IECC ENERGY CODE AMENDMENT, SECTION R402.4.1.2, TESTING:
R402.4.1.2 Testing. The building or dwelling unit shall be tested and verified as having an air leakage rate not exceeding five air changes per hour in
Climate Zones 1 and 2, and four air changes per hour in Climate Zones 3 through 8. Testing shall be conducted in accordance with ANSI/RESNET/ICC
380 and reported at a pressure of 0.2 inches w.g. (50 Pascals). Where required by the code official, testing shall be conducted by an approved third party.
A written report of the results of the test shall be signed by the party conducting the test and provided to the code official. Testing shall be performed at any
time after creation of all penetrations of the building thermal envelope.
(Ord. 43-17, 12-19-2017, eff. 1-1-2018)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 394/503
9-9-22: IECC ENERGY CODE AMENDMENT, ADD SECTION R402.6, RESIDENTIAL LOG HOME THERMAL ENVELOPE:
R402.6 Residential Log Home Thermal Envelope. Residential log home construction shall comply with sections R401 (General), R402.4 (Air Leakage),
R402.5 (Maximum Fenestration U-Factor and SHGC), R403.1 (Controls), R403.3.2 (Sealing), R403.3.5 (Building Cavities), sections R403.4 through
R403.11 (referred to as the mandatory provisions), Section R404 (Electrical Power and Lighting Systems), and either subsection i., ii., or iii. as follows:
i. Sections R402.2 through R402.3, R403.3.1, R404.1 and Table R402.6;
ii. Section R405 Simulated Performance Alternative (Performance); or
iii. REScheck (U.S. Department of Energy Building Codes Program).
(Ord. 43-17, 12-19-2017, eff. 1-1-2018)
9-9-23: IECC ENERGY CODE AMENDMENT, ADD TABLE R402.6, LOG HOME PRESCRIPTIVE THERMAL ENVELOPE
REQUIREMENTS BY COMPONENT:
TABLE R402.6
LOG HOME PRESCRIPTIVE THERMAL ENVELOPE REQUIREMENTS BY COMPONENT
Climate Zone
Fenestration
U-Factora
Skylight
U-Factor
Glazed
Fenestration
SHGC
Ceiling
R-Value
Min. Average
LOG Size In
Inches
Floor
RValue
Basement
Wall RValued
Slab RValue
&
Depthb
Crawl Space
Wall R-Valued
5, 6-High efficiency
equipment pathc
0.32 0.60 NR 49 5 30 15/19 10, 4 ft. 10/13
5 0.32 0.60 NR 49 8 30 10/13 10, 2 ft. 10/13
For SI: 1 foot = 304.8 mm
a. The fenestration U-factor column excludes skylights. The SHGC column applies to all glazed fenestration.
b. R-5 shall be added to the required slab edge R-values for heated slabs.
c. 90% AFUE natural gas or propane, 84% AFUE oil, or 15 SEER heat pump heating equipment (zonal electric resistance heating equipment such as
electric base board electric resistance heating equipment as the sole source for heating is considered compliant with the high efficiency equipment path).
d. "15/19" means R-15 continuous insulated sheathing on the interior or exterior of the home or R-19 cavity insulation at the interior of the basement wall.
"15/19" shall be permitted to be met with R-13 cavity insulation on the interior of the basement wall plus R-5 continuous insulated sheathing on the interior
or exterior of the home. "10/13" means R-10 continuous insulated sheathing on the interior or exterior of the home or R-13 cavity insulation at the interior
of the basement wall.
(Ord. 43-17, 12-19-2017, eff. 1-1-2018)
9-9-24: IECC ENERGY CODE AMENDMENT, SECTION R403.3.3, DUCT TESTING (MANDATORY):
R403.3.3 Duct testing (Mandatory). Ducts shall be pressure tested in accordance with ANSI/RESNET/ICC 380 to determine air leakage by one of the
following methods:
1. Rough-in test: Total leakage shall be measured with a pressure differential of 0.1 inch w.g. (25 Pa) across the system, including the manufacturer's
air handler enclosure if installed at the time of the test. All registers shall be taped or otherwise sealed during the test.
2. Post-construction test: Total leakage shall be measured with a pressure differential of 0.1 inch w.g. (25 Pa) across the entire system, including the
manufacturer's air handler enclosure. Registers shall be taped or otherwise sealed during the test.
Exception: A duct air leakage test shall not be required where the ducts and air handlers are located entirely within the building thermal envelope.
A written report of the results of the test shall be signed by the party conducting the test and provided to the code official.
(Ord. 43-17, 12-19-2017, eff. 1-1-2018)
9-9-25: IECC ENERGY CODE AMENDMENT, SECTION R406.3, ENERGY RATING INDEX:
R406.3 Energy Rating Index. The Energy Rating Index (ERI) shall be determined in accordance with ANSI/RESNET/ICC 301.
(Ord. 43-17, 12-19-2017, eff. 1-1-2018)
9-9-26: IECC ENERGY CODE AMENDMENT, DELETE SECTION R406.3.1, ERI REFERENCE DESIGN:
R406.3.1 ERI Reference Design. Delete.
(Ord. 43-17, 12-19-2017, eff. 1-1-2018)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 395/503
9-9-27: IECC ENERGY CODE AMENDMENT, TABLE R406.4, MAXIMUM ENERGY RATING INDEX:
The Energy Rating Index value for Climate Zone 5 shall be amended to read as follows:
TABLE R406.4
MAXIMUM ENERGY RATING INDEX
CLIMATE ZONE ENERGY RATING INDEX
5 61
(Ord. 43-17, 12-19-2017, eff. 1-1-2018)
9-9-28: IECC ENERGY CODE AMENDMENT, SECTION R406.5, VERIFICATION BY APPROVED AGENCY:
R406.5 Verification by approved agency. Verification of compliance with Section R406 shall be completed by a third party approved in accordance with
ANSI/RESNET/ICC 301.
(Ord. 43-17, 12-19-2017, eff. 1-1-2018)
9-9-29: IECC ENERGY CODE AMENDMENT, SECTION R406.6, DOCUMENTATION:
R406.6 Documentation. Documentation of the software used to determine the ERI and the parameters for the residential building shall be in accordance
with Sections R406.6.1 through R406.6.5.
(Ord. 43-17, 12-19-2017, eff. 1-1-2018)
9-9-30: IECC ENERGY CODE AMENDMENT, SECTION R406.6.1, COMPLIANCE SOFTWARE TOOLS:
R406.6.1 Compliance software tools. Software tools used for determining the ERI shall be Approved Software Rating Tools in accordance with
ANSI/RESNET/ICC 301.
(Ord. 43-17, 12-19-2017, eff. 1-1-2018)
9-9-31: IECC ENERGY CODE AMENDMENT, ADD SECTION R406.6.4, SPECIFIC APPROVAL:
R406.6.4 Specific approval. Performance analysis tools meeting the applicable sections of Section R406 shall be approved. Documentation
demonstrating the approval of performance analysis tools in accordance with Section R406.6.1 shall be provided to the code official.
(Ord. 43-17, 12-19-2017, eff. 1-1-2018)
9-9-32: IECC ENERGY CODE AMENDMENT, ADD SECTION R406.6.5, INPUT VALUES:
R406.6.5 Input values. When calculations require input values not specified by Sections R402, R403, R404, or R405, those input values shall be taken
from ANSI/RESNET/ICC 301.
(Ord. 43-17, 12-19-2017, eff. 1-1-2018)
9-9-33: IECC ENERGY CODE AMENDMENT, DELETE SECTION R406.7, CALCULATION SOFTWARE TOOLS, INCLUDING
SUBSECTIONS R406.7.1, MINIMUM CAPABILITIES, R406.7.2, SPECIFIC APPROVAL AND R406.7.3, INPUT VALUES:
R406.7 Calculation Software Tools. Delete including subsections R406.7.1, Minimum Capabilities, R406.7.2, Specific Approval and R406.7.3, Values.
(Ord. 43-17, 12-19-2017, eff. 1-1-2018)
9-9-34: IECC ENERGY CODE AMENDMENT, CHAPTER 6 REFERENCED STANDARDS:
The following referenced standards shall be added into chapter 6 of the code as follows:
ANSI/RESNET/ICC
Residential Energy Services Network, Inc.
P.O. Box 4561
Oceanside, CA 92052-4561
International Code Council
500 New Jersey Avenue,
NW, 6th Floor
Washington, D.C. 20001
Standard reference
number
Title Referenced in code section
number
301-2014 Standard for the Calculation and Labeling of the Energy Performance of Low-Rise Residential
Buildings using an Energy Rating Index
R406.3, R406.5, R406.6.1,
R406.6.5
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 396/503
ANSI/RESNET/ICC
Residential Energy Services Network, Inc.
P.O. Box 4561
Oceanside, CA 92052-4561
International Code
Council
500 New Jersey
Avenue, NW, 6th Floor
Washington, D.C.
20001
Standard reference
number
Title Referenced in code
section number
380-2016 Standard for Testing Airtightness of Building Enclosures, Airtightness of Heating and Cooling Air
Distribution Systems, and Airflow of Mechanical Ventilation Systems
R402.4.1.2, R403.3.3
(Ord. 43-17, 12-19-2017, eff. 1-1-2018)
Chapter 10
EXISTING BUILDING CODE
9-10-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to establish regulations to allow for the use of alternative methods from those contained in the Building Code of Boise City in
order to achieve compliance with those minimum requirements necessary to safeguard health, safety, property, and public welfare insofar as they are
affected by the repair, alteration, change of occupancy, addition, or relocation of existing buildings. (Ord. 42-17, 12-19-2017, eff. 1-1-2018)
9-10-2: CODE ADOPTED:
All rules, regulations and ordinances relating to the design, construction, quality of materials, erection, installation, alteration, repair, location, relocation,
replacement, addition to, use, change of occupancy, or maintenance of existing buildings, established by the 2015 edition of the International Existing
Building Code (IEBC), published under the authority of the International Code Council, Inc., is ratified and adopted, except to the extent that those rules
and regulations are hereby changed, altered, or amended by this Code. One copy of the 2015 edition of the International Existing Building Code shall be
filed for use and examination by the public in the Office of the City Clerk. All provisions in this chapter shall be effective as of January 1, 2018. (Ord. 42-17,
12-19-2017, eff. 1-1-2018)
9-10-3: IEBC EXISTING BUILDING CODE AMENDMENT, SECTION 101.1, TITLE:
101.1 Title. The 2015 Edition of the Existing Building Code, and amendments pursuant to this ordinance, shall be known as the Existing Building Code of
Boise City. The Existing Building Code of Boise City may be cited or referred to in this chapter as the "code."
(Ord. 42-17, 12-19-2017, eff. 1-1-2018)
9-10-4: IEBC EXISTING BUILDING CODE AMENDMENT, SECTION 101.2, SCOPE:
101.2 Scope. The provisions of the International Existing Building Code shall apply to the repair, alteration, change of occupancy, addition to, or relocation
of existing buildings.
Exception: Buildings within the scope of the International Residential Code and such references within this code, shall apply and comply with the
provisions of the International Residential Code as currently adopted.
(Ord. 42-17, 12-19-2017, eff. 1-1-2018)
9-10-5: IEBC EXISTING BUILDING CODE AMENDMENT, SECTION 101.4, APPLICABILITY:
101.4 Applicability. This code shall apply to the repair, alteration, change of occupancy, addition and relocation of existing buildings, regardless of
occupancy, subject to the criteria set forth in sections 101.4.1 through 101.4.5.
(Ord. 42-17, 12-19-2017, eff. 1-1-2018)
9-10-6: IEBC EXISTING BUILDING CODE AMENDMENT, SECTION 101.4.2, BUILDINGS PREVIOUSLY OCCUPIED:
101.4.2 Buildings previously occupied. The legal occupancy of any building existing as of the date of adoption of this code shall be permitted to
continue without change, except as specifically addressed by this code, the International Fire Code, the Boise City Dangerous Buildings Code, or as may
be deemed necessary by the code official in order to protect the general safety and welfare of the occupants or the public.
(Ord. 42-17, 12-19-2017, eff. 1-1-2018)
9-10-7: IEBC EXISTING BUILDING CODE AMENDMENT, ADD SECTION 101.4.3, PREVIOUS CODES IN EFFECT:
101.4.3 Previous codes in effect. Unless specifically evaluated and approved by the code official, this code shall not require less stringent standards
than what was required by the applicable building codes in effect when the prior work was completed. Nor shall this code be used to justify conditions in
buildings or structures that do not comply with those codes in effect when the prior work was completed unless such condition or conditions can be
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 397/503
justified by the International Building Code or the International Fire Code as currently adopted.
(Ord. 42-17, 12-19-2017, eff. 1-1-2018)
9-10-8: IEBC EXISTING BUILDING CODE AMENDMENT, ADD SECTION 101.4.4, OTHER COMPLIANCE:
101.4.4 Other compliance. Where items such as life-safety issues are not specifically addressed by this code, the code official shall have the discretion to
apply the applicable provisions of the International Building Code as adopted and amended by the Building Code of Boise City in order to ensure the
general safety and welfare of the occupants or the public.
(Ord. 42-17, 12-19-2017, eff. 1-1-2018)
9-10-9: IEBC EXISTING BUILDING CODE AMENDMENT, ADD SECTION 101.4.5, DANGEROUS CONDITIONS:
101.4.5 Dangerous conditions. The code official shall have the authority to require the abatement of conditions determined to be dangerous. Conditions
determined to be dangerous shall be removed or abated in accordance with the provisions of this code or the Uniform Code for the Abatement of
Dangerous Buildings as adopted under the Dangerous Buildings Code of Boise City.
(Ord. 42-17, 12-19-2017, eff. 1-1-2018)
9-10-10: IEBC EXISTING BUILDING CODE AMENDMENT, ADD SECTION 101.8, CODE OFFICIAL:
101.8 Code Official. The building official as defined and established by the International Building Code as adopted by the Building Code of Boise City
shall be referred to as the code official under this code. The code official shall be responsible for administering and enforcing this code.
(Ord. 42-17, 12-19-2017, eff. 1-1-2018)
9-10-11: IEBC EXISTING BUILDING CODE AMENDMENT, REPEAL ADMINISTRATIVE SECTIONS 102 THROUGH 115 AND
REPLACE WITH ADMINISTRATIVE SECTIONS 102 THROUGH 117 OF THE INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE:
Repeal administrative sections 102 through 115 of the IEBC and replace with administrative sections 102 through 117 of the International Building Code as
adopted under the Building Code of Boise City, for the repair, alteration, change of occupancy, addition and relocation of existing buildings.
(Ord. 42-17, 12-19-2017, eff. 1-1-2018)
9-10-12: IEBC EXISTING BUILDING CODE AMENDMENT, RENUMBER SECTION 116, EMERGENCY MEASURES, TO SECTION
118 INCLUDING AS APPLICABLE TO SUBSECTIONS:
Section 116, Emergency Measures, shall be renumbered as Section 118, including all applicable subsections.
(Ord. 42-17, 12-19-2017, eff. 1-1-2018)
9-10-13: IEBC EXISTING BUILDING CODE AMENDMENT, SECTION 118.2, TEMPORARY SAFEGUARDS:
118.2 Temporary safeguards. Notwithstanding any other provision of this code, whenever, in the opinion of the code official, there is an imminent danger
due to an unsafe condition, the code official shall have authority to summarily order temporary safeguard work to be performed in order to render the
structure temporarily safe or to warn the public of the dangerous condition. The temporary safeguard work required may include, but shall not be limited to
placement of placards or signage, erecting barrier tape, barricades, or fencing, securing openings, or other means as the code official deems necessary to
address such emergency.
(Ord. 42-17, 12-19-2017, eff. 1-1-2018)
9-10-14: IEBC EXISTING BUILDING CODE AMENDMENT, RENUMBER SECTION 117, DEMOLITION, TO SECTION 119,
DELETE THE ENTIRE SECTION AND REPLACE WITH SUBSECTION 119.1, GENERAL:
Section 117, Demolition, shall be renumbered as section 119 and deleted and replaced by subsection 119.1 General, to read as follows:
119.1 General. The code official shall have the authority to require demolition of conditions determined to be dangerous. Conditions determined to be
dangerous that would not be feasible to repair shall be removed or abated in accordance with the provisions of the Uniform Code for the Abatement of
Dangerous Buildings as adopted by the Dangerous Buildings Code of Boise City.
(Ord. 42-17, 12-19-2017, eff. 1-1-2018)
9-10-15: IEBC EXISTING BUILDING CODE AMENDMENT, SECTION 202, GENERAL DEFINITIONS, DANGEROUS:
DANGEROUS. Any building, structure or portion thereof that meets any of the conditions described below shall be deemed dangerous:
1. The building or structure has collapsed, has partially collapsed, has moved off its foundation, or lacks the necessary support of the ground.
2. There exists a significant risk of collapse, detachment, or dislodgement of any portion, member, appurtenance, or ornamentation of the building or
structure under established service loads.
3. The building or structure meets the definition of a dangerous building set forth by the Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings as
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 398/503
adopted under the Dangerous Buildings Code of Boise City.
(Ord. 42-17, 12-19-2017, eff. 1-1-2018)
9-10-16: IEBC EXISTING BUILDING CODE AMENDMENT, SECTION 1401.2, APPLICABILITY:
1401.2 Applicability. Buildings or structures existing prior to August 8, 1936, or existing prior to 1976 in Ada County and later annexed into the city of
Boise City, in which there is work that involves or includes additions, alterations, or changes of occupancy shall be required to conform with the
requirements of this code or the provisions of Chapters 5 through 13. Sections 1401.2.1 through 1401.2.5 shall apply to existing occupancies that will
continue to be, or are proposed to be, in Groups A, B, E, F, I-2, M, R and S. These provisions shall not apply to buildings with occupancies in Group H or I-
1, I-3 or I-4.
(Ord. 42-17, 12-19-2017, eff. 1-1-2018)
Chapter 11
DANGEROUS BUILDINGS CODE
9-11-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to provide a just, equitable and practical method, to be cumulative with and in addition to, any other remedy provided by this
Code, or otherwise available at law, whereby buildings or structures which, from any cause, endanger the life, limb, health, property, safety or welfare of
the general public or their occupants, may be required to be repaired, vacated or demolished. (1952 Code § 4-11-01)
9-11-2: ABATEMENT OF DANGEROUS BUILDINGS CODE ADOPTED:
All the rules, regulations and ordinances of a general and permanent character relating and applying to the repair, vacation or demolition of buildings
endangering life, limb, health, property, safety or welfare of the general public or their occupants shall be governed by the Uniform Code for the Abatement
of Dangerous Buildings, the 1997 edition, printed and published under the authority of the International Conference of Building Officials. Copies of the
Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings duly certified by the City Clerk are on file in the Office of the City Clerk for use and inspection.
(1952 Code § 4-11-02)
9-11-2-1: PRECEDENCE:
Certain provisions of the Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings, hereinafter referred to as "ADB", have been amended by the City and
shall take precedence over the ADB. (1952 Code § 4-11-02.01)
9-11-3: AMENDMENT OF ADB, VIOLATIONS, SECTION 203:
Section 203 of the ADB is amended to read as follows:
Violations And Penalties. No person, firm or corporation whether as owner, lessee, sublessee or occupant, shall erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair,
move, improve, remove, convert or demolish, equip, use, occupy or maintain any building or premises, or cause or permit the same to be done, contrary to
or in violation of any of the provisions of the Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings and the Boise City Code.
Criminal Penalties. Any person, firm or corporation violating the provisions of this Code shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction
thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), by imprisonment for not more than one hundred eighty (180) days
or by both such fine and imprisonment. Each separate day or any portion thereof during which any violation of this Code occurs or continues shall be
deemed to constitute a separate offense and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punishable as herein provided.
Civil Penalties. Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this Code may have civil penalties assessed against them. A new violation may
be filed for each day the violation continues. The violation will have a date when the violation shall be paid by, if it is not paid by that date, the City shall
pursue collections through court and will ask the court to reimburse for all costs and fees associated with collecting the penalty. Any person who violates
any provision of this Code shall be subject to a civil penalty of not more than two hundred dollars ($200.00) for the first offense and a civil penalty of not
more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each offense thereafter.
(1952 Code § 4-11-03)
9-11-4: AMENDMENT TO ADB, BOARD OF APPEALS, SECTIONS 205.1 AND 205.2:
Sections 205.1 and 205.2 of the ADB are amended to read as follows:
Appeal, Section 205.1. Any person, firm or corporation aggrieved by the determination of a dangerous building in accordance with the definitions contained
in section 302 or by any action or decision of the Planning and Development Services Department arising out of the enforcement of this chapter may
appeal the same to the Boise City Council. Such appeal shall be made in writing and must be filed with the City Clerk within ten (10) calendar days after
the action or decision which is the subject of the appeal. An appeal shall not prevent the City from taking emergency action to protect life and safety if
necessary.
(1952 Code § 4-11-04)
Civil Penalties And Procedure, Section 205.2.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 399/503
a. Upon receipt of written notice of a civil penalty, the violator shall within ten (10) days pay the penalty or file a written request for a hearing with the
Boise City Council. Such written notice shall be accompanied by a check in such amount as established by the City Council made payable to Boise
City. If the civil penalty imposed against the applicant is overturned by Boise City Council, the review fee shall be returned. Notice of the public
hearing for the review hearing shall be given by the department mailing the notice to the last known address provided by the applicant. Upon
issuance of the decision, applicant shall have fourteen (14) calendar days within which to pay the civil penalty.
(1952 Code § 4-11-04; amd. 2019 Code)
b. When determining if a civil penalty is warranted, Boise City Council shall consider the following:
(1) If the violation does not create a serious life safety hazard, did the City warn the person or his agent violating the Code prior to issuing a civil
penalty?
(2) Did the violation continue or was a subsequent violation discovered, that warranted the City to issue a civil penalty?
(3) Did the violation create a serious life safety hazard, so that the City was warranted in issuing a civil penalty even though a prior warning was
not given?
(4) Did the person or his agent regularly take out permits, and thus should have had knowledge of what the Code required?
(5) Did the person or his agent receive adequate warning notice of the Code violation or a similar Code violation?
(6) Does the person or his agent regularly violate the Code?
(1952 Code § 4-11-04)
9-11-5: AMENDMENT TO ADB, APPEAL, CHAPTER 5:
Chapter 5, Appeal, of the ADB is deleted and repealed in entirety.
(1952 Code § 4-11-05)
9-11-6: AMENDMENT TO ADB, PROCEDURES FOR CONDUCT OF HEARING APPEALS, CHAPTER 6:
Chapter 6, Procedures for Conduct of Hearing Appeals, of the ADB, is deleted and repealed in entirety.
(1952 Code § 4-11-06)
9-11-7: AMENDMENT TO ADB, PERFORMANCE OF WORK OF REPAIR OR DEMOLITION, CHAPTER 8:
Chapter 8 of the ADB is amended to read as follows:
Project Costs, Section 801.1. The Director of Planning and Development Services shall prepare an itemized report of the expenses that will be incurred by
this jurisdiction in the repair or demolition of any building done pursuant to the provisions of section 701.3, item 3 of this Code, and section 9-11-8 of the
Boise City Code.
Notice Of Hearing, Section 801.2. Upon receipt of said report, the City Clerk shall within ten (10) days or sooner if deemed necessary by PDS, present the
itemized report of expenses to the legislative body of this jurisdiction for consideration. The legislative body of this jurisdiction shall fix a time, date and
place for hearing said report and any protests or objections thereto. The City Clerk shall cause notice of said hearing to be published once in a newspaper
of general circulation in this jurisdiction.
Notice, Section 801.2.2. The Director of Planning and Development Services shall cause notice of said hearing to be posted upon the property involved,
and served by certified mail, to the owner of the property as the owner's name and address appears on the last equalized assessment roll of the County.
Such notice shall be given at least ten (10) days or as reasonably possible prior to the date set for the hearing and shall specify the day, hour and place
when the legislative body will hear and pass upon the Director of Planning and Development Services or designee's report, together with any objections or
protests which have been filed by any person, firm or corporation aggrieved by the proposed charge.
Procedure, Section 801.3. If City Council directs any work of repair or demolition to be done pursuant to section 701.3, item 3, of this Code, the work shall
be accomplished by personnel of this jurisdiction or by private contract under the direction of the Director of Planning and Development Services. Plans
and specifications therefor may be prepared by the Director, or the Director may employ such architectural and engineering assistance on a contract basis
as deemed reasonably necessary. If any part of the work is to be accomplished by private contract, standard Boise City contractual procedures shall be
followed.
Repair And Demolition Fund, Section 802.1. The legislative body of this jurisdiction shall establish a special revolving fund to be designated as the Repair
and Demolition Fund. Payments shall be made out of said fund upon the demand of the Director to defray the costs and expenses which may be incurred
by this jurisdiction in doing or causing to be done the necessary work of repair or demolition of dangerous buildings.
(1952 Code § 4-11-7)
9-11-8: AMENDMENT TO ADB, RECOVERY OF COST OF REPAIR OR DEMOLITION, CHAPTER 9:
The following sections of chapter 9 of the ADB are amended to read as follows:
Section 902 Notice Of Hearing, 903 Protests And Objections, And 904 Hearing Of Protests Of The ADB.
Account Expense, Filing Of Report, Section 901. The building official shall keep an itemized account of the expense incurred by this jurisdiction in the
repair or demolition of any building done pursuant to the provisions of section 701.3, item 3, of this Code. Upon the completion of the work of repair or
demolition, said building official shall prepare and file with the Clerk of this jurisdiction a report specifying the work done, the itemized and total cost of the
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 400/503
work, a description of the real property upon which the building or structure is or was located, and the names and addresses of the persons entitled to
notice pursuant to section 401.3.
Interest, Section 908.2. All such assessments remaining unpaid after thirty (30) days from the date of recording on the assessment roll shall become
delinquent and shall bear interest at the rate of ten percent (10%) per annum from and after said date.
Filing Copy Of Report With County Auditor, Section 910. If the County Assessor and the County Tax Collector assess property and collect taxes for this
jurisdiction, a certified copy of the assessment shall be filed with the County Auditor on or before August 1. The descriptions of the parcels reported shall
be those used for the same parcels on the County Assessor's map books for the current year.
Repayment Of Repair And Demolition Fund, Section 912. All money recovered by payment of the charge or assessment or from the sale of the property at
foreclosure sale shall be paid to the Treasurer of this jurisdiction, who shall credit the same to the Repair and Demolition Fund.
(1952 Code § 4-11-08)
Chapter 12
MOVING, DEMOLITION OF BUILDINGS
9-12-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to provide certain minimum standards and requirements to safeguard public welfare, health and safety by regulating and
controlling the moving or demolition of buildings and structures. (1952 Code § 4-04-01)
9-12-2: PERMIT REQUIRED:
A. Unlawful Acts Without Permit: Without first securing the required permits from the Planning and Development Services Department and any other
applicable agency, it shall be unlawful to:
1. Demolish any building, structure or part of a building or structure;
2. Place any moved building or structure on any lot or parcel of ground in the City corporate limits; or
3. Move any building or structure within the City corporate limits to a location into or out of the City corporate limits.
B. Application For Permit: All applications for permits shall contain such information as may be deemed necessary to safeguard public welfare, health and
safety during the moving or demolition of structures or portions of structures on public and private property and to ensure compliance with all applicable
Code requirements. (1952 Code § 4-04-02)
9-12-3: MOVING OF BUILDINGS:
All persons or entities placing any preexisting building or structure on any lot or parcel of ground within the City corporate limits or moving any building or
structure within the City corporate limits to a location into or out of the City corporate limits, shall comply with all of the following prior to any move:
A. Application: Prior to actual relocation or placement of a building or structure, the applicant shall submit for and secure all necessary City permits through
the Planning and Development Services Department.
B. Bond:
1. Post Bond: A bond is required to ensure a buildable site that is free of safety hazards and construction debris at the completion of the relocation of
the existing structure. The permit applicant shall deposit and file a bond with the Planning and Development Services Department. The bond shall
ensure that sufficient funds are available to repay the City for any expenditure incurred by the City for Code required construction upgrades,
protection or removal of property. The bond shall further ensure that the property is in a proper and safe condition after such removal and relocation,
that all combustible and noncombustible debris or material is cleared away, and that any excavation remaining is filled in. All land disturbing
activities, at both sites, shall be in compliance with chapter 14, "Construction Site Erosion Control", of this title.
2. Amount Of Bond: The bond shall be kept and maintained in force and effect until all of the actions listed above have been completed. The bond
amount shall be established in amounts equal to three percent (3%) of structure replacement square footage cost for the group and type of
construction type as published in the latest edition of the Building Safety Journal, printed by the International Code Council. In the event the applicant
fails to perform the duties and responsibilities imposed by this subsection, the bond shall be forfeited and utilized in an amount necessary to
complete the duties and responsibilities of the applicant and any remaining bond amount shall be returned to the permit applicant.
C. Insurance: Permit holders or authorized agents of permit holders moving dwellings or structures shall file a public liability insurance policy, or a
certificate of liability insurance and endorsements with the Planning and Development Services Department providing limits for property damage and
personal injuries in the minimum amount as specified in the Idaho Tort Claims Act set forth in Idaho Code title 6, chapter 9, in accordance with the
scope of the work contemplated.
D. Notification Prior To Move: The permit applicant shall certify, on permit application, to the Planning and Development Services Department that
arrangements have been made with the owner of utilities and adjacent property for the protection of such facilities when it is necessary to cut, repair,
remove, raise or replace any cable, wires, piping or any objects, whether they are publicly or privately owned, that may interfere with the removal or
placement of such building or structure. A similar list shall be provided in the vicinity of where the building structure is being located.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 401/503
E. Special Permits: The permit applicant or his authorized agent, before moving dwellings or structures, shall obtain the required permits for overweight or
oversized loads when moving buildings or structures over public right-of-way within the City limits as required in the Idaho Motor Vehicles Act set forth
in Idaho Code title 49, chapter 10. The City shall be given a copy of any required permits or certify that they have been obtained.
F. Barrier Needed: Any building or structure removed from its existing footing and foundation and elevated for relocation or any moved building or structure
placed on any lot or parcel of ground in the City corporate limits shall be enclosed with a readily visible barricade until removed from its original site or
securely anchored to an approved footing and foundation. Open excavation exceeding thirty inches (30") below existing grade shall also be enclosed
with a readily visible barricade until such excavation is backfilled to match existing grade. The removal, anchoring of building or structure or backfilling
of any open excavation shall not exceed thirty (30) calendar days from issuance date of permit. The removal, anchoring of building or structure or
backfilling of any open excavation exceeding thirty (30) calendar days shall be enclosed with a six foot (6') high construction fence constructed of
wood, metal chainlink or any other materials as approved by the building official.
G. Building Permit Required: Relocated buildings or structures shall not be stored on any lot or parcel of ground within the City corporate limits without an
approved building permit issued from Planning and Development Services.
H. Storage Requirements: Requests for storage of buildings or structures shall be made in writing to the Director of Planning and Development Services
and approved prior to issuance of a building permit. Approved storage of buildings or structures shall require the installation of a six foot (6') high
security fence constructed of wood, metal chainlink or any other materials as approved by the building official, motion sensor activated security lighting
and daily monitoring. Storage of such buildings or structures shall not exceed one hundred eighty (180) calendar days. Security measures shall be to a
degree that will prevent access.
I. Abatement: Buildings or structures placed upon any lot or parcel without valid permits shall be subject to abatement as determined by Mayor and
Council in accordance with the provisions set forth in Idaho Code title 50, chapter 3. Buildings or structures placed on any lot or parcel without valid
permits shall be immediately secured with a six foot (6') high construction fence constructed of wood, metal chainlink or any other materials as
approved by the building official. If secured by the City, the City shall also levy a special assessment on the parcel to defray the cost or reimburse the
City for the costs associated with fence construction or any additional security requirements that were required by the City of the property owner. (1952
Code § 4-04-03)
9-12-4: DEMOLITION OF BUILDINGS:
A demolition shall include any full or partial demolition work. All applications to demolish any building or structure on any lot or parcel of ground in the City
corporate limits shall comply with all of the following prior to any demolition work occurring:
A. Application: Prior to actual demolition, the applicant shall submit for and secure all City required permits through the Planning and Development
Services Department.
B. Bond:
1. Post Bond: A bond is required to ensure a buildable site that is free of safety hazards and construction debris at the completion of the demolition of
the existing structures. The permit applicant shall deposit and file a bond with the Planning and Development Services Department. The bond shall
ensure that sufficient funds are available to repay the City for any expenditure incurred by the City for the protection or removal of property. The bond
shall further ensure the property is in a proper and safe condition after such removal, that all combustible and noncombustible debris or material is
cleared away, and that any excavation remaining is filled in.
2. Amount Of Bond: A bond shall be kept and maintained in force and effect until all of the scope of work of the permit is completed and the property is
in a proper and safe condition after the structure is demolished. All combustible and noncombustible debris or material shall be cleared away and
any remaining excavation is filled into ground level. The bond amount shall be established in amounts equal to three percent (3%) of the structure
replacement square footage cost for the group and type of construction as published in the latest edition of the Building Safety Journal, printed by the
International Code Council or by acceptable bid amounts submitted by State registered and licensed contractors. In the event the applicant fails to
perform the duties and responsibilities imposed by this subsection, the bond shall be forfeited and utilized and in an amount necessary to complete
the duties and responsibilities of the applicant. Any funds remaining from the bond after it is utilized to perform the outstanding work on the permit
shall be returned to the applicant.
C. Insurance; Exception:
1. Property owners or authorized agents of permit holders demolishing dwellings or structures shall file a public liability insurance policy, or a certificate
of liability insurance, and endorsements with the Planning and Development Services Department providing limits for property damage and personal
injuries in the minimum amount as specified in the Idaho Tort Claims Act set forth in Idaho Code title 6, chapter 9 in accordance with the scope of the
work contemplated; and
2. Property owners of single-family dwellings or structures, which are not licensed or established contractors or developers, demolishing the primary or
secondary structures on the parcel without contract labor and equipment.
D. Notification Prior To Demolition: The permit applicant shall certify to the Planning and Development Services Department, on permit application forms,
that arrangements have been or will be made with the owner of utilities and adjacent property for the protection of such facilities when it is necessary to
cut, repair, remove, raise or replace any cable, wires, piping or any objects, whether they are publicly or privately owned, that may interfere with the
demolition of such building or structure.
E. Debris Removal:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 402/503
1. All combustible and noncombustible debris or material shall be removed from the premises on which the demolition is carried out within thirty (30)
calendar days from the completion of the demolition, or from the stoppage of the work thereon if the work remains uncompleted, unless the Planning
and Development Services Department extends the time therefor because of weather, terrain or other special circumstances, but such extension
shall not exceed ninety (90) calendar days.
2. It is unlawful for any owner or person in possession of real property to permit the debris to remain on the property without disposal. Any debris
remaining thirty (30) calendar days after the completion of the demolition work or from stoppage of work without an approved extension by the City
shall constitute a public nuisance. Any unsupported portions of a building or structure or debris existing beyond the periods set forth above shall be
subject to abatement by the City. Buildings or structures demolished upon any lot or parcel without valid permits shall be subject to abatement as
determined by Mayor and Council in accordance with the provisions set forth in Idaho Code title 50, chapter 3.
3. After removal of any structure, all foundations that will not be utilized in the permitted new construction shall be removed and all excavations filled in
to the level of the adjoining grade. All land disturbing activities shall be in compliance with chapter 14, "Construction Site Erosion Control", of this title.
Plans shall be submitted to the City for any new construction proposed which utilize remaining foundations.
F. Barrier Needed: Any remaining foundations or open excavation exceeding thirty inches (30") in depth below the existing grade approved for further use
shall be surrounded by a readily visible barricade and be maintained until the new construction has progressed sufficiently to remove any hazards to
the public for a period of time not to exceed thirty (30) calendar days from the date of permit issuance. Any remaining foundations or open excavation
exceeding thirty inches (30") in depth below the existing grade approved for further use that constitutes a hazard to the public after thirty (30) calendar
days from date of permit issuance shall be enclosed with a six foot (6') high construction fence constructed of wood, metal chainlink or any other
materials as approved by the building official.
G. Partial Demolition: The partial demolition of buildings or structures that leaves or exposes an exterior wall of an adjoining or adjacent building or
structure shall be evaluated by all applicable City departments to ensure that currently adopted Code provisions are met or maintained in both the
remaining buildings or structures and any future developments or improvements. The remaining buildings or structures shall also be evaluated by a
State licensed engineer for structural integrity. Any additional City or structural engineering requirements shall be included in the demolition permit and
the associated costs bonded for as herein provided. The scope of work identified in this demolition permit shall be completed within ninety (90)
calendar days of permit issuance or the bond shall be forfeited and utilized in an amount necessary to complete the duties and responsibilities of the
permit applicant. After work has been completed, any remaining bond amount shall be returned to the permit applicant.
H. Existing Parking Surfaces: Existing asphalt and concrete parking surfaces adjacent to or surrounding the removed structure and covering fifty percent
(50%) or more of the parcel shall be allowed to remain, providing a method of soil stabilization as required in chapter 14, "Construction Site Erosion
Control", of this title. Prior to issuance of a demolition permit, a written request to the Planning and Development Services Department must be
submitted and approved to enable existing building surfaces to remain intact on site.
I. Abatement: Demolition of buildings or structures begun without valid permits shall be subject to abatement as determined by Mayor and Council in
accordance with the provisions set forth in Idaho Code title 50, chapter 3. Buildings or structures under demolition without valid permits shall be
immediately secured with a six foot (6') high construction fence constructed of wood, metal chainlink or any other materials as approved by the building
official. If secured by the City, the City shall also levy a special assessment on the parcel to defray the cost or reimburse the City for the costs
associated with fence construction or any additional security requirements that were required by the City of the property owner. (1952 Code § 4-04-04)
9-12-5: APPEAL:
Any person, firm or corporation aggrieved by any action or decision of the Planning and Development Services Department arising out of the enforcement
of this chapter may appeal the same to the City Council. Such appeal shall be made in writing and must be filed with the City Clerk within ten (10) calendar
days after the action or decision which is the subject of the appeal. (1952 Code § 4-04-06)
9-12-6: PENALTY:
Any person, firm or corporation violating the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be
subject to penalty as provided in section 1-4-1 of this Code. Each separate day or any portion thereof during which any violation of this chapter occurs or
continues shall be deemed to constitute a separate offense and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punishable as herein provided. (1952 Code § 4-04-05;
amd. 2019 Code)
Chapter 13
GREEN CONSTRUCTION CODE
9-13-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to establish regulations increasing the sustainability components of buildings and sites beyond the minimum requirements of
other adopted codes using prescriptive and performance related provisions. The provisions of this chapter shall regulate the design of site development
and land use, material resource conservation and efficiency, energy conservation efficiency and CO2 emission reduction, water resource conservation
quality and efficiency, indoor environmental quality, commissioning operation and maintenance, existing buildings, and existing building site development
design in new construction. (Ord. 33-15, 8-11-2015)
9-13-2: CODE ADOPTED:
All rules, regulations and ordinances applying to the design, construction, quality of materials, erection, installation, alteration, repair, location, relocation,
replacement, addition to, use or maintenance of the building systems, contained in book and in Code form, designated and entitled 2012 International
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 403/503
Green Construction Code, including appendix A, Project Electives, published under the authority of the International Code Council, Inc. (IGCC), is ratified
and adopted, except as said rules and regulations are hereby changed, altered and amended by this chapter. The 2012 edition of the International Green
Construction Code, and amendments pursuant to this chapter, shall be known as the Green Construction Code of Boise City. One copy of the 2012
International Green Construction Code shall be filed for use and examination by the public in the Office of the City Clerk. (Ord. 33-15, 8-11-2015)
9-13-3: IGCC AMENDMENT, SECTION 101.1, TITLE:
101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the Green Construction Code of Boise City, hereinafter referred to as "this Code".
(Ord. 33-15, 8-11-2015)
9-13-4: IGCC AMENDMENT, SECTION 101.3, SCOPE:
101.3 Scope. An applicant may elect to proceed under the provisions of the Green Construction Code. In such cases, the provisions of this Code shall
apply to the design, construction, addition, alteration, change of occupancy, relocation, replacement, repair, equipment, building site, maintenance,
removal and demolition of every building or structure or any appurtenances connected or attached to such buildings or structures and to the site on which
the building is located. Occupancy classifications shall be determined in accordance with the International Building Code (IBC). Applicants may voluntarily
elect to have projects comply with this Code during the building permit application period unless compliance with this Code is required as an agreed upon
condition of approval through the planning and zoning approval process.
Exceptions:
1. The Code shall not apply to items 1.1, 1.2 and 1.3, except where the jurisdiction adopts the jurisdictional requirements of section 302.1, item 1, for
residential buildings.
1.1. Detached one- and two-family dwellings and multiple single-family dwellings (townhouses) not more than three (3) stories in height above grade
plane with a separate means of egress, their accessory structures, and the site or lot upon which these buildings are located.
1.2. Group R-3 residential buildings, their accessory structures, and the site or lot upon which these buildings are located.
1.3. Group R-2 and R-4 residential buildings four (4) stories or less in height above grade plane, their accessory structures, and the site or lot upon
which these buildings are located.
2. The Code shall not apply to equipment or systems that are used primarily for industrial or manufacturing.
3. The Code shall not apply to temporary structures approved under section 3103 of the International Building Code.
4. Where ASHRAE 189.1 is selected in accordance with section 301.1.1, ASHRAE 189.1 shall not apply to buildings identified in exceptions 1
through 3.
(Ord. 33-15, 8-11-2015)
9-13-5: IGCC AMENDMENT, SECTION 102.4, REFERENCED CODES AND STANDARDS:
102.4 Referenced Codes And Standards. The following codes shall be considered part of the requirements of this Code: the International Building Code
(IBC), the International Code Council Performance Code (ICCPC), the International Energy Conservation Code (IECC), the International Existing Building
Code (IEBC), the International Fire Code (IFC), the International Fuel Gas Code (IFGC), the International Mechanical Code (IMC), and the National
Electrical Code (NEC). All references to the International Plumbing Code (IPC) shall be construed as referring to the Uniform Plumbing Code (UPC), as
adopted and amended by the Idaho State Plumbing Board, which is known as the Idaho State Plumbing Code.
(Ord. 33-15, 8-11-2015)
9-13-6: IGCC AMENDMENT, SECTION 102.6, EXISTING STRUCTURES:
102.6 Existing Structures. The legal occupancy of any structure existing on the date of adoption of this Code shall continue without change, except as is
specifically covered in this Code, the International Building Code, the International Existing Building Code, or the International Fire Code, or as is deemed
necessary by the Code official for the general safety and welfare of building occupants and the public.
(Ord. 33-15, 8-11-2015)
9-13-7: IGCC AMENDMENT, SECTION 103.1, GENERAL:
103.1 General. The building official established under City adoption of the International Building Code, shall be referred to as the Code official under this
Code, and is hereby authorized and directed to enforce the provisions of this Code. The Code official shall have the authority to render interpretations of
this Code and to adopt policies and procedures in order to clarify the application of its provisions and how this Code relates to other applicable codes and
ordinances. Such interpretations, policies and procedures shall be in compliance with the intent and purpose of this Code and other applicable codes and
ordinances. Such policies and procedures shall not have the effect of waiving requirements specifically provided for in this Code or other applicable codes
and ordinances.
(Ord. 33-15, 8-11-2015)
9-13-8: IGCC AMENDMENT, ADD SECTION 103.5, STOP WORK ORDER:
103.5 Stop Work Order. Whenever the Code official identifies any work regulated by and conducted under the Green Construction Code performed in a
manner contrary to the provisions of this Code or in a dangerous or unsafe manner, the Code official is authorized to issue a stop work order in
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 404/503
accordance with section 115 of the International Building Code.
(Ord. 33-15, 8-11-2015)
9-13-9: IGCC AMENDMENT, ADD SECTION 105.6, APPROVED PROGRAMS:
105.6 Approved Programs. The Code official may deem other National, State or local programs as equivalent to or exceeding this Code's requirements.
Building projects approved in writing by such a program shall be considered to be in compliance with this Code. Such programs include, but are not limited
to, new buildings that achieve certification under the U.S. Green Building Council (USGBC) Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design (LEED) at a
silver or higher rating, or at a rating of two (2) green globes or higher under the Green Globes Program. Equivalency for existing buildings are those that
achieve certification under the USGBC Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design (LEED) at certified or higher or a rating of one (1) green globe or
higher under the Green Globes Program.
(Ord. 33-15, 8-11-2015)
9-13-10: IGCC AMENDMENT, SECTIONS 108, BOARD OF APPEALS AND 108.1, GENERAL:
108.1 General. Appeals of orders, decisions or determinations made by the Code official relative to the application and interpretation of this Code shall be
made to the Board of Appeals created under International Building Code amendments in the Boise City Building Code of the Boise Municipal Code.
(Ord. 33-15, 8-11-2015)
9-13-11: IGCC AMENDMENT, SECTION 108.2, LIMITATIONS ON AUTHORITY IS DELETED:
108.2 Limitations On Authority. Deleted.
(Ord. 33-15, 8-11-2015)
9-13-12: IGCC AMENDMENT, SECTION 108.3, QUALIFICATIONS IS DELETED:
108.3 Qualifications. Deleted.
(Ord. 33-15, 8-11-2015)
9-13-13: IGCC AMENDMENT, ADD SECTIONS 110, VIOLATIONS AND 110.1, GENERAL:
Section 110 Violations.
110.1 General. When proceeding under the Green Construction Code, violations of any provision of the Green Construction Code identified by the Code
official shall be subject to penalties outlined in the Boise City Building Code of the Boise Municipal Code.
(Ord. 33-15, 8-11-2015)
9-13-14: IGCC AMENDMENT, ADD SECTIONS 111, INCENTIVES AND 111.1, GENERAL:
Section 111 Incentives.
111.1 General. Projects voluntarily complying with the provisions of the Green Construction Code may apply for the following incentives when available:
1. Acceptance of project into the Planning and Development Services Project Management Program.
2. Expedited building permit application review.
3. Recognition and marketing assistance (such as awards, jobsite displays/signage, press releases, recognition on City internet site, recognition in
quarterly newsletter, and other means).
4. Any other incentive programs created and approved by City Council directed at green construction.
(Ord. 33-15, 8-11-2015)
9-13-15: IGCC AMENDMENT, ADD SECTIONS 112, CITY BUILDINGS AND 112.1, GENERAL:
Section 112 City Buildings.
112.1 General. Construction of new buildings by Boise City shall comply with the provisions of the Green Construction Code or other approved programs
as outlined in section 105.6 of this Code.
Exception: Unconditioned buildings, buildings not typically occupied, buildings with specialized industrial or mechanical equipment or similar buildings, may
be exempted from this Code by the Code official.
(Ord. 33-15, 8-11-2015)
9-13-16: IGCC AMENDMENT, SECTION 201.3, TERMS DEFINED IN OTHER CODES:
201.3 Terms Defined In Other Codes. Where terms are not defined in this Code and are defined in the currently adopted editions of the International
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 405/503
Building Code, International Energy Conservation Code, International Fire Code, International Fuel Gas Code, International Mechanical Code,
International Residential Code, National Electrical Code or the Uniform Plumbing Code, such terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them as in those
codes.
(Ord. 33-15, 8-11-2015)
9-13-17: IGCC AMENDMENT, TABLE 302.1, REQUIREMENTS DETERMINED BY THE JURISDICTION:
Table 302.1 is amended to read as follows:
TABLE 302.1
ENHANCED REQUIREMENTS DETERMINED BY THE JURISDICTION
Chapter 1. Scope
101.3
Exception
1.1
Detached one- and two-family dwellings and multiple single-family dwellings (townhouses) not more than 3 stories in
height above grade plane with a separate means of egress, their accessory structures, and the site or lot upon which
these buildings are located, shall comply with ICC 700
Yes No
101.3
Exception
1.2
Group R-3 residential buildings, their accessory structures, and the site or lot upon which these buildings are located,
shall comply with ICC 700
Yes No
101.3
Exception
1.3
Group R-2 and R-4 residential buildings 4 stories or less in height above grade plane, their accessory structures, and
the site or lot upon which these buildings are located, shall comply with ICC 700-2012 at bronze rating level or higher.
Yes No
Chapter 4. Site Development And Land Use
402.2.1 Flood hazard area preservation general Yes No
402.2.2 Flood hazard area preservation, specific: In accordance with flood hazard regulations and waterways overlay districts
of the City Development Code
Yes No
402.3 Surface water protection: In accordance with flood hazard regulations and waterways overlay districts of the City
Development Code
Yes No
402.5 Conservation area: In accordance with the waterways overlay districts and hillside and foothills development
standards of the City Development Code
Yes No
402.7 Agricultural land Yes No
402.8 Greenfield sites Yes No
407.4.1 High occupancy vehicle parking Yes No
407.4.2 Low emission, hybrid and electric vehicle parking Yes No
409.1 Light pollution control Yes No
Chapter 5. Material Resource Conservation And Efficiency
503.1 Minimum percentage of waste material diverted from landfills .35% .50%
.65% .75%
Chapter 6. Energy Conservation, Efficiency And CO2e Emission Reduction
302.1,
302.1.1,
602.1
zEPI of jurisdictional choice: The jurisdiction shall indicate a zEPI of 46 or less in each occupancy for which it intends
to require enhanced energy performance
Occupancy:
n/a
zEPI: n/a
604.1 Automated demand response infrastructure Yes No
Chapter 7. Water Resource Conservation, Quality And Efficiency
702.7 Municipal reclaimed water Yes No
Chapter 8. Indoor Environmental Quality And Control
804.2 Post construction preoccupancy baseline IAQ testing Yes No
807.1 Sound transmission and sound levels Yes No
Chapter 10. Existing Buildings
1007.2 Evaluation of existing buildings Yes No
1007.3 Post certificate of occupancy zEPI, energy demand and CO2e emissions testing Yes No
Section
Section Title Or
Description And Directives
Jurisdictional
Requirements
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 406/503
(Ord. 33-15, 8-11-2015)
9-13-18: IGCC AMENDMENT, SECTION 402.2.2, FLOOD HAZARD AREA PRESERVATION, SPECIFIC:
402.2.2 Flood Hazard Area Preservation, Specific. Where this section is indicated to be applicable in table 302.1, new buildings and structures, site
disturbance, and development of land shall be prohibited within specific flood hazard areas as regulated in accordance with the flood hazard regulations
and waterways overlay districts of the City Development Code.
(Ord. 33-15, 8-11-2015)
9-13-19: IGCC AMENDMENT, SECTION 402.2.3, DEVELOPMENT IN FLOOD HAZARD AREAS:
402.2.3 Development In Flood Hazard Areas. New buildings, structures and substantial improvements constructed in flood hazard areas shall be in
compliance with the International Building Code as adopted and regulated in accordance with the flood hazard regulations of the City Development Code.
(Ord. 33-15, 8-11-2015)
9-13-20: IGCC AMENDMENT, SECTION 402.3, SURFACE WATER PROTECTION, INCLUDING DELETING THE EXCEPTIONS:
402.3 Surface Water Protection. Where this section is indicated to be applicable in table 302.1, buildings and building site improvements near bodies of
water shall be regulated in accordance with the flood hazard regulations and waterways overlay districts of the City Development Code.
(Ord. 33-15, 8-11-2015)
9-13-21: IGCC AMENDMENT, SECTION 402.4, WETLAND PROTECTION, INCLUDING DELETING THE EXCEPTION:
402.4 Wetland Protection. Buildings and building site improvements shall not be located within a wetland and shall be regulated in accordance with the
waterways overlay districts of the City Development Code and in accordance with requirements of the United States Army Corps of Engineers when near
a wetland.
(Ord. 33-15, 8-11-2015)
9-13-22: IGCC AMENDMENT, SECTION 402.5, CONSERVATION AREA:
402.5 Conservation Area. Where this section is indicated to be applicable in table 302.1, site disturbance or development of land near designated
conservation areas shall be regulated in accordance with the waterways overlay districts and hillside and foothills development standards of the City
Development Code.
(Ord. 33-15, 8-11-2015)
9-13-23: IGCC AMENDMENT, SECTION 403.1, STORMWATER MANAGEMENT:
403.1 Stormwater Management. Stormwater management systems shall comply with the Boise City stormwater management and discharge control
ordinance.
(Ord. 33-15, 8-11-2015)
9-13-24: IGCC AMENDMENT, SECTION 403.1.1, INCREASED RUNOFF IS DELETED:
403.1.1 Increased Runoff. Deleted.
(Ord. 33-15, 8-11-2015)
9-13-25: IGCC AMENDMENT, SECTION 403.1.2, ADJOINING LOTS AND PROPERTY IS DELETED:
403.1.2 Adjoining Lots And Property. Deleted.
(Ord. 33-15, 8-11-2015)
9-13-26: IGCC AMENDMENT, SECTION 405.1.1, STORMWATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLAN:
Section 405.1.1 shall be repealed and replaced with language as follows:
405.1.1 Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan. Regardless of the size of the site, a written Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan (SWPPP) that meets the
minimum requirements as prescribed in the most current construction general permit (CGP) shall be submitted and approved prior to construction. The
implementation of an approved SWPPP shall be in compliance with the rules, regulations and standards prescribed in the construction site erosion control
ordinance of the Boise Municipal Code during all phases of construction. In addition to the CGP requirements, the plan must include the following:
1. Treatment details for each zone of soil that will be restored, including the type, source and expected volume of materials, including compost
amendments, mulch and topsoil.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 407/503
2. The following plans shall be included as appendices to the SWPPP:
2.1 Vegetation and Soil Protection Plan per section 405.2 of this Code.
2.2 Soil Reuse and Restoration Plan per section 405.1.4 of this Code.
2.3 Building Site Waste Management Plan per section 406 of this Code.
2.4 Invasive Species Management Plan per section 405.2.2 of this Code.
(Ord. 33-15, 8-11-2015)
9-13-27: IGCC AMENDMENT, SECTION 405.1.2, TOPSOIL PROTECTION IS DELETED:
405.1.2 Topsoil Protection. Deleted.
(Ord. 33-15, 8-11-2015)
9-13-28: IGCC AMENDMENT, SECTION 405.2.1, VEGETATION AND SOIL PROTECTION PLAN:
Section 405.2.1 shall be struck and replaced with language as follows:
405.2.1 Vegetation And Soil Protection Plan. Where existing soils and vegetation are to be protected, a Vegetation and Soil Protection Plan
establishing designated vegetation and soil protection areas (VSPAs) shall be submitted with the construction documents and other submittal
documents. The Protection Plan shall be in accordance with the Boise Development Code section 11-07-05.
(Ord. 33-15, 8-11-2015)
9-13-29: IGCC AMENDMENT, SECTION 405.2.1.1, TREE PROTECTION ZONES (TPZ):
405.2.1.1 Tree Protection Zones (TPZ). Where tree protection zones are specified, they shall be in accordance with the Boise Development Code section
11-07-05.
(Ord. 33-15, 8-11-2015)
9-13-30: IGCC AMENDMENT, SECTION 405.3, NATIVE AND ADAPTIVE PLANT LANDSCAPING:
405.3 Native And Adaptive Plant Landscaping. Where new landscaping is installed as part of a site plan or within the building site, not less than fifty
percent (50%) of the newly landscaped area shall be planted with native and adaptive plant species. Low water use vegetation shall also be considered
appropriate. A list of plant materials which are acceptable is maintained by the Boise City Planning Division.
Exception: Schools, parks, outdoor sports facilities and other similar uses with large open fields are allowed to be less than fifty percent (50%) at the
discretion of the Code official.
(Ord. 33-15, 8-11-2015)
9-13-31: IGCC AMENDMENT, SECTION 406.1, BUILDING SITE WASTE MANAGEMENT PLAN:
406.1 Building Site Waste Management Plan. A Building Site Waste Management Plan shall be developed and implemented to divert not less than
seventy five percent (75%) of the land clearing debris and excavated soils from the landfill. Where it can be shown that diverting seventy five percent
(75%) of debris and soils is not feasible to the satisfaction of the Code official, debris and soils shall be diverted from the landfill to the maximum extent
possible. Land clearing debris includes rock, trees, stumps and associated vegetation. The plan shall include provisions that address all of the following:
1. Materials to be diverted from disposal by efficient usage, recycling or reuse on the building site shall be specified.
2. Diverted materials sent to other site locations where approved by the Code official.
3. The effective destruction and disposal of invasive plant species.
4. Where contaminated soils are removed, the methods of removal and location where the soils are to be treated and disposed.
5. The amount of materials to be diverted shall be specified and shall be calculated by weight or volume, but not both.
6. Where the site is located in a Federal or State designated quarantine zone for invasive insect species, building site vegetation management shall
comply with the quarantine rules.
7. Receipts or other documentation related to diversion shall be maintained through the course of construction. When requested by the Code official,
evidence of diversion shall be provided.
(Ord. 33-15, 8-11-2015)
9-13-32: IGCC AMENDMENT, SECTION 407.2, CHANGING AND SHOWER FACILITIES:
407.2 Changing And Shower Facilities. Buildings which require long term or covered bicycle parking per the Boise Development Code shall be provided
with on site changing room and shower facilities. Not less than one shower shall be provided for each twenty (20) long term bicycle parking spaces, or
fraction thereof.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 408/503
When more than one changing room and shower facility is required, separate facilities shall be provided for each sex.
(Ord. 33-15, 8-11-2015)
9-13-33: IGCC AMENDMENT, SECTION 407.3, BICYCLE PARKING AND STORAGE, INCLUDING DELETING THE
EXCEPTIONS:
407.3 Bicycle Parking And Storage. Long term and short term bicycle parking shall be designated on the site plan by a registered design professional and
as specified in table 407.3. The required number of spaces shall be per the Boise Development Code section 11-07-03. Accessory occupancy areas shall
be included in the calculation of primary occupancy area.
(Ord. 33-15, 8-11-2015)
9-13-34: IGCC AMENDMENT, SECTION 407.3.1, SHORT TERM BICYCLE PARKING, INCLUDING DELETING THE EXCEPTION:
407.3.1 Short Term Bicycle Parking. Short term bicycle parking shall comply with all of the following:
1. It shall be provided with illumination of not less than one foot-candle at the parking surface;
2. It shall be located at the same grade as the sidewalk or at a location reachable by ramp or accessible route;
3. It shall have an area of not less than thirty inches by seventy two inches (30" x 72") for each bicycle;
4. It shall be provided with a rack or other facility for locking or securing each bicycle; and
5. It shall be located within fifty feet (50') of, and visible from, the main entrance.
(Ord. 33-15, 8-11-2015)
9-13-35: IGCC AMENDMENT, SECTION 407.3.2, LONG TERM OR COVERED BICYCLE PARKING, INCLUDING DELETING THE
LAST PARAGRAPH:
407.3.2 Long Term Or Covered Bicycle Parking. Long term or covered bicycle parking shall comply with all of the following:
1. It shall be located on the same site and within the building or within fifty feet (50') of the main entrances;
2. It shall be provided with illumination of not less than one foot-candle at the parking surface;
3. It shall have an area of not less than thirty inches by seventy two inches by seven feet (30" x 72" x 7') for each bicycle; and
4. It shall be provided with a rack or other facility for locking or securing each bicycle.
All long term bicycle parking shall be within a building or provided with a permanent cover including, but not limited to, roof overhangs, awnings or bicycle
storage lockers.
(Ord. 33-15, 8-11-2015)
9-13-36: IGCC AMENDMENT, SECTION 408.2, SITE HARDSCAPE:
408.2 Site Hardscape. In Climate Zones 1 through 6, as established in the International Energy Conservation Code, not less than forty percent (40%) of
the site hardscape shall be provided with one or any combination of options described in sections 408.2.1 through 408.2.4. For the purposes of this
section, site hardscape shall not include areas of the site covered by solar photovoltaic arrays of solar thermal collectors.
(Ord. 33-15, 8-11-2015)
9-13-37: IGCC AMENDMENT, SECTION 408.2.4, PERVIOUS AND PERMEABLE PAVEMENT:
408.2.4 Pervious And Permeable Pavement. Pervious and permeable pavements including open grid paving systems and open graded aggregate
systems shall have a design infiltration rate not less than ten inches (10") per hour per square foot. Pervious and permeable pavement shall be permitted
where the use of these types of hardscapes does not interfere with fire and emergency apparatus or vehicle or personnel access and egress, utilities, or
telecommunications lines. Aggregate used shall be of uniform size.
(Ord. 33-15, 8-11-2015)
9-13-38: IGCC AMENDMENT, SECTION 409.1, LIGHT POLLUTION CONTROL:
409.1 Light Pollution Control. Where this section is indicated to be applicable in table 302.1, or where chosen as an elective from table A104 of appendix
A, uplight, light trespass, and glare shall be limited for all exterior lighting equipment as described in sections 409.2 and 409.3.
Exception: Lighting used for the following exterior applications is exempt where equipped with a control device independent of the control of the
nonexempt lighting:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 409/503
1. Specialized signal, directional, and marker lighting associated with transportation.
2. Advertising signage or directional signage.
3. Lighting integral to equipment or instrumentation and installed by its manufacturer.
4. Theatrical purposes, including performance, stage, film production, and video production.
5. Athletic playing areas where lighting is equipped with hoods or louvers for glare control.
6. Temporary lighting.
7. Lighting for industrial production, material handling, transportation sites, and associated storage areas where lighting is equipped with hoods or
louvers for glare control.
8. Theme elements in theme and amusement parks.
9. Roadway lighting required by governmental authorities.
10. Lighting used to highlight features of public monuments and registered landmark structures.
11. Lighting classified for and used in hazardous areas.
12. Lighting for swimming pools and water features.
(Ord. 33-15, 8-11-2015)
9-13-39: IGCC AMENDMENT, SECTION 503.1, CONSTRUCTION MATERIAL AND WASTE MANAGEMENT PLAN:
503.1 Construction Material And Waste Management Plan. Not less than thirty five percent (35%) of nonhazardous construction waste shall be diverted
from disposal, except where other percentages are indicated in table 302.1. A Construction Material and Waste Management Plan shall be developed and
implemented to recycle or salvage construction materials and waste. This plan can be a deferred submittal, however, the plan must be submitted for
review and approval prior to the first inspection on the construction site. The Construction Material and Waste Management Plan shall comply with all of
the following:
1. The location for collection, separation and storage of recyclable construction waste shall be indicated.
2. Materials to be diverted from disposal by efficient usage, recycling, reuse, manufacturer's reclamation, or salvage for future use, donation or sale
shall be specified.
3. The percentage of materials to be diverted shall be specified and shall be calculated by weight or volume, but not both.
4. Receipts or other documentation related to diversion shall be maintained through the course of construction. Where requested by the Code official,
evidence of diversion shall be provided.
For the purposes of this section, construction materials and waste shall include all materials delivered to the site and intended for installation prior to the
issuance of the certificate of occupancy, including related packaging. Construction and waste materials shall not include land clearing debris, excavated
soils and fill and base materials such as, but not limited to, topsoil, sand and gravel. Land clearing debris shall include trees, stumps, rocks, and
vegetation. Excavated soil, fill material and land clearing debris shall be managed in accordance with section 406.1.
(Ord. 33-15, 8-11-2015)
9-13-40: IGCC AMENDMENT, SECTION 504.1, RECYCLING AREAS FOR WASTE GENERATED POST CERTIFICATE OF
OCCUPANCY, INCLUDING DELETING ITEMS 3, 3.1 AND 3.2:
504.1 Recycling Areas For Waste Generated Post Certificate Of Occupancy. Waste recycling areas for use by building occupants shall be provided in
accordance with one of the following:
1. Waste recycling areas shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the Boise City solid waste ordinance.
2. Where laws or regulations do not exist or where limited recycling services are available, waste recycling areas shall be designed and constructed
to accommodate recyclable materials.
(Ord. 33-15, 8-11-2015)
9-13-41: IGCC AMENDMENT, SECTION 505.2, MATERIAL SELECTION:
505.2 Material Selection. Not less than forty percent (40%) of the total building materials used in the project, based on cost, shall comply with section
505.2.1, 505.2.2, 505.2.3, 505.2.4 or 505.2.5. Where a material complies with more than one section, the material value shall be multiplied by the number
of sections that it complies with. The value of total building material cost shall remain constant regardless of whether materials are tabulated in more than
one section.
(Ord. 33-15, 8-11-2015)
9-13-42: IGCC AMENDMENT, SECTION 603.6, ENERGY DISPLAY:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 410/503
603.6 Energy Display. A permanent, readily accessible and visible display shall be provided. The display shall be capable of providing all of the following:
1. The current energy demand for the whole building level measurements, updated for each fuel type at the intervals specified in section 603.3.
2. The average and peak demands for the previous day and the same day the previous year.
3. The total energy usage for the previous eighteen (18) months.
(Ord. 33-15, 8-11-2015)
9-13-43: IGCC AMENDMENT, SECTION 607.6.1, BURIED PIPING, EXCEPTION:
607.6.1 Buried Piping. Service hot water piping installed within a slab or below grade shall be insulated in accordance with section 607.6 and shall be
placed within a physically protective, waterproof channel or sleeve having internal dimensions large enough so that the piping and insulation can be
removed and replaced, and maintain its dimensional integrity during and after construction.
Exception: For piping other than that located under building slabs, sleeving is not required where the insulation manufacturer stipulates that the pipe
insulation will maintain its insulating value in underground applications in damp soil where installed in accordance with manufacturer's instructions.
(Ord. 33-15, 8-11-2015)
9-13-44: IGCC AMENDMENT, SECTION 608.6, PLUG LOAD CONTROLS AND ALL SUBSECTIONS 608.6.1 THROUGH 608.6.6
ARE DELETED:
608.6 Plug Load Controls. Deleted and subsections 608.6.1 through 608.6.6 deleted.
(Ord. 33-15, 8-11-2015)
9-13-45: IGCC AMENDMENT, SECTION 609.2.1, ELEVATORS:
609.2.1 Elevators. When acceptable by the State of Idaho Division of Building Safety, elevator systems shall comply with sections 609.2.1.1 through
609.2.1.2.3.
(Ord. 33-15, 8-11-2015)
9-13-46: IGCC AMENDMENT, SECTION 609.2.1.5, GUIDES IS DELETED:
609.2.1.5 Guides. Deleted.
(Ord. 33-15, 8-11-2015)
9-13-47: IGCC AMENDMENT, SECTION 609.2.2, ESCALATORS AND MOVING WALKWAYS:
609.2.2 Escalators And Moving Walkways. When acceptable by the State of Idaho Division of Building Safety, escalators and moving walkways shall
comply with sections 609.2.2.1 through 609.2.2.5.
(Ord. 33-15, 8-11-2015)
9-13-48: IGCC AMENDMENT, SECTION 609.2.2.5, STANDBY MODE:
609.2.2.5 Standby Mode. During standby mode, escalators and moving walkways shall be capable of being automatically slowed to not less than ten feet
(10') per minute of nominal speed. Escalators and moving walkways shall be capable of being turned off when the building is unoccupied or outside of
facility operations. In locations where multiple escalators serve the same passenger load, not less than fifty percent (50%) of the escalators shall have the
capability of being turned off in response to reduced occupant traffic.
(Ord. 33-15, 8-11-2015)
9-13-49: IGCC AMENDMENT, SECTION 610.1, RENEWABLE ENERGY SYSTEMS REQUIREMENTS:
610.1 Renewable Energy Systems Requirements. Where chosen as an elective from table A106 of appendix A, buildings that consume energy shall
comply with this section. Each building or surrounding lot or building site where there are multiple buildings on the building site shall be equipped with one
or more renewable energy systems in accordance with this section.
Renewable energy systems shall comply with the requirements of section 610.2 for solar photovoltaic systems, section 610.3 for wind systems, section
610.4 for solar water heating systems, section 610.5 for geothermal heating systems and section 610.6 for performance monitoring and metering of these
systems as approved by the Code official. These systems shall be commissioned in accordance with the requirements of section 611.
Exception: Renewable energy systems are not required for the following:
1. Buildings or building sites where there are multiple buildings on the building site providing not less than two percent (2%) of the total estimated
annual energy use of the building, or collective buildings on the site, with on site renewable energy using a combination of renewable energy
generation systems complying with the requirements of section 610.2, 610.3, or 610.4.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 411/503
2. Where not less than four percent (4%) of the total annual building energy consumption from renewable generation takes the form of a 10-year
commitment to renewable energy credit ownership, confirmed by the Code official.
3. Where the combined application of on site generated renewable energy and a commitment to renewable energy credit ownership as confirmed by
the Code official, totals not less than four percent (4%) of the total annual building energy consumption from renewable generation.
(Ord. 33-15, 8-11-2015)
9-13-50: IGCC AMENDMENT, SECTION 610.5, GEOTHERMAL HEATING SYSTEMS:
Section 610.5 shall be repealed and replaced with language as follows:
610.5 Geothermal Heating Systems. Where the Boise City geothermal system is available for connection at a site, a geothermal heating system can
be utilized as a required building renewable energy system. Geothermal heating systems shall be designed and installed in accordance with the
requirements of the Boise City Public Works Department. The Boise City geothermal system is not a qualifying system when pursuing LEED
certification.
(Ord. 33-15, 8-11-2015)
9-13-51: IGCC AMENDMENT, RENUMBER SECTION 610.5, RENEWABLE ENERGY SYSTEM PERFORMANCE MONITORING
AND METERING, TO SECTION 610.6:
610.5 Renewal Energy System Performance Monitoring And Metering. Renumber to section 610.6.
(Ord. 33-15, 8-11-2015)
9-13-52: IGCC AMENDMENT, RENUMBER SECTION 610.5.1, METERING, TO SECTION 610.6.1:
610.5.1 Metering. Renumber to section 610.6.1.
(Ord. 33-15, 8-11-2015)
9-13-53: IGCC AMENDMENT, RENUMBER SECTION 610.5.2, MONITORING, TO SECTION 610.6.2:
610.5.2 Monitoring. Renumber to section 610.6.2.
(Ord. 33-15, 8-11-2015)
9-13-54: IGCC AMENDMENT, SECTION 611.1.5.4, FINAL COMMISSIONING REPORT:
611.1.5.4 Final Commissioning Report. A complete report of test procedures and results identified as "Final Commissioning Report" shall be completed
and provided to the building owner within twelve (12) months after the date of issuance of a certificate of occupancy. At the request of the Code official, a
copy of the final commissioning report shall be made available for review. The report shall include all of the following:
1. Results of all functional performance tests.
2. Disposition of all deficiencies found during testing, including details of corrective measures used or proposed.
3. All functional performance test procedures used during the commissioning process, including measurable criteria for test acceptance, provided
herein for repeatability.
(Ord. 33-15, 8-11-2015)
9-13-55: IGCC AMENDMENT, SECTION 611.1.5.5, POST OCCUPANCY RECOMMISSIONING IS DELETED:
611.1.5.5 Post Occupancy Recommissioning. Deleted.
(Ord. 33-15, 8-11-2015)
9-13-56: IGCC AMENDMENT, SECTION 611.3.5, POST OCCUPANCY RECOMMISSIONING IS DELETED:
611.3.5 Post Occupancy Recommissioning. Deleted.
(Ord. 33-15, 8-11-2015)
9-13-57: IGCC AMENDMENT, ADD SECTION 611.5, RENEWABLE ENERGY SYSTEMS COMMISSIONING AND COMPLETION
REQUIREMENTS:
611.5 Renewable Energy Systems Commissioning And Completion Requirements. Prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy, the registered design
professional shall provide evidence of commissioning and completion of any building renewable energy systems installed under section 610 of this Code.
Copies of all documentation shall be given to the building owner and made available to the Code official upon request.
(Ord. 33-15, 8-11-2015)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 412/503
9-13-58: IGCC AMENDMENT, ADD SECTION 701.1.1, GRAY WATER SYSTEMS:
701.1.1 Gray Water Systems. Plumbing for gray water systems from any fixture up to, but not including, the exterior irrigation system tank shall be
inspected by the authority having jurisdiction. The Idaho Department of Environmental Quality (IDEQ) shall have jurisdiction to inspect and approve the
installation of exterior irrigation system tank and all piping therefrom to the point of disposal in accordance IDAPA 58.1.03, "Individual/Subsurface Sewage
Disposal Rules". Gray water system and design criteria requirements related to irrigation and leaching shall be determined in accordance with the
requirements as established by the IDEQ.
(Ord. 33-15, 8-11-2015)
9-13-59: IGCC AMENDMENT, ADD SECTION 701.1.2, WATER REUSE:
701.1.2 Water Reuse. The design of any water reuse system must be permitted and approved by the Idaho Department of Environmental Quality (IDEQ)
in accordance with IDAPA 58.01.17, "Recycled Water Rules". All planning, design, and operation of any reuse facilities shall be under the authority of
IDEQ. All piping associated with the collection and distribution of these systems shall be inspected by the authority having jurisdiction in accordance with
the Idaho State Plumbing Code.
(Ord. 33-15, 8-11-2015)
9-13-60: IGCC AMENDMENT, SECTION 704.2, REVERSE OSMOSIS WATER TREATMENT SYSTEMS:
704.2 Reverse Osmosis Water Treatment Systems. Point of use reverse osmosis treatment systems shall be listed and labeled in accordance with NSF
58. The discharge pipe from a reverse osmosis drinking water treatment unit shall connect to the building drainage system in accordance with section
603.4.13 of the Idaho State Plumbing Code. Point of use reverse osmosis systems shall be equipped with an automatic shutoff valve that prevents the
production of reject water when there is no demand for treated water.
(Ord. 33-15, 8-11-2015)
9-13-61: IGCC AMENDMENT, SECTION 704.3, ON SITE RECLAIMED WATER TREATMENT SYSTEMS:
704.3 On Site Reclaimed Water Treatment Systems. On site reclaimed water treatment systems, including gray water reuse treatment systems and
wastewater treatment systems, used to produce nonpotable water for use in water closet and urinal flushing, surface irrigation and similar applications
must be permitted and approved by the Idaho Department of Environmental Quality (IDEQ) in accordance with IDAPA 58.01.17, as referenced in sections
701.1.1 and 701.1.2 of this Code.
(Ord. 33-15, 8-11-2015)
9-13-62: IGCC AMENDMENT, SECTION 706.2, SIGNAGE REQUIRED:
706.2 Signage Required. Where nonpotable water is used for a water application, signage shall be provided in accordance with chapter 16, part 2, of the
Idaho State Plumbing Code.
(Ord. 33-15, 8-11-2015)
9-13-63: IGCC AMENDMENT, ADD SECTION 707.1.1, WATER REUSE:
707.1.1 Water Reuse. Where collected water is to be treated to potable water standards, it shall be installed in accordance with section 701.1.2.
(Ord. 33-15, 8-11-2015)
9-13-64: IGCC AMENDMENT, SECTION 707.2, POTABLE WATER CONNECTIONS:
707.2 Potable Water Connections. Where a potable system is connected to a rainwater collection and conveyance system, the potable water supply shall
be protected against backflow in accordance with section 603 of the Idaho State Plumbing Code.
(Ord. 33-15, 8-11-2015)
9-13-65: IGCC AMENDMENT, SECTION 707.10, TRENCHING REQUIREMENTS, INCLUDING DELETING ONE OF THE
EXCEPTIONS:
707.10 Trenching Requirements. All water service piping, including piping containing reclaimed water, shall be separated from the building sewer by five
feet (5') of undisturbed or compacted earth. Pressurized, buried reclaimed water piping shall be separated from potable water piping underground by ten
feet (10') of undisturbed or compacted earth in accordance with section 1618(C) of the Idaho State Plumbing Code. Reclaimed water service pipes shall
not be located in, under or above cesspools, septic tanks, septic tank drainage fields or seepage pits. Buried reclaimed water piping shall comply with the
requirements of section 315 of the Idaho State Plumbing Code for trenching, excavation and backfill.
Exceptions:
1. The required separation distance shall not apply where the bottom of the water service pipe within five feet (5') of the sewer is a minimum of
twelve inches (12") above the top of the highest point of the sewer and the pipe materials shall comply with the Idaho State Plumbing Code for such
applications.
2. Water service pipe is permitted to be located in the same trench with a building sewer, provided such sewer is constructed of materials that comply
with the Idaho State Plumbing Code for such installations.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 413/503
3. Irrigation piping located outside of a building and downstream of the backflow preventer is not required to meet the trenching requirements where
rainwater is used for outdoor applications.
(Ord. 33-15, 8-11-2015)
9-13-66: IGCC AMENDMENT, SECTION 707.11.1.1, POTABLE WATER APPLICATIONS:
707.11.1.1 Potable Water Applications. Where collected water is to be treated to potable water standards, it shall be installed in accordance with section
701.1.2.
(Ord. 33-15, 8-11-2015)
9-13-67: IGCC AMENDMENT, SECTION 707.11.3.1, SLOPE:
707.11.3.1 Slope. Roof gutters, leaders, and rainwater collection piping shall slope continuously toward collection inlets. Gutters and downspouts shall
have a slope of not less than one unit in sixteen (16) units along their entire length, and shall not permit the collection or pooling of water at any point.
(Ord. 33-15, 8-11-2015)
9-13-68: IGCC AMENDMENT, SECTION 707.11.3.2, SIZE:
707.11.3.2 Size. Gutters and downspouts shall be installed and sized in accordance with section 1106.3 of the Idaho State Plumbing Code.
(Ord. 33-15, 8-11-2015)
9-13-69: IGCC AMENDMENT, SECTION 707.11.4.2, SIZE:
707.11.4.2 Size. Collection piping conveying rainwater from collection surfaces shall be sized in accordance with chapter 11 of the Idaho State Plumbing
Code and local rainfall rates.
(Ord. 33-15, 8-11-2015)
9-13-70: IGCC AMENDMENT, SECTION 707.11.7.4, OVERFLOW:
707.11.7.4 Overflow. The storage tank shall be equipped with an overflow pipe having the same or larger area as the sum of the areas of all tank inlet
pipes. The overflow pipe shall be protected from insects or vermin and the discharge from such pipe shall be disposed of in a manner consistent with
stormwater runoff requirements of the jurisdiction. The overflow pipe shall discharge at a sufficient distance from the tank to avoid damaging the tank
foundation or the adjacent property. The overflow drain shall not be equipped with a shutoff valve. A minimum of one cleanout shall be provided on each
overflow pipe in accordance with section 719 of the Idaho State Plumbing Code.
(Ord. 33-15, 8-11-2015)
9-13-71: IGCC AMENDMENT, SECTION 707.11.11.1, WATER PRESSURE REDUCING VALVE OR REGULATOR:
707.11.11.1 Water Pressure Reducing Valve Or Regulator. Where the rainwater pressure supplied by the pumping system exceeds eighty (80) psi static, a
pressure reducing valve shall be installed to reduce the pressure in the rainwater distribution system piping to eighty (80) psi static or less. Pressure
reducing valves shall be specified and installed in accordance with section 608.2 of the Idaho State Plumbing Code.
(Ord. 33-15, 8-11-2015)
9-13-72: IGCC AMENDMENT, SECTION 707.11.12.4, MARKING, INCLUDING DELETING THE EXCEPTION:
707.11.12.4 Marking. All nonpotable rainwater distribution piping shall be marked in accordance with sections 1617 and 1619 of the Idaho State Plumbing
Code.
(Ord. 33-15, 8-11-2015)
9-13-73: IGCC AMENDMENT, SECTION 707.12.1, DRAINAGE AND VENT TESTS:
707.12.1 Drainage And Vent Tests. The testing of rainwater collection piping, overflow piping, vent piping and storage tank drains shall be conducted in
accordance with section 712 of the Idaho State Plumbing Code.
(Ord. 33-15, 8-11-2015)
9-13-74: IGCC AMENDMENT, SECTION 707.12.2, DRAINAGE AND VENT FINAL TEST:
707.12.2 Drainage And Vent Final Test. A final test shall be applied to the rainwater collection piping, overflow piping, storage tank, and tank vent piping in
accordance with section 1605 of the Idaho State Plumbing Code.
(Ord. 33-15, 8-11-2015)
9-13-75: IGCC AMENDMENT, SECTION 707.12.3, WATER SUPPLY SYSTEM TEST:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 414/503
707.12.3 Water Supply System Test. The testing of makeup water supply piping and rainwater distribution piping shall be conducted in accordance with
section 609 of the Idaho State Plumbing Code.
(Ord. 33-15, 8-11-2015)
9-13-76: IGCC AMENDMENT, SECTION 707.12.4, INSPECTION AND TESTING OF BACKFLOW PREVENTION ASSEMBLIES:
707.12.4 Inspection And Testing Of Backflow Prevention Assemblies. The testing of backflow preventers and backwater valves shall be conducted in
accordance with section 603 of the Idaho State Plumbing Code.
(Ord. 33-15, 8-11-2015)
9-13-77: IGCC AMENDMENT, ADD SECTION 708.1.1, GRAY WATER SYSTEMS:
708.1.1 Gray Water Systems. Jurisdiction of gray water systems shall be governed in accordance with sections 707.1.1 and 707.1.2.
(Ord. 33-15, 8-11-2015)
9-13-78: IGCC AMENDMENT, SECTION 708.3, POTABLE WATER CONNECTIONS:
708.3 Potable Water Connections. Where a potable water system is connected to a gray water system, the potable water supply shall be protected against
backflow in accordance with section 602.3 of the Idaho State Plumbing Code.
(Ord. 33-15, 8-11-2015)
9-13-79: IGCC AMENDMENT, SECTION 708.5.1, GRAY WATER SYSTEMS FOR LANDSCAPE IRRIGATION IS DELETED:
708.5.1 Gray Water Systems For Landscaping Irrigation. Deleted.
(Ord. 33-15, 8-11-2015)
9-13-80: IGCC AMENDMENT, SECTION 708.6, APPLICATIONS IS DELETED:
708.6 Applications. Deleted.
(Ord. 33-15, 8-11-2015)
9-13-81: IGCC AMENDMENT, SECTION 708.10, TRENCHING REQUIREMENTS, INCLUDING DELETING EXCEPTIONS 3, 4, 5,
AND 6:
708.10 Trenching Requirements. All water service piping, including piping containing gray water, shall be separated from the building sewer by five feet (5')
of undisturbed or compacted earth. Pressurized reclaimed water piping shall be separated from potable water piping underground by ten feet (10') of
undisturbed or compacted earth in accordance with section 1618(C) of the Idaho State Plumbing Code. Nonpotable water service pipes shall not be
located in, under or above cesspools, septic tanks, septic tank drainage fields or seepage pits. Buried gray water piping shall comply with the requirements
of section 315 of the Idaho State Plumbing Code for trenching, excavation and backfill.
Exceptions:
1. The required separation distance shall not apply where the bottom of the gray water service pipe within five feet (5') of the sewer is not less than
twelve inches (12") above the top of the highest point of the sewer and the pipe materials comply with the requirements of the Idaho State Plumbing
Code for such applications.
2. The required separation distance shall not apply where the bottom of the potable water service pipe within five feet (5') (1524 mm) of the gray
water pipe is not less than twelve inches (12") above the top of the highest point of the gray water pipe and the pipe materials comply with the
requirements of the Idaho State Plumbing Code for such applications.
(Ord. 33-15, 8-11-2015)
9-13-82: IGCC AMENDMENT, SECTION 708.11, SYSTEM ABANDONMENT IS DELETED:
708.11 System Abandonment. Deleted.
(Ord. 33-15, 8-11-2015)
9-13-83: IGCC AMENDMENT, SECTION 708.12, GRAY WATER SYSTEMS:
708.12 Gray Water Systems. The design of the gray water system shall conform to accepted engineering practice and section 701.1.1.
(Ord. 33-15, 8-11-2015)
9-13-84: IGCC AMENDMENT, SECTION 708.12.6, STORAGE TANK AND ALL SUBSECTIONS 708.12.6.1 THROUGH 708.12.6.10
ARE DELETED:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 415/503
708.12.6 Storage Tank. Deleted and all subsections 708.12.6.1 through 708.12.6.10 deleted.
(Ord. 33-15, 8-11-2015)
9-13-85: IGCC AMENDMENT, SECTION 708.12.8, VENT PIPING IS DELETED:
708.12.8 Vent Piping. Deleted.
(Ord. 33-15, 8-11-2015)
9-13-86: IGCC AMENDMENT, SECTION 708.12.9.3, WATER PRESSURE REDUCING VALVE OR REGULATOR:
708.12.9.3 Water Pressure Reducing Valve Or Regulator. Where the gray water pressure supplied by the pumping system exceeds eighty (80) psi static, a
pressure reducing valve shall be installed to reduce the pressure in the gray water distribution system piping to eighty (80) psi static or less. Pressure
reducing valves shall be specified and installed in accordance with section 608.2 of the Idaho State Plumbing Code.
(Ord. 33-15, 8-11-2015)
9-13-87: IGCC AMENDMENT, SECTION 708.12.10.4, MARKING, INCLUDING DELETING THE EXCEPTION:
708.12.10.4 Marking. All gray water distribution piping shall be marked in accordance with sections 1617 and 1619 of the Idaho State Plumbing Code.
(Ord. 33-15, 8-11-2015)
9-13-88: IGCC AMENDMENT, SECTION 708.13, TESTS AND INSPECTIONS:
708.13 Tests And Inspections. Tests and inspections shall be performed in accordance with sections 708.13.1 through 708.13.5.
(Ord. 33-15, 8-11-2015)
9-13-89: IGCC AMENDMENT, SECTION 708.13.1, DRAINAGE AND VENT TEST:
708.13.1 Drainage And Vent Test. A pressure test shall be applied to the gray water collection piping, overflow piping, storage tank drainage piping and
tank vent piping in accordance with section 712 of the Idaho State Plumbing Code.
(Ord. 33-15, 8-11-2015)
9-13-90: IGCC AMENDMENT, SECTION 708.13.2, DRAINAGE AND VENT FINAL TEST:
708.13.2 Drainage And Vent Final Test. A final test shall be applied to the gray water collection piping, overflow piping, and tank vent piping in accordance
with section 712 of the Idaho State Plumbing Code.
(Ord. 33-15, 8-11-2015)
9-13-91: IGCC AMENDMENT, SECTION 708.13.3, WATER SUPPLY SYSTEM TEST:
708.13.3 Water Supply System Test. The testing of makeup water supply piping and rainwater distribution piping shall be conducted in accordance with
section 609.4 of the Idaho State Plumbing Code.
(Ord. 33-15, 8-11-2015)
9-13-92: IGCC AMENDMENT, SECTION 708.13.4, INSPECTION AND TESTING OF BACKFLOW PREVENTION ASSEMBLIES:
708.13.4 Inspection And Testing Of Backflow Prevention Assemblies. The testing of backflow preventers and backwater valves shall be conducted in
accordance with section 603 of the Idaho State Plumbing Code.
(Ord. 33-15, 8-11-2015)
9-13-93: IGCC AMENDMENT, SECTION 708.13.6, STORAGE TANK TESTS IS DELETED:
708.13.6 Storage Tank Tests. Deleted.
(Ord. 33-15, 8-11-2015)
9-13-94: IGCC AMENDMENT, SECTION 708.13.7, SUPPLY PRESSURE TEST IS DELETED:
708.13.7 Supply Pressure Test. Deleted.
(Ord. 33-15, 8-11-2015)
9-13-95: IGCC AMENDMENT, SECTION 708.13.8, WATER QUALITY TEST IS DELETED:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 416/503
708.13.8 Water Quality Test. Deleted.
(Ord. 33-15, 8-11-2015)
9-13-96: IGCC AMENDMENT, SECTION 708.14, SUBSURFACE GRAY WATER IRRIGATION SYSTEMS:
708.14 Subsurface Gray Water Irrigation Systems. Subsurface gray water irrigation systems, where provided in accordance with section 404.1.1, shall be
in accordance with sections 701.1.1 and 701.1.2.
(Ord. 33-15, 8-11-2015)
9-13-97: IGCC AMENDMENT, SECTION 708.14, SUBSURFACE GRAY WATER IRRIGATION SYSTEMS, ALL SUBSECTIONS
708.14.1 THROUGH 708.14.6 ARE DELETED:
708.14 Subsurface Gray Water Irrigation Systems. All subsections 708.14.1 through 708.14.6 deleted.
(Ord. 33-15, 8-11-2015)
9-13-98: IGCC AMENDMENT, ADD SECTION 709.1.1, RECLAIMED WATER SYSTEMS:
709.1.1 Reclaimed Water Systems. All planning, design and operation of reuse facilities shall be in accordance with section 701.1.2.
(Ord. 33-15, 8-11-2015)
9-13-99: IGCC AMENDMENT, SECTION 709.3, POTABLE WATER CONNECTIONS:
709.3 Potable Water Connections. Connections between a reclaimed water system and a potable water system shall be protected against backflow in
accordance with section 603 of the Idaho State Plumbing Code.
(Ord. 33-15, 8-11-2015)
9-13-100: IGCC AMENDMENT, SECTION 709.5.1, RECLAIMED WATER FOR LANDSCAPE IRRIGATION, INCLUDING THE
EXCEPTION, IS DELETED:
709.5.1 Reclaimed Water For Landscape Irrigation. Deleted, including the exception.
(Ord. 33-15, 8-11-2015)
9-13-101: IGCC AMENDMENT, SECTION 709.7, WATER PRESSURE REDUCING VALVE OR REGULATOR:
709.7 Water Pressure Reducing Valve Or Regulator. Where the reclaimed water pressure supplied to the building exceeds eighty (80) psi static, a
pressure reducing valve shall be installed to reduce the pressure in the reclaimed water distribution system piping to eighty (80) psi static or less. Pressure
reducing valves shall be specified and installed in accordance with section 608 of the Idaho State Plumbing Code.
(Ord. 33-15, 8-11-2015)
9-13-102: IGCC AMENDMENT, SECTION 709.8, TRENCHING REQUIREMENTS, INCLUDING DELETING ALL THE
EXCEPTIONS:
709.8 Trenching Requirements. All water service piping, including piping containing reclaimed water, shall be separated from the building sewer by five
feet (5') of undisturbed or compacted earth. Pressurized reclaimed water piping shall be separated from potable water piping underground by ten feet (10')
of undisturbed or compacted earth in accordance with section 1618(C) of the Idaho State Plumbing Code. Reclaimed water service pipes shall not be
located in, under or above cesspools, septic tanks, septic tank drainage fields or seepage pits. Buried reclaimed water piping shall comply with the
requirements of section 315 of the Idaho State Plumbing Code for trenching, excavation and backfill.
(Ord. 33-15, 8-11-2015)
9-13-103: IGCC AMENDMENT, SECTION 709.9, RECLAIMED WATER SYSTEMS:
709.9 Reclaimed Water Systems. All planning, design and operation of reuse facilities shall be in accordance with sections 701.1.1 and 701.1.2.
(Ord. 33-15, 8-11-2015)
9-13-104: IGCC AMENDMENT, SECTION 709.9.1.4, MARKING, INCLUDING DELETING THE EXCEPTION:
709.9.1.4 Marking. All reclaimed water distribution piping shall be marked in accordance with sections 1617 and 1619 of the Idaho State Plumbing Code.
(Ord. 33-15, 8-11-2015)
9-13-105: IGCC AMENDMENT, SECTION 709.10, TESTS AND INSPECTIONS:
709.10 Tests And Inspections. Tests and inspections shall be performed in accordance with section 1620 of the Idaho State Plumbing Code.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 417/503
(Ord. 33-15, 8-11-2015)
9-13-106: IGCC AMENDMENT, SECTION 709.10.1, WATER SUPPLY SYSTEM TEST IS DELETED:
709.10.1 Water Supply System Test. Deleted.
(Ord. 33-15, 8-11-2015)
9-13-107: IGCC AMENDMENT, SECTION 709.10.2, INSPECTION AND TESTING OF BACKFLOW PREVENTION ASSEMBLIES
IS DELETED:
709.10.2 Inspection And Testing Of Backflow Prevention Assemblies. Deleted.
(Ord. 33-15, 8-11-2015)
9-13-108: IGCC AMENDMENT, ADD SECTION 902.1.4, QUALIFICATIONS:
902.1.4 Qualifications. Personnel employed by an approved agency shall demonstrate competence, qualifications and experience. This includes having
certifications such as from AABC Commissioning Group (ACG), American Society of Heating, Refrigeration and Air Conditioning Engineers (ASHRAE),
National Environmental Balancing Bureau (NEBB), Association of Energy Engineers (AEE), Building Commissioning Association (BCXA) or equivalent.
Professional engineers conducting commissioning shall be licensed with the State of Idaho in the applicable discipline for the type of work being
commissioned. Documentation outlining experience and copies of certifications or licenses shall be provided to the Code official.
(Ord. 33-15, 8-11-2015)
9-13-109: IGCC AMENDMENT, SECTION 903.1, GENERAL:
903.1 General. Where application is made for construction as described in this section, the registered design professional in responsible charge or
approved agency shall perform commissioning during construction and after occupancy as required by table 903.1. Where table 903.1 specifies that
commissioning is to be done on a periodic basis, the registered design professional in responsible charge shall provide a schedule of periodic
commissioning with the submittal documents that shall be reviewed and approved by the Code official.
The approved agency shall be qualified and shall demonstrate competence, to the satisfaction of the Code official, for the commissioning of the particular
type of construction or operation. The registered design professional in responsible charge and engineers independent from the design of the project are
permitted to act as the approved agency provided those personnel meet the qualification requirements of this section and section 902 to the satisfaction of
the Code official. The approved agency shall provide written documentation to the Code official demonstrating competence and relevant experience or
training. Experience or training shall be considered relevant where the documented experience or training is related in complexity to the same type of
commissioning activities for projects of similar complexity and material qualities.
(Ord. 33-15, 8-11-2015)
9-13-110: IGCC AMENDMENT, SECTION 903.1.1, PREOCCUPANCY REPORT REQUIREMENT:
903.1.1 Preoccupancy Report Requirement. The approved agency shall keep records of the commissioning required by table 903.1. The approved agency
shall furnish commissioning reports to the owner and the registered design professional in responsible charge and, upon request, to the Code official.
Reports shall indicate that work was or was not completed in conformance to approved construction documents. Discrepancies shall be brought to the
immediate attention of the contractor for correction. Where discrepancies are not corrected, they shall be brought to the attention of the owner, Code
official and to the registered design professional in responsible charge prior to the completion of that phase of the work. Prior to the issuance of a
Certificate of Occupancy, a preoccupancy commissioning report shall be submitted to and accepted by the Code official.
(Ord. 33-15, 8-11-2015)
9-13-111: IGCC AMENDMENT, SECTION 903.1.2, FINAL COMMISSIONING REPORT REQUIREMENT:
903.1.2 Final Commissioning Report Requirement. Commissioning shall occur as specified in the applicable sections of this Code whether preoccupancy
or post-occupancy. A final commissioning report shall be provided to the owner within twelve (12) months after the Certificate of Occupancy is issued for
the project and shall be made available to the Code official upon request.
(Ord. 33-15, 8-11-2015)
9-13-112: IGCC AMENDMENT, TABLE 903.1, COMMISSIONING PLAN:
Table 903.1 is amended to read as follows:
TABLE 903.1
COMMISSIONING PLAN
Chapter 4. Site Development And Land Use
Construction Or System Requiring Verification
Preoccupancy
Method Occurrence
Section/
Referenced
Standard
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 418/503
Inventory and assessment of natural resources and baseline
conditions of building site
X Report With permit submittal 401.2
Landscape irrigation systems X Field inspection Installation or at final
inspection
404.1
Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan (SWPPP) including
required appendices
X SWPPP report With permit submittal; during
construction
405.1.1
Topsoil and vegetation protection measures; setbacks from
protected areas
X In SWPPP
(appendix) report
and field
inspection
With permit submittal;
installation of measures, prior
to other site disturbance
405.1.1,
405.2
Imported soils X Field inspection
and geotechnical
report
With permit submittal; after
all fill operations are
complete
405.1.3
Soil restoration and reuse X In SWPPP
(appendix) report
and field
inspection
With permit submittal;
preparation and replacement
of soils
405.1.1,
405.1.4
Invasive species management X In SWPPP
(appendix) report
and field
inspection
With permit submittal; prior to
site disturbance; during
landscaping of site
405.1.1,
405.2.2
Stormwater management system operation X Report and field
inspection
With permit submittal;
installation prior to
occupancy
403.1
Erosion and sediment control X In SWPPP report
and field
inspection
With permit submittal; site
prep inspection, general
inspections during
construction activities; site
final inspection prior to
occupancy
405.1.1
Building site waste management X In SWPPP
(appendix) report
and field
inspection
With permit submittal; during
construction
405.1.1,
406.1
Hardscape and shading provided by structures and vegetation X Report and field
inspection
With permit submittal; during
construction and installation
408.2
Roof coverings- solar reflectance and thermal emittance-where
structures provide shade to parking
X Report and field
inspection
With permit submittal;
installation or at final
inspection
408.3
Vegetative roofs X Field inspection
and report
At installation of protective
membranes, base materials,
soils and vegetation
408.3.2
Site lighting X Testing and report
After installation or at final
inspection
409
Chapter 5. Material Resource Conservation And Efficiency
Construction waste management X Report and field
inspection
With permit submittal or
deferred until first inspection;
during construction; at final
inspection
503.1
Recycling areas for building occupants X Field inspection At final inspection 504.1
Storage space for lamps, batters and electronics X Field inspection At final inspection 504.2
Material selection or whole building life cycle assessment X Field inspection
and report
At installation or at final
inspection
505
Lamp mercury content X Field inspection At final inspection 506
Building Envelope Moisture Control (Section 507.1)
Foundation subsoil drainage system X Field inspection
and verification
Periodic inspection for entire
subsoil drainage system
507.1 and
IBC ch. 18
Foundation waterproofing X Field inspection
and verification
Periodic inspection for entire
foundation
507.1 and
IBC ch. 18
Construction Or System Requiring Verification
Preoccupancy
Method Occurrence
Section/
Referenced
Standard
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 419/503
Foundation dampproofing X Field inspection
and verification
Periodic inspection for entire
foundation
507.1 and
IBC ch. 18
Under slab water vapor protection X Field inspection
and verification
Periodic inspection for entire
slab footprint
507.1, IBC
ch. 19 and
ASTME
1643
Flashing at: exterior windows, doors, skylights, wall flashing
and drainage systems
X Field inspection
and verification
Periodic inspection for not
less than 25 percent of all
flashing locations
507.1 and
IBC ch. 14
Exterior wall coverings X Field inspection
and verification
Periodic inspection for not
less than 25 percent of
exterior wall cladding
systems
507.1 and
IBC ch. 14
Roof coverings, roof drainage and flashings X Field inspection
and verification
Periodic inspection for not
less than 25 percent of roof
covering, roof drainage and
flashings
507.1 and
IBC ch. 15
Chapter 6. Energy
Energy Consumption, Monitoring, Targeting And Reporting
Monitoring system X Inspection and
verification with
the RDP or
approved agency
During construction and prior
to occupancy
603, 610.5
Calibration X Testing and
review and
evaluation or test
reports with the
RDP or approved
agency
During commissioning 603, 610.5
Mechanical Systems Completion-All Buildings
Air system balancing-provide the means for system balancing X Field inspection
and verification
During construction and prior
to occupancy
611.1.2.1
and through
reference to
IECC
Hydronic system balancing-provide means for system
balancing
X Field inspection
and verification
During construction and prior
to occupancy
611.1.2.2
and through
reference to
IECC
Mechanical system manuals-construction documents to require
O&M manual
X Verification of
construction
documents
Plan review 611.1.5.2
Mechanical Systems-Buildings Over 5,000 Square Feet Total Building Floor Area
Commissioning required and noted in plans and specifications X Verification of
construction
documents
Plan review 611.1
Documentation of required commissioning outcomes X Verification with
the building owner
Subsequent to completion of
all commissioning activities
611.1
Preparation and availability of a commissioning plan X Verification with
the RDP or
approved agency
Between plan review and
commissioning initiation
611.1.1
Balance HVAC systems (both air and hydronic) X HVAC system
installer/
contractor with
approved agency
After installation of HVAC
systems and prior to
occupancy
611.1.2
Functional performance testing of HVAC equipment X HVAC system
installer/
contractor with
approved agency
After installation of HVAC
systems and prior to
occupancy
611.1.3
Construction Or System Requiring Verification
Preoccupancy
Method Occurrence
Section/
Referenced
Standard
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 420/503
Functional performance testing of HVAC controls and control
systems
X HVAC system
installer/
contractor with
approved agency
After installation of HVAC
systems and prior to
occupancy
611.1.3.2
Preparation of preliminary commissioning report X HVAC system
installer/
contractor with
approved agency
Prior to occupancy 611.1.4
Acceptance of HVAC systems and equipment/system
verification report
X Field inspection
verification; RDP
and building
owner
Prior to occupancy or within
12 months after occupancy
611.1.4.1
Preparation and distribution of final HVAC system completiondocumentation
that construction documents require drawings,
manuals, balancing reports and commissioning report be
provided to the owner and that they have been provided
X Field inspection
verification;
contractor/
installer, RDP or
approved agency
and building
owner
Prior to occupancy or within
12 months after occupancy
611.1.5
Building renewal energy systems (solar photovoltaic systems,
wind energy systems, solar water heating, and geothermal
heating systems)
X Field inspection
verification and
testing with
system installer/
contractor and
approved agency
After installation of systems
and prior to occupancy or
within 12 months after
occupancy
610, 611.5
Lighting
Specified transformer nameplate efficiency rating X Field inspection At final inspection 608.8.1.1
Verification of lamp X Field inspection At final inspection 608.10
Verification of ballast X Field inspection At final inspection 608.10
Lighting Controls
Installation X Field inspection At final inspection 608.11
Calibration X System installer/
contractor with
approved agency
At final inspection 611.3.3
Chapter 7. Water Resource Conservation, Quality And Efficiency
Appliances X Field inspection After installation and prior to
occupancy
702.6
Hot water distribution X Field inspection At final inspection 702.8
Cooling tower performance X System installer/
contractor with
approved agency
Prior to occupancy or within
12 months after occupancy
703.7.7
Metering X Field inspection At final inspection 705.1.1
Rainwater system water quality X Field testing and
verification; report
Prior to occupancy or within
12 months after occupancy
707.15.1
Gray water system water quality X Field testing and
verification; report
Prior to occupancy 708.13.8
Chapter 8. Indoor Environmental Quality And Comfort
Building Construction, Features, Operations And Maintenance Facilities
Air handling system access X Field inspection
and verification;
report
During construction and prior
to occupancy
802.2
Construction Or System Requiring Verification
Preoccupancy
Method Occurrence
Section/
Referenced
Standard
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 421/503
Air handling system filters X Field inspection
and verification;
report
During construction and prior
to occupancy
802.3
Specific Indoor Air Quality And Pollutant Control Measures
Listing, installation and venting of fireplaces and combustion
appliances
X Field inspection
and verification;
report
During construction and prior
to occupancy
804.1
Daylighting X Field inspection
and verification;
report
With permit submission; field
inspection; report prior to
occupancy
808.1
Appendix A. Project Electives
Project electives chosen from appendix A implemented into the
design
X Inspection and
verification with
the RDP or
approved agency
Prior to occupancy or within
12 months after occupancy
Appendix A
RDP = Registered design professional in responsible charge (owner authorized agent).
Approved agency = Registered design professional in responsible charge, professional engineers independent from the design, Professional
Commissioning Agency, or any combination thereof.
(Ord. 33-15, 8-11-2015)
9-13-113: IGCC AMENDMENT, SECTION 1001.4, EXISTING MATERIALS, ASSEMBLIES, CONFIGURATIONS AND SYSTEMS:
1001.4 Existing Materials, Assemblies, Configurations And Systems. Materials, assemblies, configurations and systems already in use that conform to the
requirements or approvals in effect at the time of their erection or installation shall be permitted to remain in use.
(Ord. 33-15, 8-11-2015)
9-13-114: IGCC AMENDMENT, ADD SECTION 1001.5, NEW AND REPLACEMENT MATERIALS, ASSEMBLIES,
CONFIGURATIONS AND SYSTEMS:
1001.5 New And Replacement Materials, Assemblies, Configurations And Systems. Except as otherwise required or permitted by this Code, materials,
assemblies, configurations and systems permitted by the applicable Code for new construction shall be used. Like materials shall be permitted for repairs
and alterations, provided no hazard to the environment, life, health or property is created. Hazardous materials shall not be used where the Code for new
construction would not permit their use in a building of similar occupancy, purpose and location.
(Ord. 33-15, 8-11-2015)
9-13-115: IGCC AMENDMENT, SECTION 1006.1, DECONSTRUCTION AND DEMOLITION MATERIAL AND WASTE
MANAGEMENT PLAN:
1006.1 Deconstruction And Demolition Material And Waste Management Plan. Where buildings, structures or portions thereof are deconstructed or
demolished, a minimum of thirty five percent (35%) of materials shall be diverted from landfills. A Construction Material and Waste Management Plan shall
be developed that is in accordance with section 503.1, that includes procedures for deconstruction, and that documents the total materials in buildings,
structures and portions thereof to be deconstructed or demolished and the materials to be diverted.
(Ord. 33-15, 8-11-2015)
9-13-116: IGCC AMENDMENT, SECTION 1101.4.1, EXISTING MATERIALS, ASSEMBLIES, CONFIGURATIONS AND SYSTEMS:
1101.4.1 Existing Materials, Assemblies, Configurations And Systems. Materials and systems already in use on a building site in compliance with the
requirements or approvals in effect at the time of their installation shall be permitted to remain in use.
Existing buildings and site improvements located within or located closer to protected areas than permitted by section 402.1 but that are in compliance with
the requirements or approvals in effect at the time of their installation shall be permitted to remain in use.
(Ord. 33-15, 8-11-2015)
9-13-117: IGCC AMENDMENT, SECTION 1103.2, CHANGES TO HARDSCAPES AND SURFACE VEHICLE PARKING:
1103.2 Changes To Hardscapes And Surface Vehicle Parking. Where existing hardscapes are altered, the alterations shall comply with the provisions of
this Code, Boise Development Code section 11-07-05, and the Boise City stormwater management and discharge control ordinance.
Construction Or System Requiring Verification
Preoccupancy
Method Occurrence
Section/
Referenced
Standard
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 422/503
Exceptions:
1. Existing hardscapes and vegetation are permitted to be replaced with materials shown in previously approved construction documents as allowed
by the Boise Development Code section 11-07-05.
2. Where existing vehicle surface parking lots are altered without changing parking space configuration or increasing the number of parking spaces,
the altered parking lot shall not be required to comply with section 407.4.
(Ord. 33-15, 8-11-2015)
9-13-118: IGCC AMENDMENT, SECTION 1104.2, BUILDING SITE IMPROVEMENTS:
1104.2 Building Site Improvements. Where a change in occupancy results in an increase in the occupant load of the building, bicycle parking shall comply
with the following:
1. Short term bicycle parking spaces shall be provided in accordance with section 407.3 equivalent to a new building of the new occupancy.
2. Where the existing building and building site have parking for motorized vehicles, long term bicycle parking shall be provided in accordance with
section 407.3 equivalent to a new building of the new occupancy.
(Ord. 33-15, 8-11-2015)
9-13-119: IGCC AMENDMENT, CHAPTER 12, REFERENCED STANDARDS:
The following referenced standard shall be amended as follows:
ICC-700-2012. National Green Building Standard 101.3.1, 302.1, table 302.1.
(Ord. 33-15, 8-11-2015)
9-13-120: IGCC AMENDMENT, APPENDIX A, SECTION A102.2, REQUIRED NUMBER OF AND SELECTION OF PROJECT
ELECTIVES:
A102.2 Required Number Of And Selection Of Project Electives. Each project constructed in the jurisdiction shall be required to comply with a minimum of
three (3) electives from not less than two (2) of the categorized tables noted as tables A104, A105, A106, A107 and A108. Electives shall be selected by
the owner from the applicable tables chosen. Selected project electives shall be applied as mandatory requirements for the project. Selected project
electives shall be communicated to the Code official by means of checking the appropriate boxes in the tables and providing a copy of the tables, or by
inclusion of a list of selected project electives, with the construction documents.
(Ord. 33-15, 8-11-2015)
9-13-121: IGCC AMENDMENT, APPENDIX A, TABLE A104, SITE PROJECT ELECTIVES:
The following additional elective option shall be added to table A104:
TABLE A104
SITE PROJECT ELECTIVES
Section Description
Minimum Number
Of Electives Required
And Electives Selected
409 Site lighting .Yes .No
(Ord. 33-15, 8-11-2015)
9-13-122: IGCC AMENDMENT, APPENDIX A, SECTION A104.7, CHANGING AND SHOWER FACILITIES PROJECT ELECTIVE:
A104.7 Changing And Shower Facilities Project Elective. Where a new building requires less than ten (10) bicycle parking spaces per Boise Development
Code section 11-07-03, providing changing and shower facilities in accordance with section 407.2 shall be recognized as a project elective.
(Ord. 33-15, 8-11-2015)
9-13-123: IGCC AMENDMENT, APPENDIX A, SECTION A104.8, LONG TERM BICYCLE PARKING AND STORAGE PROJECT
ELECTIVE, INCLUDING DELETING ITEM 3:
A104.8 Long Term Bicycle Parking And Storage Project Elective. The development of a new building and associated site improvements where additional
long term bicycle parking is provided in accordance with all of the following shall be recognized as a single project elective:
1. Provide long term bicycle parking that is twice the number of parking spaces required by the Boise Development Code section 11-07-03; and
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 423/503
2. Provide spaces in accordance with section 407.3.2.
(Ord. 33-15, 8-11-2015)
9-13-124: IGCC AMENDMENT, APPENDIX A, TABLE A106, ENERGY CONSERVATION AND EFFICIENCY:
The following additional elective option shall be added to table A106:
TABLE A106
ENERGY CONSERVATION AND EFFICIENCY
Section Description Minimum Number Of Electives Required And Electives Selected
610 Building renewable energy systems (choose method):
.Solar photovoltaic systems (610.2)
.Wind energy systems (610.3)
.Solar water heating equipment (610.4)
.Geothermal heating system (610.5)
.Yes .No
(Ord. 33-15, 8-11-2015)
9-13-125: IGCC AMENDMENT, APPENDIX A, SECTION A107.3, ALTERNATE ON SITE NONPOTABLE WATER FOR OUTDOOR
HOSE CONNECTIONS PROJECT ELECTIVE IS DELETED:
Appendix A, A107.3 Alternate On Site Nonpotable Water For Outdoor Hose Connections Project Elective. Deleted.
(Ord. 33-15, 8-11-2015)
9-13-126: IGCC AMENDMENT, APPENDIX A, SECTION A107.3.1, SIGNAGE IS DELETED:
Appendix A, A107.3.1 Signage. Deleted.
(Ord. 33-15, 8-11-2015)
9-13-127: IGCC AMENDMENT, APPENDIX A, TABLE A107, WATER RESOURCE CONSERVATION AND EFFICIENCY, THE
ROW WITH SECTION A107.3 AND A DESCRIPTION OF ALTERNATE ON SITE NONPOTABLE WATER FOR OUTDOOR HOSE
CONNECTIONS IS DELETED FROM THE TABLE:
Appendix A, Table A107 Water Resource Conservation And Efficiency, The Row With Section A107.3 And A Description Of Alternate On Site Nonpotable
Water For Outdoor Hose Connections. Deleted from the table.
(Ord. 33-15, 8-11-2015)
9-13-128: IGCC AMENDMENT, APPENDIX A, SECTION A107.4, ALTERNATE ON SITE NONPOTABLE WATER FOR PLUMBING
FIXTURE FLUSHING WATER PROJECT ELECTIVE:
A107.4 Alternate On Site Nonpotable Water For Plumbing Fixture Flushing Water Project Elective. Where projects are intended to qualify for an alternate
on site nonpotable water for plumbing fixture flushing project elective in accordance with section A107.4, nonpotable water shall be used for flushing water
closets and urinals. The design of any water reuse system shall be in accordance with section 701.1.2 of this Code.
(Ord. 33-15, 8-11-2015)
9-13-129: IGCC AMENDMENT, APPENDIX A, SECTION A107.5.2, SOURCE VOLUME INDICATION:
A107.5.2 Source Volume Indication. All buildings utilizing reclaimed water supply for the purpose of building fire protection shall be equipped with a device
that indicates the volume of nonpotable water contained in the collection reservoir. The indicator shall be approved and shall be in compliance with NFPA
72.
(Ord. 33-15, 8-11-2015)
9-13-130: IGCC AMENDMENT, APPENDIX A, SECTION A107.5.3, QUALITY OF WATER USED FOR FIRE SUPPRESSION:
A107.5.3 Quality Of Water Used For Fire Suppression. The required quality and treatment of the nonpotable water stored and used for fire suppression
shall be determined by the authority(s) having jurisdiction. Recycled or reclaimed water used in a sprinkler system shall include an annual water analysis
to determine if contaminants exist in the reclaimed water and that these contaminants will not adversely affect fire sprinkler system components or the
expected reasonable life of the fire sprinkler system. A copy of the completed water analysis shall be maintained on site by the building owner and
available upon request by the Fire Code official.
(Ord. 33-15, 8-11-2015)
9-13-131: IGCC AMENDMENT, APPENDIX A, SECTION A107.7, ALTERNATE ON SITE NONPOTABLE WATER FOR
INDUSTRIAL PROCESS MAKEUP WATER PROJECT ELECTIVE:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 424/503
A107.7 Alternate On Site Nonpotable Water For Industrial Process Makeup Water Project Elective. Where projects are intended to qualify for an alternate
on site nonpotable water for industrial process makeup water project elective in accordance with section A107.7, industrial processes requiring makeup
water shall utilize nonpotable water except where the process requires potable water for proper functioning. The design of any water reuse system shall be
in accordance with section 701.1.2 of this Code.
(Ord. 33-15, 8-11-2015)
9-13-132: IGCC AMENDMENT, APPENDIX A, SECTION A107.8, ALTERNATE ON SITE NONPOTABLE WATER FOR COOLING
TOWER MAKEUP WATER PROJECT ELECTIVE:
A107.8 Alternate On Site Nonpotable Water For Cooling Tower Makeup Water Project Elective. Where projects are intended to qualify for an alternate on
site nonpotable water for cooling tower makeup water project elective in accordance with section A107.7, nonpotable water shall be utilized for cooling
tower makeup water in accordance with the requirements of section 706.3. The design of any water reuse system shall be in accordance with section
701.1.2 of this Code.
(Ord. 33-15, 8-11-2015)
Chapter 14
CONSTRUCTION SITE EROSION CONTROL
9-14-1: TITLE, PURPOSE AND GENERAL PROVISIONS:
9-14-1-1: TITLE:
This chapter shall be known as the CONSTRUCTION SITE EROSION CONTROL ORDINANCE. (Ord. 48-14, 12-16-2014, eff. 1-1-2015)
9-14-1-2: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
The purpose and intent of this chapter is to:
A. Promote and protect the health, safety and general welfare of the citizens of the City and enhance and preserve the quality and value of our resources
by regulating construction activities.
B. Provide for the protection of stormwater, groundwater, water bodies, watercourses and wetlands pursuant to and consistent with the Clean Water Act,
and NPDES permits granted to the City.
C. Manage and control the amount of pollutants in stormwater discharges, soil erosion, sediment discharge, and mud and dirt deposits on public roadways
caused by or a result of construction activities.
D. Ensure adequate drainage, stormwater management and soil conservation measures are utilized at the site of any construction activity.
E. Restore and maintain water quality by reducing solid particulate matter emissions caused by construction activities on site. (Ord. 48-14, 12-16-2014, eff.
1-1-2015)
9-14-1-3: DEFINITIONS:
The terms as used in this chapter shall have the following meanings:
AUTHORIZED ENFORCEMENT AGENT: The Director of the Boise City Department of Planning and Development Services and/or any individual
designated by the Director of the Boise City Department of Planning and Development Services as an authorized enforcement agent. The authorized
enforcement agent must complete initial training regarding proper control measure selection, installation and maintenance as well as administrative
requirements such as inspection reporting and tracking and the implementation of enforcement actions. The authorized enforcement agent must also
complete annual refresher training to receive updates on preferred BMPs, regulation changes, permit updates and policy or standards updates.
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMPs): Physical, structural and/or managerial practices that, when used alone or in combination, control activities,
including, but not limited to, site runoff, spillage and leaks, and waste disposal, and prevent or reduce the discharge of pollutants directly or indirectly to
waters of the State or U.S. BMPs may include schedules of activities, prohibition of practices, design standards, educational activities and treatment
requirements.
CLEAN WATER ACT (CWA): Federal Water Pollution Control Act enacted by Pub.L 92-500, as amended by Pub.L 95-217, 95-576, 96-483 and 97-117,
enacted at 33 USC 1251 et seq.
CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY: Activities occurring in furtherance of a construction project, including, but not limited to, land disturbing activities; temporary
crushing and screening operations lasting less than one hundred eighty (180) calendar days, and hauling of soil and rock; explosive and abrasive blasting;
implosion; handling of building materials; concrete, stone and tile cutting; operation of motorized and nonmotorized machinery; and operation of motor
vehicles on the site, staging areas, parking areas, storage areas, or any access routes to the construction site.
DIRECTOR: The Director of the Boise City Department of Planning and Development Services.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 425/503
ENVIRONMENTALLY SENSITIVE AREA (ES): Projects located within fifty feet (50') of the Boise River, irrigation canals, or any other redefined tributary or
conveyance (freeflowing or intermittent) or wetland from the area of disturbance and/or projects located on slopes fifteen percent (15%) or greater.
EROSION: Progressive detachment and removal of particles, including soil and rock fragments, from the earth's surface by means of water, wind, ice,
gravity or mechanical processes, including vehicular traffic.
EROSION CONTROL PLAN (ECP): Details of the concepts and techniques, including BMPs, used prior to and during construction, up to and including
final landscaping, to control and limit soil erosion, mud and dirt deposits on public roadways, and sediment discharge.
FINAL STABILIZATION: A. All soil disturbing activities at the site have been completed and one of the three (3) following criteria are met:
1. A uniform (e.g., evenly distributed, without large bare areas) perennial vegetative cover with a density of seventy percent (70%) of the vegetative
cover existing prior to earth disturbing activities for the area has been established on all unpaved areas and areas not covered by permanent
structures1. For all areas designated as hillside or foothill area, the minimum acceptable plant coverage shall meet the stabilization requirements
set forth in the hillside and foothill areas development ordinance, title 11, chapter 11-07 of this Code.
2. Equivalent permanent stabilization measures (such as the use of riprap, gabions or geotextiles) have been employed to provide effective cover.
3. Temporary erosion control measures (e.g., degradable rolled erosion control product) are selected, designed and installed along with an
appropriate seed base to provide erosion control for at least three (3) years without active maintenance. The temporary erosion control measures
must be selected, designed and installed to achieve seventy percent (70%) vegetative coverage within three (3) years.
B. For construction projects on land used for agricultural purposes (e.g., pipelines across crop or range land, staging areas for highway construction,
etc.), final stabilization may be accomplished by returning the disturbed land to its preconstruction agricultural use. Areas disturbed that were not
previously used for agricultural activities, such as buffer strips immediately adjacent to "water of the United States", and areas which are not being
returned to their preconstruction agricultural use must meet final stabilization criteria.
FUGITIVE DUST: Particulate matter suspended in the air primarily from soil that has been disturbed by wind or human activities, such as earthmoving and
vehicular and equipment traffic on unpaved surfaces. Fugitive dust does not include emissions from vents, chimneys or stacks.
HAZARDOUS WASTE: Any chemical, compound, mixture, substance or article which is designated by the United States Environmental Protection Agency
or appropriate agency of the State to be a "hazardous waste", "hazardous material" or "hazardous substance", as those terms are defined by Federal or
State law.
ILLICIT DISCHARGE: Any discharge to a storm drain system that is not composed entirely of stormwater, except discharges pursuant to an NPDES
permit, discharges resulting from firefighting activities, and other exempt discharges as outlined in the Boise City stormwater management and discharge
control ordinance.
LAND DISTURBING ACTIVITY: A human induced change to improved or unimproved land, including, but not limited to, new home or building
construction, expansion of an existing building or home, demolition activity, clearing, grubbing, leveling, excavation, fill operations, clearing, trenching,
landscaping, grading, drainage, pipe installation, drilling, mining, dredging, road construction or improvement, paving, construction of earthen berms, and
improvements for use as parking or storage.
NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (NPDES) PERMIT: A discharge permit issued by the U.S. EPA, Region X, in compliance
with the Federal Clean Water Act and its amendments.
PDS: The Boise City Department of Planning and Development Services.
PERMIT: The erosion control permit issued by the Director of Planning and Development Services authorizing performance of a construction project.
PERMIT HOLDER: The person who applies his or her signature for an erosion control permit.
PERSON: Any individual, firm, association, club, organization, corporation, partnership, business trust, company or other entity which is recognized by law
as the subject of rights or duties.
POLLUTANT: Objects including, but not limited to, dredged soil, solid waste, incinerator residue, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, chemical
waste, biological materials, radioactive materials, wrecked or discarded equipment, rock, sand, silt, cellar dirt, industrial, Municipal and agricultural waste,
gases entrained in water, paints, oil and other automotive fluids, soil, rubbish, trash, debris, refuse, heavy metals, hazardous waste, road sanding
materials, yard waste from commercial landscaping operations, animal waste, materials that result from the process of constructing a building or structure,
and nauseous or offensive matter of any kind, which, when discharged to water, cause or contribute to water pollution.
POLLUTION: The degradation of the physical, thermal, chemical, biological or radioactive properties of the air and the waters of the State or U.S.; the
discharge of any pollutant into the air stream or waters of the State or U.S. which will or is likely to create a nuisance or to render such waters harmful,
detrimental or injurious to public health, safety or welfare, or to domestic, commercial, industrial, recreational, aesthetic or other beneficial uses.
PREMISES: Any building, lot, parcel of land, or portion of land, whether improved or unimproved, including adjacent sidewalks and parking strips.
PUBLIC NUISANCE: Any condition which affects others beyond the property line and is injurious to health, offensive to the senses, or constitutes an
obstruction to the free use of property and interferes with the comfortable enjoyment of life or property.
PUBLIC WORKS: Any construction project for the benefit of the public on behalf of the State of Idaho, any county or municipal corporation within the State
of Idaho, or any other public board, body, commission, agency or entity.
RESPONSIBLE PERSON: Any foreman, superintendent, project manager or other person with operational control over site activities and day to day
operational control over plan requirements and permit conditions at the site of any construction activity. A person or persons possessing a current and
valid Boise City Certificate of Training, as provided for in section 9-14-2-7 of this chapter, shall be directly in charge of all sites of construction activity
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 426/503
regulated by this chapter.
SEDIMENT: Solid material, either mineral or organic, that is in suspension or has been or is being moved from its site of origin due to erosion.
STOP WORK ORDER: Posted on site or given to the contractor/responsible person. Only work allowed under a stop work order will be at the discretion of
the authorized enforcement agent, which could include that all construction activities are halted, except those activities directed to achieve compliance to
the violations.
STORM DRAIN SYSTEM: Facility by which stormwater may be collected and conveyed to waters of the State or U.S.
STORMWATER: Surface runoff and drainage associated with rainstorm events and snow.
STORMWATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLAN (SWPPP): A site specific, written document that identifies potential sources of stormwater pollution at
the construction site. The SWPPP describes practices to reduce pollutants in stormwater discharges from the construction site, describes how reduction of
pollutants can be achieved, and identifies procedures the operator will implement to comply with the terms and conditions of the construction general
permit (CGP).
U.S. EPA: United States Environmental Protection Agency.
VARIANCE: A modification of the requirements of this chapter based on hardship.
VERBAL CORRECTION NOTICE: Verbal corrections are used for minor violations and are primarily consultative in nature. Verbal corrections shall include
the specific violation(s) which require corrective action and will contain the timeframe for the necessary corrections.
WATERS OF THE STATE: All the accumulations of water, surface and underground, natural and artificial, public and private, or parts thereof which are
wholly or partially within, which flow through or border upon the State. (IDAPA 58.01.02.010.113.)
WATERS OF THE UNITED STATES: 40 CFR 230.3(s) and related revisions shall be incorporated by reference.
WETLANDS: Lands that meet all of the following criteria: a) a predominance of hydric soil; b) saturation by surface or ground water at a frequency and
duration sufficient to support a prevalence of hydrophytic vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions; and c) normally support a
prevalence of hydrophytic vegetation.
WRITTEN CORRECTION NOTICE: Will be prepared by the authorized enforcement agent and submitted to the operator/responsible person or posted on
site. The notice will include the nature of the violation(s) and the required timeframe for correcting the violation. (Ord. 48-14, 12-16-2014, eff. 1-1-2015;
amd. 2019 Code)
9-14-1-4: APPLICABILITY:
This chapter shall apply to all construction activity and all land disturbing activity, directly or indirectly associated with construction projects, and all persons
engaged in construction activity and land disturbing activity, directly or indirectly associated with construction projects, within the corporate limits of the
City. Indirect association requires a cognizable nexus between the activity involved and the construction project, but does not require a primary or direct
connection. (Ord. 48-14, 12-16-2014, eff. 1-1-2015)
9-14-1-5: REGULATORY CONSISTENCY:
This chapter shall be construed to assure consistency with State and Federal laws, rules and regulations, including the Clean Water Act and all acts
amendatory thereof or supplementary thereto; all NPDES permits issued to the City; and any other provisions of this Code. No permit or approval issued
pursuant to this chapter shall relieve a person of the responsibility to secure permits and approvals required for activities regulated by any other applicable
rule, code, act, permit or ordinance. Compliance with this chapter does not exempt any person from complying with other applicable ordinances, rules,
codes, acts or permits. (Ord. 48-14, 12-16-2014, eff. 1-1-2015)
9-14-2: EROSION CONTROL REGULATIONS AND REQUIREMENTS:
9-14-2-1: GENERAL REQUIREMENTS AND PROHIBITIONS:
A. Permit Required: Every person shall obtain an erosion control permit (hereinafter "permit") before commencing any construction activity, unless
performing work covered by an existing City approved erosion control permit or otherwise exempted by this chapter.
B. Elimination Required: Erosion, sediment, fugitive dust or discharge of pollutants, resulting from construction activities, which enter onto public property
or private property not controlled by the permit holder, shall be eliminated to the maximum extent practicable unless otherwise permitted or exempted
under this chapter.
C. Erosion Control Plan Required: An erosion control permit and plan is required for land disturbing or other construction activities. No final plat,
subdivision site development plan, site plan, grading permit, building permit, or City project shall be approved without an approved erosion control plan.
D. Compliance Required: All construction activity commenced pursuant to an approved erosion control plan or permit must at all times comply with the
conditions of the erosion control plan or permit. The permit holder is responsible for ensuring their contractor(s), subcontractor(s), utility trenching
subcontractor(s), and all other persons entering the site abide by the conditions of the permit. The permit holder's signature or that of his authorized
agent on the permit shall constitute an agreement by the permit holder to accept responsibility for meeting the conditions of the permit.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 427/503
E. Work Without Permit Prohibited: No construction activity shall take place without a valid permit unless otherwise authorized or exempted under this
chapter. If a permit has been suspended or revoked, or has expired, all work covered by the permit shall cease until a new permit is issued.
F. Unoccupied Property Where Topsoil Removed; Stockpiles: No owner or lessee of real property shall allow the property to be unoccupied, unused,
vacant or undeveloped after the topsoil has been disturbed or the natural cover removed, unless control measures are undertaken to prevent mud,
sand, dirt and gravel from migrating off site and entering the public right-of-way or a stormwater system. Soil or aggregate stockpiles shall not be stored
on unoccupied, vacant, unused or undeveloped property unless permitted by the City and such control measures are in place. This provision is not
meant to prevent individual homeowners from accepting title of land that is not yet landscaped, and such homeowners will not be in violation of this
chapter.
G. Stabilization Required; Exceptions: All sites are required to be stabilized. Existing vegetation must be preserved where possible and disturbed portions
of the site are stabilized. Operators of the sites must initiate stabilization measures, except as provided below, as soon as practicable in portions of the
site where construction activities have temporarily or permanently ceased, but in no case more than fourteen (14) days after the construction activity in
that portion of the site has temporarily or permanently ceased. Following exceptions are:
1. Where stabilization by the fourteenth day is precluded by snow cover or frozen ground conditions, stabilization measures must be initiated as soon
as practicable.
2. Where construction activity on a portion of the site is temporarily ceased, and earth disturbing activities will be resumed within fourteen (14) days
after construction activity, temporary stabilization measures do not have to be initiated on that portion of the site.
3. During the summer months when perennial vegetative stabilization measures are not possible within fourteen (14) days after construction activity
has temporarily or permanently ceased. Temporary stabilization measures must be in place until final vegetative stabilization measures can be
completed.
H. Signage: All construction projects which hold an erosion control permit shall display a sign at the main entrance of the property indicating the address of
the property, if one has been assigned, or a lot or block number, the ESC permit number, the EPA permit number (if applicable), the responsible
person's name and phone number, the stormwater pollution hotline phone number, and the location of the Federal Notice of Intent (NOI), and the
Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan (SWPPP). The City shall provide the materials for the signs. All required writing on the signs shall be legible and
of sufficient size to be easily read from the street.
I. Fugitive Dust Control: In order to avoid pollutants from being discharged into waters of the State and waters of the U.S. and, the generation of dust must
be minimized to the maximum extent practicable (MEP). No person shall cause, suffer, allow or permit crushing, excavation, screening, drying,
handling or conveying of materials, stockpiling, sandblasting and related abrasion operations, demolition operations or any other operation likely to
cause fugitive dust, or other airborne material, such as sand or abrasive materials, unless reasonable control measures are in place to prevent
particulate matter from becoming airborne. All reasonable precautions shall be taken to prevent fugitive dust.
J. Water Pollutants: In order to avoid pollutants from being discharged into surface waters, pollution prevention control practices shall be implemented.
K. Removal Of Temporary Measures: All temporary erosion and sediment control measures shall be removed after final site stabilization. The permit
holder shall be responsible to inspect and maintain controls until the site is stabilized, by definition set forth in this chapter. Projects that are part of a
larger common plan of development or sale may leave BMPs in place after final stabilization has been achieved only when another project within the
same drainage area assumes ownership.
L. Document Availability For Inspection: The permit, permit conditions, erosion control plan, inspection reports and any other document pertaining to the
permit shall be readily available during construction for on site inspection by the authorized enforcement agent. (Ord. 48-14, 12-16-2014, eff. 1-1-2015)
9-14-2-2: EROSION CONTROL PERMITS:
A. Categories: The following categories of permits shall be issued upon approved application. An erosion control plan (ECP) is required on all site specific,
special site projects (including single-family residential projects) and annual permits. Applicants may submit a plan waiver request letter in lieu of an
ECP for minor disturbances:
1. General Permit: Issued for construction, demolition and site development for single-family homes and duplexes, and utility trench excavation.
2. Site Specific Permit: Issued for construction, demolition and site development for multiple-home developments, apartment complexes and
commercial sites.
3. Special Site Permit: Issued for the following sites:
a. Development regulated by the City hillside and foothill area development ordinance, title 11 of this Code.
b. Predevelopment slopes greater than fifteen percent (15%).
c. Ground disturbance of a natural vegetative buffer within fifty feet (50') of wetlands or water bodies.
d. Sites located entirely or partially within an environmentally sensitive area as declared by the Director, or State or Federal authorities.
e. Any other site determined by the Director to have conditions necessitating additional control measures.
4. Annual Permit: Issued for minor disturbances, which are not exempt by this chapter. This permit may include utility installation, project staging areas,
stockpile storages and other activities.
a. The permit will be issued to a single permit holder for minor projects valid for one year from the permit issue date.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 428/503
b. The permit will cover the following activities:
(1) Projects where disturbances are one hundred (100) linear feet or less of linear construction (utilities);
(2) Equipment staging and/or stockpile soil areas of equal to or less than one-fourth (1/4) acres;
(3) Sign installation throughout the City limits.
c. Holders of annual permits are required to notify the City Planning and Development Services of upcoming projects prior to the start of work.
B. Applications: Applications for permits shall be made on forms provided by the City Department of Planning and Development Services (PDS) and shall
be accompanied by the applicable fee or fees. In addition, applications for site specific permits, special site permits and annual permits shall be
accompanied by two (2) copies of an erosion control plan which is in compliance with the provisions of this chapter. No permit requiring an erosion
control plan shall be granted unless the erosion control plan has been approved by PDS.
C. Filing Of Application: Permit applications shall be filed with PDS at the same time as the request for a permit to conduct the construction activity, such
as a building permit or grading permit. (Ord. 48-14, 12-16-2014, eff. 1-1-2015)
D. General Permit Requirements: For general permits, although an erosion control plan is not required, the permit will contain requirements and conditions
that must be implemented before and during construction. These requirements and conditions will consist of, but are not limited to, the requirements
found in this chapter, including fugitive dust. (Ord. 48-14, 12-16-2014, eff. 1-1-2015; amd. 2019 Code)
E. Surety Bond: A surety bond may be required prior to issuance of a permit. The surety bond shall be in a form and amount necessary to ensure the
ability to correct any deficiency caused from the failure to comply with the conditions of the permit. The Director may also approve the use of a cash
bond or instrument of credit in lieu of the surety bond. Existing surety bonds may be utilized upon approval of the Director. The bond shall remain in
effect until the site has achieved final stabilization, at which time the permit may be finalized.
F. Activity Requires Permit; Exceptions Specified: No construction activity shall take place without a valid permit, unless otherwise authorized or exempted
under this chapter. Persons performing activities which are exempt from securing a permit shall be responsible to retain sediment and other pollutants
from leaving the work site. Should sediment and/or other pollutants not be retained on site, the inspector may require the operator to secure an erosion
control permit. As well, other enforcement actions may be applicable depending on the severity of the violation(s). These actions may include, but are
not limited to, verbal notice, written correction notices, stop work orders, notice of violation and civil action. The following construction or land disturbing
activities do not require a permit as long as no sediment or other pollutants enter the MS4 system or leave the work site:
1. Repair, replacement and utility work which occurs entirely on a residential lot.
2. Drain tiling, tilling or planting incidental to agricultural crops, and harvesting of agricultural, horticultural or silvicultural (forestry) crops.
3. Installation of fence, sign, telephone, electric poles and other types of posts and poles that involves less than two (2) cubic yards of excavation in
any one location.
4. Emergency repairs or emergency work necessary to protect life, limb or property. PDS shall be notified of emergency work within three (3) business
days of the work beginning. The Director may require a permit after the repair has been performed.
5. Parking lot and driveway repair. A permit is not required if less than ten percent (10%) of the total area of hard surface is removed. Areas exceeding
ten percent (10%) will be required to secure a permit.
6. Construction activity that occurs entirely on Federal or State owned lands.
7. Construction and maintenance activity that occurs on transportation rights-of-way or land owned by a separate governmental entity, when an erosion
control plan for the activity has been approved by the controlling governmental entity.
8. Construction, maintenance, and any other land disturbing activity on canals, laterals, sublaterals, ditches, drains and other water conveyance
facilities, and all appurtenant roadways and structures, which occurs within the fee title lands, rights-of-way, or easements for such facilities and
appurtenances. This exemption is not a relief from provisions of this chapter which control activities that impact public or private property.
9. Holders of a Federal multi-sector general permit (MSGP) when the land disturbance is a result of the MSGP sector activity.
10. Demolitions in which a building permit is not required. Where a building permit is required, then an erosion control permit shall be required.
G. Continuous Compliance: Approval of an erosion control plan and issuance of a permit does not relieve a person from the duty to ensure continuous
compliance with all conditions of the approved plan or permit, as well as all of the applicable provisions of this chapter.
H. Suspension, Revocation: The permit may be suspended or revoked at any time if the site of the construction activity is not in full compliance with the
conditions of the approved erosion control plan, the permit, and all applicable provisions of this chapter; the permit was issued in error; or the permit
was based on incorrect information.
I. Notice Of Intent To Suspend: Notice shall be given by the City of the intent to suspend or revoke a permit, and this decision may be appealed in
accordance with the provisions of section 9-14-3-2 of this chapter.
J. Failure To Commence Work; Abandonment; Renewal: A permit will be null and void if work has not started within one hundred eighty (180) days from
the date of issuance or if work is abandoned for one hundred eighty (180) days. An active permit is one where the site controls continues to be
installed, inspected and maintained by the site operator or RP and a requested ESC inspection has not been requested and performed within a six (6)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 429/503
month time from the last City inspection. The project shall not recommence until the permit has been renewed. Such renewal will require submittal of
intent to renew the permit, payment of the applicable fee, and approval by PDS.
K. Final Inspection Approval: Once final landscaping and/or final stabilization have been completed and the erosion control permit receives final inspection
approval, the conditions of the permit shall cease. Any charges, fees, cleanup costs and penalties must be paid before a permit receives final
inspection approval or a letter of completion. Final inspection approval for a phased development permit shall not be issued until all lots have been
completed or a legal transfer of ownership has occurred.
L. Continuance Under New Permit Holder: In cases where another person wishes to continue or complete work previously commenced under a permit,
this person shall either obtain a new permit or gain transfer of the previous permit. The original permit holder will be released from the permit once
another person has become responsible for the conditions for erosion and sediment.
M. Transfer Of Permit: Permits may be transferred to other persons upon approval of the Director after receiving a request for transfer and payment of the
applicable fee. The request must contain the name, address, and telephone number of the person to whom the permit will be transferred. The involved
parties shall be notified of the decision of the Director within ten (10) working days. If approved, all conditions of the permit shall transfer to the new
permit holder. If approval is not granted, an appeal may be taken under the provisions of section 9-14-3-2 of this chapter. (Ord. 48-14, 12-16-2014, eff.
1-1-2015; amd. 2019 Code)
9-14-2-3: EROSION CONTROL PLANS:
A. Signature, Certification Required: An erosion control plan (ECP) or stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPPP) submitted with an application for a
permit must bear the signature and certification number of an individual who has successfully completed a City approved training course and who has
demonstrated competence, through education, training and knowledge of the applicable laws and regulations, in erosion and sediment.
B. Permit Issuance: The PDS shall review all submitted ECPs and issue a permit for each approved ECP.
C. Partial Approval: An ECP may be approved in whole or in part. If only part of the erosion control plan has met approval, only that section of the project
for which the plan has been approved, shall be allowed to commence.
D. Nonissuance Of Permit; Notice; Appeal: If an ECP is not approved, a permit will not be issued, and the applicable construction activity will not be
allowed to commence. Notice of this decision shall be sent to the applicant and a new erosion control plan will be required prior to the issuance of a
permit. An applicant may appeal a decision not to approve an ECP pursuant to the provisions of section 9-14-3-2 of this chapter.
E. Information Required: ECPs shall include the following:
1. An ECP which discusses, with supporting technical documentation, the strategy of the proposed erosion control plan, and including significant details
of the BMPs which will be utilized. This report shall be typed, except for computational sheets, in good technical form, on eight and one-half inch by
eleven inch (81/2" x 11") paper and bound in a covered binder. Maps, diagrams and figures, shall be clearly labeled and folded to fit within the report.
The report shall contain the title on the outside of the binder and include a title sheet, table of contents, list of figures and tables, and the narrative or
body, in that order. The narrative shall contain an introduction, analysis and conclusion.
2. A site drawing of existing and proposed conditions, including:
a. Property boundaries and lot lines.
b. North arrow, scale and date.
c. Excavations, grades, paved areas, pond elevations, structures and utilities.
d. Drainage easements.
e. Benchmark.
f. Surface water and wetlands, drainage patterns and watershed boundaries, if present.
g. Location of vegetative cover.
h. Location of BMPs.
i. Dewatering channels, basin(s), advanced treatment system (ATS) and other BMPs for dewatering.
j. Authorized nonstormwater discharge(s).
3. A topographic survey showing drainage and irrigation water conveyance systems and finished grade contours at two foot (2') intervals. Sites less
than one acre, with less than two percent (2%) cross grades, may submit grade spot elevations of the property line and other required points in lieu
of the topographic study.
4. Provide notification to the construction site operator(s) if the project is required to obtain coverage under the NPDES construction general permit.
5. Provide contact information for other agencies requiring notification of any activity related to the permit as applicable.
6. A description of the receiving waters.
7. A plan of new or modified drainage systems, including system dimensions.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 430/503
8. All located in areas which are regulated by the Boise foothills development ordinance (title 11, chapter 11-07 of this Code) shall have all erodible
soils designated and classified using the Unified Soil Classification System (USCS). An engineering geology or geotechnical report, prepared by a
registered geologist or geotechnical engineer, and providing recommendations for erosion control, may be required if a determination is made that
additional information is necessary to assess the ECP.
9. Location and schedule of soil disturbance.
10. A description of all applicable sediment, erosion, runoff, administrative and good housekeeping controls to be implemented.
11. A BMP inspection and maintenance schedule.
12. The final vegetation, landscape and permanent stabilization measures.
13. The name, title, address and telephone number of the landowner or owner's representative.
14. Any other information used to prepare the ECP, such as geologic reports prepared by a registered geologist, maps and geotechnical engineering
reports prepared by a registered engineer, and soil surveys. Photographs should be included or cited by reference.
F. Stormwater Management Plan: If the applicant submitting an erosion control plan has an approved stormwater management plan which contains the
requirements listed above, the applicant may file proof of the approved stormwater management plan in lieu of submitting a new ECP.
G. Modifications; Fee: ECPs may be modified at the permit holder's request upon an approved application for modification and payment of the applicable
fee. Any modification deemed by PDS to be minor may be approved on site by an authorized enforcement agent without the need for a formal
application and fee payment. The authorized enforcement agent shall document the modification on a field report or correction notice, and the
approved plans, with a dated signature.
H. Order Of Revised Plan; Appeal: If an authorized enforcement agent determines the facilities or techniques of an ECP are not effective or sufficient after
prior approval, and is having an impact on public property or private property not controlled by the permit holder, or is placing the City in violation of its
NPDES permit, the agent may order a revised plan be submitted within a reasonable time period. If the revised plan is not acceptable or is not
immediately implemented upon approval, the permit may be suspended or revoked. Any decision of the authorized enforcement agent or PDS may be
appealed pursuant to section 9-14-3-2 of this chapter.
I. Emergency Control Measures: Emergency control measures may be ordered when erosion products are actually leaving the site or sediment deposition
is occurring. These measures will not relieve the duty to file a revised plan if ordered. (Ord. 48-14, 12-16-2014, eff. 1-1-2015)
9-14-2-4: EROSION, SEDIMENT AND FUGITIVE DUST CONTROL STANDARDS:
The design, testing, installation and maintenance of erosion controls, as detailed in the erosion control plan, shall be in accordance with the Idaho
Department of Environmental Quality Catalog of Stormwater Best Management Practices for Idaho Cities and Counties or the manufacture's
specifications, and shall be based on the following conditions, goals and expectations:
A. Soil Exposure: Minimization of soil exposure through phasing of projects;
B. Landslides, Erosion: Prevention of landslides, slope failures, gully developments and hill erosion at hillside locations;
C. Final Stabilization: Establishment of final stabilization measures of exposed soil areas resulting from land disturbing activities (refer to definition of final
stabilization under section 9-14-1-3, "Definitions", of this chapter);
D. Deposit, Tracking Mud, Debris: All necessary action shall be taken to minimize the depositing and tracking of mud, dirt, sand, gravel, rock or debris on
the public right-of-way. The owner of the site of the construction activity or the permit holder with respect to the construction site shall be responsible for
any clean up of the public rights-of-way or private property not under the permit holder's control necessitated from any tracking or depositing of mud,
dirt, sand, gravel, rock or debris, or shall reimburse the City for any expenses incurred by the City to effectuate the clean up;
E. Construction Ramps: Construction ramps shall be constructed of material that will not erode or deteriorate under adverse conditions, and shall not be
placed in a manner as to interfere with or block the passage of stormwater runoff;
F. Sediment Damages: Prevention of sediment damages to storm drain systems;
G. Temporary Sediment Basins: Use of temporary sediment basins in compliance with the Federal construction general permit;
H. Downstream Erosion: Control of stormwater discharge to minimize downstream erosion;
I. Waterways, Outlets: Stabilization of waterways and outlets prior to conveying water;
J. Stormwater Inlets: Protection of stormwater inlet structures from sediment during construction;
K. Washout Basins: Washout basins for concrete, stucco, non-VOC paints, drywall adhesive and similar substances;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 431/503
L. Access Routes: Construction of access routes;
M. Sediment Disposal: Control measures for disposal of sediment from temporary erosion and sediment control devices;
N. Maintenance Of Facilities: Maintenance of erosion and sediment control facilities and practices and installed best management products so they remain
effective;
O. Material Delivery; Site Parking: Control measures to accommodate construction material delivery and construction site parking;
P. Building Waste: Control measures for disposal of construction and building waste used during construction and site clean up;
Q. Stormwater Controls: Stormwater runon and runoff controls;
R. Dust Suppression: Provisions for dust suppression, including treatment of disturbed surface areas with dust suppressants during all activities until site
stabilization has occurred. These provisions must include one or any combination of the following:
1. Application of chemical stabilization to unstabilized roads, vehicle parking areas, or other disturbed surface areas.
2. Application of dust suppressants on disturbed surface areas.
3. Application of water to disturbed surface areas or prior to initiating any construction activity.
4. Sweeping and cleaning street locations used for vehicle exits from construction sites.
5. Application of temporary seed, vegetation or other control methods approved by PDS.
6. Sequencing of activities.
7. Preservation of vegetation.
8. Monitoring of local weather forecast;
S. Pollutants: Dewatering process and procedures which will remove pollutants in discharges that will comply with all applicable water quality standards for
the receiving waters;
T. Buffers: Maintain adequate buffers or equivalent between construction limits and waters of the U.S and waters of the State to comply with Idaho Water
Quality Standards and consistent with the most current construction general permit;
U. Turbidity Monitoring: Turbidity monitoring may be required at construction sites that directly discharge to a water body, as required by the most current
construction general permit or the State;
V. Soil Compaction: For sites disturbing one acre or greater, soil compaction shall be minimized on areas of the site where final vegetative stabilization will
occur or where surface infiltration practices will be installed. If soil compaction cannot be avoided, appropriate soil conditioning techniques shall be
used;
W. Topsoil Preservation: For sites disturbing one acre or greater, native topsoil shall be preserved unless it is not technologically possible or economically
practicable;
X. Structure Removal: Removal of all structural Best Management Practices upon achieving final stabilization of the site. (Ord. 48-14, 12-16-2014, eff. 1-1-
2015)
9-14-2-5: SELF-INSPECTIONS AND CORRECTIVE ACTION:
A. Inspections Required; Report: All permitted sites shall conduct self-inspections to verify compliance with the permit conditions and this chapter. The
inspection reports shall be documented and kept with the permit and/or erosion control plan.
B. When Inspection: Inspections shall be performed at least monthly and after a storm event of one-fourth inches (1/4") or greater within one business day
of the storm event.
C. Projects Discharging To Water Body: All projects discharging to a water body impaired for sediment or a sediment related parameter, per the most
current Idaho DEQ Integrated Water Quality Monitoring and Assessment Report, must inspect the site every seven (7) days and after a storm event of
one-fourth inches (1/4") or greater.
D. Corrective Action: Corrective actions must be initiated within twenty four (24) hours of identifying a violation and shall be completed within seven (7)
days. If it is infeasible to complete the corrective action within seven (7) days, the reason must be documented. (Ord. 48-14, 12-16-2014, eff. 1-1-2015)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 432/503
9-14-2-6: PERMIT FEES:
A. Authority: The City maintains the right to prescribe and regulate the fees or charges associated with obtaining a permit pursuant to this chapter.
B. Required; Incorrect Fee: The City shall set reasonable fees for the application for a permit. Such fees shall be required upon initial application, as well
as for any requests for modifications of erosion control plans and requests for variances. If, after review of the plan, it is determined by the Director an
incorrect fee has been collected, the fee will be adjusted to the correct amount. (Ord. 8-15, 3-10-2015, eff. 5-1-2015)
C. Fees Specified: The required permit fees are based on the nature or size of the permitted area and are for the purpose of providing administration and
enforcement of the provisions of this chapter. The permit fees shall be in such amounts as established by the City Council. (Ord. 8-15, 3-10-2015, eff.
5-1-2015; amd. 2019 Code)
D. Double Fee: The above listed fees shall be doubled if the construction activity is commenced prior to the issuance of the permit, except where an
emergency situation has been recognized by the Director. Payment of the doubled fee shall not preclude the City from taking any other enforcement
actions within its authority.
E. Resubmittal Of Application: The fee necessary to resubmit an application for an expired permit shall be one-half (1/2) the above listed fees. (Ord. 8-15,
3-10-2015, eff. 5-1-2015)
9-14-2-7: TRAINING AND CERTIFICATION:
A. Certificate; Fee: Any person who successfully completes a City approved training program shall receive a City Certificate of Training, upon payment of a
fee in such amount as established by the City Council. Successful completion of the applicable City certificate training program shall authorize the
person to perform the functions of plan designer or responsible person as specified by the certificate.
B. Interim Certificates; Fee: Interim certificates can be obtained prior to the completion of a City approved training program by submitting an enrollment
request form to the PDS with an interim certification fee in such amount as established by the City Council. An interim certificate issued by the City
shall remain for ninety (90) days; holders will be required to attend an approved training class prior to the ninety (90) day expiration period. Interim
certificates are not renewable. (Ord. 48-14, 12-16-2014, eff. 1-1-2015; amd. 2019 Code)
C. Request Form: The enrollment request form for an interim certificate or the training program shall contain the name, address and telephone number of
the person receiving the certification, as well as that person's employer, and a brief description of the duties performed by the person to receive the
certification.
D. Responsible Person Requirements: A certified responsible person shall be directly in charge of all sites of construction activity regulated by this chapter.
A responsible person must meet one of the following requirements:
1. Certified responsible person (RP);
2. Interim certificate holder;
3. Certified homeowner certification (HOC) may be used for day to day control over the erosion control permit, plan and/or conditions in lieu of the
regular RP certification under the following conditions:
a. Single-family remodel and additions (not new structures);
b. Sites are not located in environmentally sensitive areas (ES);
c. An on site conference with a City erosion inspector is required prior to commencing any land disturbing activities. The conference will be
scheduled by the HOC after the City permits have been issued. Upon completion of the on site conference, a site preparation inspection with an
associated pass of the inspection will be required. After the site preparation inspection has passed, additional work can commence;
d. The construction project is the primary residence of the person with the HOC. (Ord. 48-14, 12-16-2014, eff. 1-1-2015)
9-14-2-8: TRAINING INSTRUCTORS:
A. Approved Instructor; Fee: For a training program to be approved, it must be taught by an approved instructor certified by the City. A person may apply
for certification by submitting a letter of application, a fifty dollar ($50.00) application fee, and a resume detailing educational history and experience in
the area of erosion control. They must be able to demonstrate knowledge of the principles of: (Ord. 48-14, 12-16-2014, eff. 1-1-2015; amd. 2019 Code)
1. Erosion;
2. Sediment transport and deposition;
3. Erosion and sediment control technology, implementation and maintenance;
4. Local ordinances regulating erosion and sediment control, including this chapter;
5. Federal NPDES regulations.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 433/503
B. Determination By Director: The Director shall determine approval of a request for instructor certification by an analysis of the person's demonstrated
competence, experience, education, training and understanding of the applicable laws, regulations and ordinances.
C. Validity Of Instructor Certification: An instructor's certification shall be valid for three (3) years from the date of issuance.
D. Class Completion Notification: After each class held by a certified training instructor, the instructor shall notify the Director of all persons who have
successfully completed the program, including their names, addresses, telephone numbers and employers. Certification will be sent by the Director to
applicants who have successfully completed the program.
E. Program Preapproval: A training program must be preapproved by the Director and must include educational materials on the following subjects:
1. Ecological and resource value of the waters of the State and the U.S.;
2. The proper and effective methods of erosion and sediment control implementation and maintenance, and the benefits of such;
3. Recognition of improperly implemented erosion and sediment control BMPs and the methods of correction;
4. The purpose and provisions of any laws, regulations and ordinances on erosion and sediment control, including this chapter;
5. A description of sediment as a pollutant;
6. The processes of erosion, sediment transport and sediment deposition;
7. The required responsibilities of supervisory and enforcement personnel pursuant to this chapter;
8. The effect of storms on erosion control measures;
9. Emergency remedial action;
10. Dewatering practices;
11. Management of hillsides;
12. Proper measures for areas subject to flooding, including those outside the floodplain; and
13. The difference between erosion control and sediment control.
F. Certificate Validity: A City Certificate of Training shall be valid for three (3) years from the date of issuance. A change of employment has no effect on
the validity of the certificate. A certificate holder must attend the next available training program after three (3) years has elapsed. If the certificate
holder does not attend a training program as directed, the certificate shall expire the day following the designated program.
G. Other Certifications: Certifications from other cities, states or associations may be accepted upon approval of the Director, when the applicant can
demonstrate the prior certification was based on standards similar to those found in this chapter. (Ord. 48-14, 12-16-2014, eff. 1-1-2015)
H. Lost Certificate Replaced; Fee: Lost certificate of trainings will be replaced by the City for a fee in such amount as established by the City Council. (Ord.
48-14, 12-16-2014, eff. 1-1-2015; amd. 2019 Code)
9-14-3: ADMINISTRATION, INSPECTION AND ENFORCEMENT:
9-14-3-1: WAIVERS AND VARIANCES:
A. Waiver Or Modification: The Director may waive or modify the requirement for all or part of the erosion control plan or report upon a determination that
the plan or requirement is unnecessary due to the size, character or natural conditions of a site.
1. To obtain a waiver or modification, a written request must be submitted to the Director, along with the permit application and the applicable fees,
detailing each requirement for which a waiver or modification is sought, the reasons for the request, and the potential impact of the waiver or
modification.
2. The Director may place conditions upon a grant of waiver or modification deemed necessary to substantially secure the objectives of the standards
or requirements being waived or modified.
3. The Director shall be responsible for ensuring that a waiver or modification would not adversely affect the public welfare or the interests of the City,
and the general intent of this chapter is preserved.
4. A request for waiver or modification, and the decision of the Director related to such request, shall be enclosed with and made part of the permit
application and erosion control plan.
5. A denial of the waiver or modification may be appealed in accordance with the requirements of section 9-14-3-2 of this chapter.
B. Variance: If undue hardship would result from strict application of the requirements of this chapter, a variance may be requested:
1. The variance request must be submitted in writing to the Director with the applicable fee, and must detail the reason for the request and include
documentation, if necessary.
2. If a request for variance is denied, the denial may be appealed in accordance with the requirements of section 9-14-3-2 of this chapter.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 434/503
3. A variance shall not be considered a right or special privilege. (Ord. 48-14, 12-16-2014, eff. 1-1-2015)
9-14-3-2: APPEALS:
A. Request For Reconsideration; Time Limitation: Any person notified of a violation of this chapter and ordered to perform corrective actions or other
activities, or denied a request for a plan waiver, modification or variance, may request a reconsideration of the order and denial within ten (10) business
days of receipt of the decision.
B. Details In Writing: A request for reconsideration shall be made in writing to the Director with specific detail as to the decision or order in question and the
reason the decision or order should be reconsidered.
C. Consideration: The Director may take additional evidence and testimony to render a decision to affirm, modify or withdraw the order or decision, or the
Director may deny the request for reconsideration.
D. Additional Testimony, Supporting Evidence: For reconsideration of decisions on variance or waiver requests, no additional testimony or supporting
evidence will be allowed unless it is information not reasonably known by the applicant at the time of the original request for variance or waiver.
E. Appeal To City Council: A denial of reconsideration, or a decision to affirm or modify the original order or decision, may be appealed to the City Council.
The appeal must be in written form and submitted to the City Clerk's Office within five (5) days of receipt of the decision to be appealed. The appellant
shall have the right to address the City Council at a public hearing to dispute the decision of the Director. The City Council may affirm, modify or
withdraw the decision of the Director, or may remand the issue back to the Director for further proceedings. (Ord. 48-14, 12-16-2014, eff. 1-1-2015)
9-14-3-3: CITY INSPECTIONS:
All construction activities which require a permit under this chapter shall be subject to the inspection provisions provided herein.
A. Authority: The City maintains the right to inspect any site of construction activity that has been issued a permit under this chapter or is required to have
a permit issued under this chapter.
B. Required Inspection; Request: Sites shall be required to undergo and pass a City inspection upon completion of the installation of perimeter erosion and
sediment controls, and upon completion of final stabilization. The permit holder or responsible person shall be responsible for scheduling these
inspections through PDS. Inspections must be requested a minimum of twenty four (24) hours prior to the desired time of inspection, excluding
Saturdays, Sundays and holidays. The City shall ensure an inspection is done within twenty four (24) hours of a request, excluding Saturdays, Sundays
and holidays. Additional inspections may also occur as deemed necessary by PDS.
C. Completed Inspection Required: When an inspection is required under this chapter, no work shall proceed until completion of the inspection and
approval from the authorized enforcement agent conducting the inspection.
D. Complaint Of Violation: A complaint of violation shall be promptly investigated by inspection. The complainant shall be notified of the results of the
inspection and any enforcement action taken.
E. Classification Of Project: All projects shall be classified according to the area disturbed and the project location. Each classification of a project has an
associated frequency of inspections. (Ord. 48-14, 12-16-2014, eff. 1-1-2015)
9-14-3-4: ADMINISTRATIVE ENFORCEMENT:
In addition to any other remedies under this chapter, a person or permit holder in violation of this chapter may be subject to administrative enforcement
procedures. The administrative enforcement procedures are not a prerequisite to any other remedy under this chapter and if administrative enforcement is
undertaken, any of the following procedures may be utilized regardless of the order in which they appear in this section:
A. Verbal Warning; Notification: If an authorized enforcement agent determines a violation is occurring or has occurred, the permit holder or the designated
responsible person may be notified by a verbal warning, correction notice or notice of violation. Notification shall contain a description of the required
corrective action and provide a time period in which the corrective action must be completed. A correction notice will not require a signature from the
owner; however, a notice of violation shall require the signature of the owner of the site or an agent representing the owner.
B. Stop Work Order: If the corrective action requested in a correction notice or notice of violation is not completed in the specified time period, a stop work
order may be issued. The authorized enforcement agent shall determine the extent of the order, which may include all work except the corrective
action. Once a correction notice and/or a notice of violation have been issued to a permit holder, if continuous violations occur on the permitted project,
stop work orders or a citation may be issued without further issuance of a correction notice or notice of violation. The permit holder may be requested
by the Director to respond in writing to multiple violations.
C. Forced Corrective Action: If no reasonable effort at corrective action is made, or if necessitated by emergency, the Director or authorized enforcement
agent may cause the corrective action to be performed and shall assess the actual and administrative costs of such performance against the property
owner.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 435/503
D. Work Without Permit, Illicit Discharges: A stop work order may be issued at any time if work is being done without a valid, current permit or if an illicit
discharge has occurred.
E. Administrative Costs: Administrative costs may be assessed to the property owner if any administrative enforcement action is undertaken.
F. Repeated, Subsequent Violations: Any repeated or subsequent violation by any individual of this chapter may result in the immediate issuance of a stop
work order and/or initiation of any enforcement action as provided for by this chapter. (Ord. 48-14, 12-16-2014, eff. 1-1-2015)
9-14-3-5: VIOLATIONS CONSTITUTE MISDEMEANORS:
The violation of any provision or failure to comply with any requirement of this chapter shall constitute a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, subject to
penalty as provided in section 1-4-1 of this Code. Each day on which a violation occurs may constitute a separate criminal offense. (Ord. 48-14, 12-16-
2014, eff. 1-1-2015; amd. 2019 Code)
9-14-3-6: VIOLATIONS DEEMED PUBLIC NUISANCE:
A. Declaration Of Nuisance: In addition to any other remedies and penalties provided for by this chapter, any condition caused or permitted to exist in
violation of this chapter shall be considered a threat to the public health, safety, welfare and environment, and may be declared and deemed a
nuisance by the Director or an authorized enforcement agent.
B. Abatement: Any condition deemed a nuisance by the Director or an authorized enforcement agent may be summarily abated and/or restored by the City
and civil actions may be taken to abate, enjoin or otherwise compel the cessation of such nuisance.
C. Cost Borne By Owner: The cost of abatement and restoration shall be borne by the owner of the property or the permit holder for work done on the
property, and shall be a lien upon and against the property and such lien shall continue until paid.
D. Payment Of Costs: The City shall seek from the violator, the payment of all costs of investigation, administrative overhead, out of pocket expenses, cost
of administrative hearings, costs of suit and reasonable attorney fees for all administrative or civil proceedings for nuisance violations in which the City
is the prevailing party, as authorized by State law. (Ord. 48-14, 12-16-2014, eff. 1-1-2015)
9-14-3-7: CIVIL ACTIONS FOR VIOLATIONS:
A. Action Taken By City: The Environmental Protection Agency requires, as mandated by the NPDES permit, that the City adopt and employ a scheme of
civil and administrative penalties. Therefore, pursuant to this Federal requirements and Idaho Code section 50-302(2), the City may enforce any
provision of this chapter through civil penalties. Such penalties shall be in addition to any other remedies provided for by this chapter. In any such
action, the City may seek any or all of the following:
1. Temporary and/or permanent injunction;
2. Assessment of the violator for the costs of any investigation, inspection or monitoring survey which led to the establishment of a violation, and for the
reasonable costs of preparing and bringing legal action under this provision;
3. Costs incurred in removing, correcting or terminating the adverse effects resulting from a violation;
4. Compensatory damages for loss or destruction to water quality, wildlife, fish and aquatic life.
Assessments and recovered damages under this provision shall be used exclusively for costs associated with implementing or enforcing this chapter.
B. Assessment; Guidelines: Any person or its agent violating any provision of this chapter may have civil penalties assessed against them. The notice of
said penalties shall be served upon the violator or service may be effectuated by certified mail to the last known business address or residential
address of the violator. A new violation may be filed for each day the violation continues. The violation will have a date when the violation shall be paid
by, if it is not paid by that date, the City shall pursue collections through the court and will ask the court to reimburse for all costs associated with
collecting the penalty. Civil penalties may be issued pursuant to the following guidelines:
1. If a violation(s) is observed which may create or has created an off site discharge of pollutants, the City shall issue a warning to the responsible
person.
2. Should the violation continue or a subsequent violation(s) is discovered, the City may issue civil penalties.
3. If the RP has not provided day to day controls as required by this chapter which would have reduced the off site pollutants to the maximum extent
practicable (MEP).
C. Penalties Specified: Civil penalties will not exceed two hundred dollars ($200.00) for the first offense and not more than one thousand dollars
($1,000.00) for each offense thereafter. (Ord. 48-14, 12-16-2014, eff. 1-1-2015)
9-14-3-8: CONCEALMENT:
Causing, permitting, aiding, abetting or concealing a violation of any provision of this chapter shall constitute a violation of such provision. (Ord. 48-14, 12-
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 436/503
16-2014, eff. 1-1-2015)
9-14-3-9: NONEXCLUSIVITY OF REMEDIES:
All remedies and penalties under this chapter are in addition to and do not supersede or limit any and all other remedies and penalties, both civil and
criminal. The remedies and penalties provided for herein shall be cumulative and not exclusive. (Ord. 48-14, 12-16-2014, eff. 1-1-2015)
9-14-3-10: ACTS RESULTING IN VIOLATION OF FEDERAL LAWS AND REGULATIONS:
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter, any provision of any permit issued pursuant to this chapter, or discharges any pollutant or causes
pollution, or violates a cease and desist order or any requirement or prohibition, may also be in violation of Federal laws or regulations, and may be subject
to the sanctions of those laws or regulations, including civil or criminal penalties, notwithstanding any legal action taken by the City. (Ord. 48-14, 12-16-
2014, eff. 1-1-2015)
9-14-3-11: DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY:
The degree of protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific, engineering and other
relevant technical considerations. The standards set forth herein are minimum standards and this chapter does not imply that compliance will ensure
against all unauthorized discharge of pollutants. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the City, any agent or employee thereof for any
damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder. (Ord. 48-14, 12-16-2014, eff. 1-1-2015)
Title 10
PUBLIC UTILITIES
Chapter 1
IRRIGATION SYSTEM REGULATIONS
10-1-1: TITLE:
This chapter shall be known as the BOISE CITY MUNICIPAL IRRIGATION SYSTEM ORDINANCE. (1952 Code § 8-16-01)
10-1-2: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
There is hereby created the City municipal irrigation system to exercise the rights and authorities as provided by Idaho Code title 50, chapter 18. For the
purpose of developing, managing and utilizing the irrigation water resources of the City and for distributing said irrigation water resources to users, a
Municipal irrigation system or systems for the development, distribution and management of irrigation water resources shall be maintained, repaired,
replaced and operated by the City in accordance with this chapter. The intent of this chapter is to provide an entity with the power and capability to own,
operate and maintain a separate irrigation system or systems to allow for the continued use of developed irrigation water rights and to preserve the higher
quality water for human consumption. (1952 Code § 8-16-02)
10-1-3: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and phrases used in this chapter shall have the following meanings unless a different meaning clearly appears from the context:
BOISE CITY AREA OF CITY IMPACT: The area defined in section 11-01-07 of this Code.
CITY: The City of Boise City.
IRRIGATION COMMISSION: A recommendatory body to assist the Mayor and Council to effectuate and establish the policy and standards for irrigation
systems required in residential development in the Boise City impact area.
IRRIGATION ENTITY: In accordance with Idaho Code section 31-3805, an irrigation entity is an existing irrigation district, or other canal company, ditch
association or like irrigation water delivery entity.
IRRIGATION PURPOSES: The use of water for lawns, gardens, pastures, parks, greenbelts, golf courses and open space.
IRRIGATION WATER: Nonpotable water used for irrigation purposes.
MUNICIPAL IRRIGATION FUND: In accordance with Idaho Code section 50-1806, a separate fund which will be the repository for City fees, assessments
and charges arising from the operation of the Boise City municipal irrigation system.
NONPOTABLE WATER: Water which does not conform to drinking water quality standards.
PERSON: Any individual, corporation, partnership, association, firm, public agency or any other legal entity.
POTABLE WATER: Water which conforms to drinking water quality standards.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 437/503
PRESSURE IRRIGATION SYSTEM: A system that delivers irrigation water under pressure through a closed distribution piping system.
SEPARATE IRRIGATION SYSTEM: A system of ditches, piping and water sources for delivery of irrigation water that is separate and independent of the
potable water system.
USER: Any consumer of water from the Boise City municipal irrigation system.
WATER: When the term water is used in this chapter without the prefix irrigation or potable, it shall refer to both irrigation and potable water.
WATER RIGHTS: The legal right to divert and beneficially use the public waters of the State of Idaho where such right is evidenced by a decree, a permit
or a license issued by the Idaho Department of Water Resources, a beneficial or constitutional use right evidenced by an adjudication claim or claim based
on Idaho Code section 42-243, or a right based on Federal law.
WATER STOCK: The document which is evidence of ownership in an irrigation entity. This term has no application to irrigation districts because irrigation
districts are quasi-governmental entities who do not offer any form of ownership to the owners of land within the irrigation district. (1952 Code § 8-16-03)
10-1-4: APPLICABILITY:
Pursuant to the City subdivision ordinance, every person within the area of City impact providing an irrigation system separate from the potable water
system shall make provisions for the continued ownership, operation and maintenance of the separate irrigation system. All separate irrigation systems
constructed within the area of City impact shall also comply with the minimum design criteria and specifications established by the City subdivision
ordinance. This chapter shall apply to all users within the area of City impact who become part of the City municipal irrigation system. (1952 Code § 8-16-
04)
10-1-5: CONNECTION REQUIREMENTS AND PROCEDURES:
Every person providing a separate irrigation system who desires to have the system owned, operated and maintained by the City:
A. Application: File an application with the Public Works Department containing the following information:
1. A description of the area and property to be served by the separate irrigation system.
2. For existing systems, a map or drawing of the system indicating the proposed location of all easements, pipes and other system infrastructure.
3. A description of the available surface water irrigation right and the irrigation entity which supplies the water to the system.
4. A formal request for inclusion into the City municipal irrigation system.
B. Agreement: The Public Works Department will prepare an agreement with the person containing at least the following provisions:
1. Definition of ownership, operation and maintenance responsibilities.
2. Agreement to abide by the terms of this chapter, including the payment of fees.
3. Agreement to abide by all applicable design standards and criteria established by the City.
4. The right of the City at any time without notice to shut off the water supply for repairs, extensions, or for any other maintenance and operation
procedures. The City shall not be responsible for any damage such as the breaking of any pipe or fixtures, or any other damage resulting from
shutting the water off.
5. A provision for the assignment of any water stock owned in any irrigation and canal companies who may provide water to the system and a provision
for the issuance of a City water certificate. The City may also require that the agreement between the City and irrigation water user be subject to an
additional agreement between the City and irrigation entity addressing the delivery of irrigation water to the user's property.
6. A provision that the irrigation water to be delivered by the City municipal irrigation system may be pooled for delivery.
7. When the entity providing water to the Municipal irrigation system is an irrigation district, the agreement between the irrigation water user and the
City shall be contingent upon the execution of a contract between the City and the irrigation district which, among other things, provides that the
water may be pooled for delivery and the means and methods of passing on district irrigation assessments.
8. Any other terms both parties deem necessary.
C. Adoption And Approval: The application and agreement will be forwarded to the City Council for formal adoption and approval. If the application and
agreement are approved, the Council shall pass and publish an ordinance describing the exterior boundaries of each separate irrigation system and
incorporating the separate irrigation system into the boundaries of the City municipal irrigation system. (1952 Code § 8-16-05)
10-1-6: ASSESSMENTS AND FEES:
A. Funds: All fees, charges and assessments received and collected under the authority of this chapter shall be deposited and credited to funds
designated as the Municipal Irrigation Fund. The accounts of said funds shall show all receipts and expenditures for the maintenance and operation of
the irrigation system and any payments into a sinking fund established for the purpose of paying principal of and interest on bond indebtedness of the
Municipal irrigation systems which shall, from time to time, be outstanding. As provided by law, when budgeted and appropriated, the funds and credits
to the account of the Municipal Irrigation Fund shall be available for the payment of the requirements for the maintenance and operation, repairs and
upkeep of the Municipal irrigation system of the City, and to the extent legally available, for payment into a sinking fund established for the payment of
the principal of and interest on any Municipal Irrigation Fund indebtedness of the City which shall, from time to time, be outstanding.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 438/503
B. Assessments: The assessments for each irrigation system served by the City municipal irrigation system shall be established by the City Council in
accordance with the provisions of Idaho Code title 50, chapter 18. The following dates are established by Idaho Code title 50, chapter 18:
1. By the fourth Monday of January of each year, the City Clerk shall prepare an assessment book listing all the property to which irrigation water is
being supplied by the City municipal irrigation system and listing the persons who own or have possession or control of the property. Both lists shall
conform to the requirements of Idaho Code section 50-1807.
2. By the second Monday of February of each year, unless a legal holiday, then on the succeeding work day, the Mayor and City Council shall meet
and make an estimate of the necessary funds for the expenses of maintaining, operating, improving, extending and enlarging the City municipal
irrigation system for the ensuing year. The estimate of the expenses and the assessments derived from the estimate shall conform to the
requirements of Idaho Code section 50-1807.
3. By the first day of March of each year, the City Clerk must give notice in accordance with Idaho Code section 50-1807 of the time the Mayor and
Council shall meet to correct the assessments. The meeting will occur no later than March 20 and, in the meantime, the assessment books will be
available for inspection in the Office of the City Clerk. The meeting may not exceed three (3) working days, and the City Clerk shall complete all
corrections to the assessment books within five (5) days after the Mayor and Council adjourn and the City Clerk shall certify and deliver the
assessment books to the City Treasurer.
4. The City Treasurer shall publish notice in accordance with Idaho Code section 50-1814 that the assessments are due and payable on or before April
1 of each year. (1952 Code § 8-16-06)
10-1-7: TERMS AND CONDITIONS OF SERVICE:
A. Payment: All service charges, fees and assessments, including any legally established franchise fees, not paid within thirty (30) days after the due date
shall be considered delinquent. By the second Monday of July of each year in which the assessments are levied, the City Treasurer shall enter all
delinquent assessments and penalties on the assessment roll, which entry shall be dated as of July 1 of each year. By the third Monday of July of each
year in which the assessments were levied, the Treasurer shall certify to the City Clerk both the collected and the delinquent assessments. The City
Treasurer must compile an alphabetical list of the delinquent assessments by the fourth Monday of July and shall file a certified copy of the delinquency
list with the County Recorder also on or before the fourth Monday of July.
B. Disconnection: The following may be a basis for the disconnection of users of the Municipal irrigation system:
1. Nonpayment of charges, fees and assessments when due and owing.
2. Illegal connection to the system.
3. When necessary for the protection of the public health and safety.
4. Cross connection to a potable water system.
C. Lien: All assessments levied by the City constitute liens and shall be collected in accordance with the provisions of Idaho Code title 50, chapter 18.
D. Disconnect And Reconnect Fees: The City Council may, by resolution, establish fees for the disconnection and reconnection of users to the Municipal
irrigation system. (1952 Code § 8-16-07)
10-1-8: PROHIBITED ACTS:
A. Unlawful Use Or Obstruction: It shall be unlawful for any person, except one duly authorized by the City, to operate, interfere with or connect anything
with any portion of the City municipal irrigation system, i.e., valves, pipes, shutoff valves, ditches, pump stations. Further it shall be unlawful for any
person to obstruct the access to any Municipal irrigation system appurtenances.
B. Waste Of Water: It shall be unlawful for any person to allow or permit the waste of irrigation water by allowing said water to flow upon or into any storm
or sanitary sewer, street, alley or other public right-of-way, or by allowing said water to flow on or upon adjacent or adjoining property so as to cause
unnecessary inconvenience or expense to the owner of such adjacent or adjoining property or by using more of said water than good husbandry
requires for the maintenance and cultivation of premises being irrigated.
C. Backflow: It shall be unlawful for any person to interconnect or cause to be interconnected the potable and nonpotable portions, distribution systems or
service lines of dual water supplies or extensions thereof without the installation of an inspected and approved reduced pressure type backflow
prevention device. (1952 Code § 8-16-08)
10-1-9: CITY RIGHTS, POWERS AND AUTHORITY:
The City, through its authorized representative bearing proper identification, shall be permitted at proper and reasonable hours of the day to enter all
properties, premises or buildings to which water is furnished from the Municipal irrigation system for any purpose necessary for the proper administration
of the Municipal irrigation system. Also, the City, through its authorized representative, shall be permitted to enter all private properties through which the
City holds a duly negotiated easement for any purpose necessary for the maintenance of any portion of the Municipal irrigation system lying within said
easements. (1952 Code § 8-16-11)
10-1-10: APPEALS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 439/503
Any user of the system aggrieved by any decision rendered by the Department of Public Works pursuant to this chapter may appeal the decision to the
Irrigation Commission. Any such appeal shall be in writing, describing the decision and the grounds for appeal, and shall be filed with the Public Works
Department within ten (10) days after the date of the administrative decision. The Irrigation Commission shall hold a hearing thereon at its earliest
convenience. Notice of the time, place and date of the hearing shall be sent to the aggrieved party at least seven (7) days prior to the hearing date. The
decision of the Irrigation Commission shall be in writing and may be appealed to the City Council by the filing of a notice of appeal with the City Clerk
within fifteen (15) days of receipt of the written decision. (1952 Code § 8-16-10)
10-1-11: PENALTY; CIVIL REMEDIES:
A. Misdemeanor Penalty: Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall
be subject to a penalty as provided in section 1-4-1 of this Code. (1952 Code § 8-16-09)
B. Criminal Remedies: In addition to, and exclusive of the criminal remedy provided by this chapter, the following civil remedies may be invoked:
1. Injunction: The City may seek a temporary restraining order or may institute injunctive, abatement or any other appropriate proceedings to prevent or
temporarily or permanently enjoin or abate existing or proposed violations of the provisions of this chapter.
2. Disconnection: The City may discontinue service to any user who fails to comply with the provisions of this chapter after ten (10) days' written notice
to comply. Except in the case of a threat to the public health and safety, the user may request a hearing before the Irrigation Commission within ten
(10) days of service of notice. The Irrigation Commission shall conduct a hearing at its earliest possible convenience to determine if disconnection
should occur. The user shall be given notice of such hearing and shall be given the opportunity to present evidence at such hearing. The
determination of the Irrigation Commission shall be in writing and may be appealed to the City Council.
3. Civil Damages: The City may seek civil damages, enforceable in a court of law, from any person violating the provisions of this chapter and by such
violation causing the City additional costs to maintain and operate the Municipal irrigation system, or causing the City to be subject to penalties for
violation of any State or Federal law. (1952 Code § 8-16-09)
Chapter 2
SEWER USE AND REGULATIONS
10-2-1: PURPOSE AND AUTHORITY:
10-2-1-1: PURPOSE:
For the purpose of promoting health, safety and the general welfare of the City and the City area of impact, a system for the collection, transmission and
disposal of wastewater shall be constructed, extended, maintained and operated within the City and the City area of impact, and other mutually agreed
upon entities, by which to provide an adequate system for the collection, transmission and disposal of wastewater. (1952 Code § 8-11-01)
10-2-1-2: POLICY TO ENHANCE AND PRESERVE WATER QUALITY:
It is the declared policy of the City to enhance and preserve the quality and value of the water resources of the State, to assist in the prevention, control
and abatement of water pollution, and to conform to the expressed intent of the Congress of the United States and the legislature of the State to abate
pollution of streams and lakes. (1952 Code § 8-11-01.01)
10-2-1-3: APPLICABILITY OF CHAPTER:
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all persons who connect to, or have an impact upon, the City sewer system. (1952 Code § 8-11-01.03)
10-2-1-4: TITLE; OBJECTIVES:
A. Title: This chapter shall be known as the BOISE CITY SEWER ORDINANCE.
B. Objectives: The objectives of this chapter are to:
1. Prevent the introduction of pollutants into the wastewater system which will interfere with the operation of the system, contaminate the resulting
biosolids, cannot be adequately treated or that would otherwise be incompatible with the wastewater system;
2. Set forth uniform requirements for direct and indirect contributors into the wastewater collection and treatment system, and enable the City to comply
with all State and Federal laws applicable to the treatment of wastes and discharges of clean and safe water;
3. Improve the opportunity to recycle and reclaim wastewaters and biosolids from the system; and
4. Provide for equitable distribution, among users, of the cost of the wastewater system. (1952 Code § 8-11-01.04)
10-2-1-5: COMPOSITION OF SEWER SYSTEM:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 440/503
All land sites, sanitary sewers, wastewater treatment works, their appurtenances, equipment, materials and supplies owned and used by the City to collect,
treat and recycle wastewater from property within the City and the City area of impact constitute the City sewer system. (1952 Code § 8-11-01.05)
10-2-1-6: PUBLIC WORKS COMMISSION:
A. System Policy: Pursuant to the authority granted by title 2, chapter 6 of this Code, the Public Works Commission shall advise the City Council on policy
matters pertaining to the wastewater system.
B. Authority Of Commission: The commission shall have the authority to:
1. Study, evaluate and maintain continuing review and appraisal of the effectiveness of existing and proposed wastewater systems and facilities,
programs, policies and activities of the City sewer system to ensure that the systems and facilities are designed, operated and maintained so as to
meet the requirements of Federal, State and local bodies;
2. Review and recommend the type, location and method of financing the construction, installation, replacement and operation of improvements and
extensions to the wastewater system in a manner consistent with Federal, State and local policies and regulations;
3. Review and recommend rates and fees for the use of, and the services rendered by, the wastewater system;
4. Review and recommend changes or additions to the ordinance regulating the use of wastewater systems; and
5. Propose and promulgate, subject to ratification by the City Council, rules and regulations for the control and regulation of wastewater systems and
facilities within their control.
C. Appeal: Final decisions by the Public Works Department may be appealed to the Public Works Commission pursuant to the requirements set forth in
section 10-2-9-8 of this chapter. Final decisions of the Public Works Commission may be appealed to the City Council pursuant to section 10-2-9-9 of
this chapter. (1952 Code § 8-11-01.06)
10-2-1-7: PUBLIC WORKS DEPARTMENT DIRECTOR:
The Director shall have the authority to:
A. Regulate the volume and flow rate of discharge to the wastewater system;
B. Establish permissible limits of concentration for various specific substances, materials, waters or wastes that can be accepted into the wastewater
system;
C. Specify those substances, materials, waters or wastes that are prohibited from entering the wastewater system;
D. Specify standards for installation of wastewater lines and services;
E. Enforce local compliance with Federal standards promulgated pursuant to the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the Clean Water Act,
codified as amended in 33 USC section 1251 et seq.;
F. Recommend or establish reasonable fees for administrative processes; and
G. Establish policies for operations of the City sewer system. (1952 Code § 8-11-01.07)
10-2-1-8: SEWAGE WORKS FUND:
There is hereby created a special fund to be designated as the Sewage Works Fund (commonly known as the Sewer Fund). All service charges and fees
received and collected pursuant to the provisions of section 10-2-6-4 of this chapter, all connection fees received and collected pursuant to the provisions
of section 10-2-6-3 of this chapter, and all monies and receipts from contract charges or from any other source as provided by the provisions of this
chapter shall be deposited to the credit of the Sewage Works Fund and such monies are hereby set aside and perpetually appropriated for, and shall be
expended only for, the payment of:
A. Costs and expenses of maintenance, operation, replacement and repair of the wastewater system;
B. Constructing and extending a wastewater system consisting of, but not limited to, sewers, trunks and lines, manholes, pumps, related structures and
appurtenances, and facilities for the treatment and disposal of sewage, wastewater and other matter;
C. The retirement of debt incurred in the construction and operation of the City sewer system; and
D. Expenditures and uses authorized by the Idaho Revenue Bond Act. (1952 Code § 8-11-01.08)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 441/503
10-2-2: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
10-2-2-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and phrases used in this chapter shall have the following meanings unless a different meaning clearly appears from the context:
APARTMENT: A room or suite of rooms in a multiple-family structure which is arranged, designed or used as a single housekeeping unit, and which
includes permanently installed complete kitchen and sanitary facilities.
ASSISTED LIVING/RESIDENTIAL CARE FACILITY: A retirement facility licensed and regulated by the State of Idaho, with restrictions on the size and
occupancy of sleeping areas.
BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (BOD): The quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter in five (5) days under standard
laboratory procedures set forth in the latest edition of "Standard Methods", expressed in milligrams per liter.
BOISE AREA OF IMPACT: An area mutually agreed upon, including plan and ordinances, between Boise City and Ada County, as provided for by Idaho
Code sections 67-6526 and 50-1306. The boundaries and provisions of the area of impact can be found in section 11-01-07 of this Code.
BOISE CITY (CITY): The Municipal corporation known as Boise City, Idaho.
BREWERY: A building or establishment for the commercial brewing of beer or other malt liquors.
CHANGE OF USE: Such time as the nature of the business for which a structure is used has changed, or the primary use of the structure has changed.
COMBINED WASTEWATER: Wastewater containing stormwater, infiltration or inflow, which is ordinarily prohibited from entering public sanitary sewers.
COMMERCIAL: Any business, industrial, institutional or nonprofit enterprise. This shall include, but is not limited by, hotels, motels, assisted living facilities,
schools, churches and nonresidential condominiums.
CONDOMINIUM: Real estate, portions of which are designated for separate ownership and the remainder of which is designated for common ownership
solely by the owners of those portions. Real estate is not a condominium unless the undivided interests in the common elements are vested in the unit
owners.
CONTRIBUTOR: Any person who directly or indirectly contributes or discharges wastewater into the City sewer system.
DATE SEWER SYSTEM IS AVAILABLE: The date the public sewer, to which the building or structure is to be connected, is accepted by the City Engineer
as ready for use.
DEVELOPER OR SUBDIVIDER: Any person who subdivides and/or improves undeveloped land for industrial, commercial, residential or mixed use, and
thereby creates a demand for City sewer services.
DIRECTOR: The Public Works Department Director, or the authorized representative as designated by the Director.
DISCHARGE: The disposal of sewage, holding tank waste, water or any other substance into the wastewater system of the City.
DOMESTIC (SANITARY) WASTES OR WASTEWATER: Liquid or water carried wastes from the noncommercial preparation and handling of food, or
containing human excrement and similar matters from toilets and the sanitary plumbing systems of dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial facilities and
institutions. When analyzed by standard methods, domestic waste shall contain approximately three hundred milligrams per liter (300 mg/L) of TSS and
three hundred milligrams per liter (300 mg/L) of BOD.
DUPLEX: A detached building containing two (2) dwelling units. Each unit must be capable of functioning as a dwelling unit independently of the other.
DWELLING UNIT: One or more rooms and single kitchen designed for, or occupied as, a unit by one family for living and cooking purposes, which is
located in a single-family or multi-family dwelling.
FINANCIAL HARDSHIP: Shall be deemed to exist when an owner's annual family gross income is at or below the income level indicated for a family of
similar size on the current "Low Income Guidelines" chart employed by the City in the administration of the Community Development Block Grant Program,
and shall be verified by the previous year's Federal Tax return.
FLAG LOT: A lot having access to a public or private street via a narrow private driveway, the frontage of which is generally forty feet (40') or less in width.
FLOW: The volume of wastewater.
GRAVITY FLOW SEWER SYSTEM: That part of the wastewater system which uses gravity, as opposed to lift stations, pumps or pressure lines, to
transport sewage to the waste treatment facility.
GROSS ACRE: An acre of ground, including all public rights-of-way and private streets within the development.
HEATING AND/OR COOLING SYSTEM DISCHARGE: The water discharged from any use, such as heating, air conditioning, cooling or refrigeration, or to
which the only pollutant added is heat.
INDIVIDUAL (PRIVATE) WASTEWATER DISPOSAL SYSTEM: A septic tank, cesspool or similar self-contained receptacle or facility which collects and/or
treats or otherwise disposes of wastewater and which is not connected to the City sewer system.
INDUSTRIAL WASTES OR WASTEWATER: The liquid and water carried wastes from industrial processes or discharged from industrial plants, including
wastewater from pretreatment facilities and polluted cooling water, as distinct from domestic wastewater.
LARGE OPEN SPACE LOTS WITH LOW SEWER IMPACT: Lots in excess of five (5) acres with open space use, which have single-family dwelling
equivalent (SFDE) density, calculated on fixture units, of less than one SFDE per five (5) acres and to which the general public has unrestricted access.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 442/503
LATERAL SEWER: Those public sewers which are eight inches (8") or less in diameter.
LOW CONSUMPTION USER: A commercial user whose use is comparable in quantity to a residential user, as determined by the use of standard
engineering references.
LOW INCOME DISCOUNT: A reduction of thirty percent (30%) in the amount charged for residential sewer service calculated in accordance with section
10-2-7-2 of this chapter.
MOBILE HOME PARK: Any area, tract, plot or parcel of land, developed as a planned unit development and designed primarily for placement of mobile
homes, located and maintained for dwelling purposes, on lots that are rented on a permanent or semipermanent basis.
MONITORED CONNECTION: A connection having measuring and sampling devices, installed near the discharger's point of connection to the wastewater
system, that are used to determine flow, BOD and TSS values suitable for fee calculations.
MULTI-FAMILY DWELLING: A structure, or portion thereof, containing three (3) or more dwelling units, excluding attached single-family townhouse units
located on individual lots.
OVERSIZING: The term for the circumstance where the City has required the developer to install a sewer of a size or capacity greater than eight inches
(8").
OWNER: The person holding record title to the property.
PERMANENT LIFT STATION: Sewer pumping facilities which take the place of the gravity flow sewer system on a permanent basis according to the
master sewer plan.
PERSON: Any individual, joint venture, partnership, firm, corporation, association, club or organized group, trust, estate, governmental entity or any other
legal entity, or their legal representatives, agents or assigns.
PRIVATE SERVICE LINE: That part of a sewer, connected to the City sewer system located within private property or private sewer service easement.
Owned by the property owner and not maintained by Boise City.
PRIVATE SEWER: The same as "private service line", as defined in this section.
PUBLIC SERVICE LINE: That part of a sewer constructed from the sewer tap-in of the existing lateral, manhole, trunk sewer or interceptor sewer to the
right-of-way line of the public sewer easement. Public service lines are owned by Boise City.
PUBLIC SEWER: The sewer which is part of the City sewer system, subject to the ownership, control and maintenance of the City.
RESIDENTIAL: A single-family dwelling, duplex, multi-family dwelling, apartment, townhouse, noncommercial condominium or mobile home park.
RESTAURANT: Any sandwich shop, pizza parlor, full service, fast food or other eating establishment where food is prepared, served or provided for the
public.
SANITARY SEWER: A public sewer which carries wastewater, and to which storm, surface and ground waters are not generally admitted, including the
pipe or conduit system and appurtenances for the collection, transportation, pumping and treatment of wastewater. This definition includes the terms public
sewer, sewer system and public service line.
SEPTAGE: Any wastewater from holding tanks, such as vessels, chemical toilets, campers, trailers, recreation vehicles, septic tanks, sealed vaults and
vacuum pump trucks.
SERVICE BILL: The consolidated bill issued monthly or quarterly by utility billing which itemizes the separate charges for each service provided to the
customer.
SEWAGE: Wastewater.
SEWER: A pipe or conduit which collects and carries wastewater to a treatment plant.
SEWER CONNECTION CREDITS: A single-family dwelling equivalent (SFDE) value given for previously paid trunk and treatment sewer capacities
permanently removed or demolished to be used as a credit toward future connection fees, subject to the provisions of subsection 10-2-6-6C of this
chapter.
SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLING: A building designed for use and occupancy by no more than one family.
SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLING EQUIVALENT (SFDE): For the purpose of calculating treatment connection fees, a typical peak month daily average
discharge from a single-family dwelling, specifically defined as two hundred eighty two (282) gallons per day of flow, 0.54 pounds per day of BOD, and
0.54 pounds per day of TSS. For the purpose of calculating trunk connection fees, an SFDE shall mean a typical peak hour discharge from a single-family
dwelling of 22.2 gallons per hour. An SFDE generates a fixture unit count, as defined in the Uniform Plumbing Code, of twenty one (21).
STANDARD METHODS: Procedures described in the most recent edition of "Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater", as
published by the American Public Health Association, American Water Works Association and the Water Environment Federation.
STRENGTH OF WASTEWATER (WASTE STRENGTH): The quality of wastewater discharged as measured by its elements, including its constituents and
characteristics.
STRUCTURE: Anything constructed or erected, except fences, which requires permanent location on the ground, or is attached to something having
location on the ground, which is designed or intended for the shelter, enclosure or protection of persons, animals, chattels or property of any kind, and
which is determined by the department to have a potential for impact on the City sewer system.
SUSPENDED SOLIDS OR TOTAL SUSPENDED SOLIDS (TSS): The total suspended matter that floats on the surface of, or is suspended in, water,
wastewater or other liquids, and which is removable by laboratory filtering in accordance with procedures set forth in "Standard Methods", expressed in
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 443/503
milligrams per liter.
TAP-IN (SEWER TAP-IN): A sewer service connection to an existing sewer lateral, trunk, interceptor sewer or manhole.
TEMPORARY LIFT STATIONS: Sewer pumping facilities which, on an interim basis, take the place of gravity flow sewer systems and are designated as
temporary by the master sewer plan.
TOWNHOUSE: An attached single-family dwelling unit located on a platted lot and for which the individual owner may acquire title to the unit and lot.
TRUNK LINE (SEWER TRUNK LINE): A gravity sewer larger than eight inches (8") in internal diameter, and shall also include pressure sewer lines. A
trunk sewer line shall be of such size and location by which to serve the projected growth in population and sewer use of any area within Boise City and
the Boise area of impact, and to provide an adequate system for the collection, transmission and disposal of sanitary sewage from residential and
commercial users within and without the City.
UNMONITORED CONNECTION: A connection where the discharger's flow is determined by winter water use, and the BOD and TSS values are set at
typical levels for the discharger category.
USER: Generally, the owner, tenant, trustee, mortgage receiver or occupier of premises which is connected to the wastewater system.
WASTEWATER (SEWAGE): Any liquid or water carried industrial or sanitary wastes, whether treated or untreated, including polluted heating and/or
cooling water from dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial facilities and institutions, which is contributed or permitted to enter the public sewer system.
WASTEWATER SYSTEM, WASTEWATER TREATMENT SYSTEM, WASTEWATER WORKS: Any devices, facilities, structure, equipment or works owned
or used by the City for the purpose of the transmission, storage, treatment, recycling and reclamation of industrial and domestic wastes from within or
without the City, or necessary to recycle or reuse water at the most economical cost over the estimated life of the system (including intercepting sewers,
outfall sewers, public service lines, pumping, power, and other equipment and their appurtenances, but excluding private service lines, extensions,
improvements, additions, alterations or any remodeling thereof). This definition shall also include elements essential to provide a reliable recycled supply,
such as standby treatment units and clear well facilities; and any works, including the land and sites that may be acquired, that will be an integral part of
the treatment process or is used for the ultimate disposal of residues resulting from such treatment.
WET LINE SEWER: An operating public sewer capable of serving a structure immediately upon connection.
WINTER WATER USE: The average of the previous winter (4 months) water consumption as recorded by the user's commercial water meter. If the
residential user is attached to a private well, water consumption is based on the number of residents in the home. Where internal water use is separately
metered, a twelve (12) month average water consumption may be used.
WORKING DAY: The time between the hours of eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. and five o'clock (5:00) P.M. on any day, except Saturday, Sunday and any
National, State or local holidays or days of observation during which the Public Works Department is not open for regular business. (1952 Code § 8-11-
02.01; amd. Ord. 23-17, 7-18-2017)
10-2-2-2: ABBREVIATIONS:
BOD Biochemical oxygen demand
L Liter
mg Milligrams
mg/L Milligrams per liter
SFDE Single-family dwelling equivalent
TSS Total suspended solids
(1952 Code § 8-11-02.02)
10-2-2-3: MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS:
A. No Permits Issued For Construction Unless In Compliance: No permit shall be issued for the construction of any building or structure in the City on any
lot, tract or parcel of land adjoined by a public sewer, unless the plans and specifications show connections which comply with this chapter.
B. Sewer Annexation Covenant: Any sewer user located outside the City limits, but within the City area of impact, who connects to the public sewer shall
be required to execute a request for annexation on the form provided by the Public Works Department.
C. Service Outside City Area Of Impact: Persons outside the City area of impact may request connection to the City sewer system for use of the excess or
surplus capacity of the treatment system. Wastewater service may be provided to persons outside the area of impact only if the terms and conditions of
the service have been approved by the City Council and the terms and conditions of this chapter and any applicable State or Federal regulations have
been satisfied. (1952 Code § 8-11-02.03)
D. Septage Hauling: Septage hauled to the City wastewater treatment facilities will comply with the following:
1. Vehicles: Any vehicle used for the purpose of transporting or hauling septage, sewage or effluent shall be watertight and airtight.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 444/503
2. Compliance: Every person licensed to transport septage shall comply with all applicable codes and ordinances of the City, and all standards, rules
and regulations relating to health and safety prescribed by the Department of Health and Welfare of the State of Idaho, and the Central District
Health Department.
3. Agreement Required: Septage will not be accepted at any City wastewater treatment facility or any site or facility discharging to a City wastewater
treatment facility, except pursuant to a written agreement with the City setting forth discharge terms, including payment of fees, which the City deems
reasonable and necessary. (Ord. 16-14, 4-15-2014)
10-2-3: REGULATIONS FOR INDUSTRIAL AND COMMERCIAL DISCHARGERS:
For the purpose of promoting the health, safety and general welfare of its citizens, the City has adopted regulations governing the discharge of industrial
and commercial wastewater into publicly owned treatment works. These regulations are contained in chapter 5 of this title. (1952 Code § 8-11-03)
10-2-4: CONNECTION REQUIREMENTS:
10-2-4-1: NEW CONSTRUCTION:
Except as provided in section 10-2-9-3 of this chapter, all new structures constructed within the City and the City area of impact shall be connected to wet
line sewer. (1952 Code § 8-11-04.01)
10-2-4-2: CHANGE OF USE:
Any existing structure which is not otherwise required to connect to the wastewater system under the provisions of this chapter, shall be required to
connect if a change of use of the structure occurs, and if there is an increased demand on the wastewater system. (1952 Code § 8-11-04.02)
10-2-4-3: EXISTING STRUCTURE FOR WHICH CONNECTION FEES HAVE BEEN PAID:
Except as provided in section 10-2-9-2 of this chapter, any building or structure existing at the time sewer becomes available to the property and for which
connection fees have been paid by any person, shall be connected to the City public sewer system not later than nine (9) months from the date sewer
service is available to the property on which the building or structure is located. (1952 Code § 8-11-04.03)
10-2-4-4: EXISTING STRUCTURE FOR WHICH CONNECTION FEES HAVE NOT BEEN PAID:
Any building or structure existing at the time sewer becomes available to the property, for which connection fees have not been paid by any person, shall
not be required to be connected to the City sewer system unless immediate connection is required to protect public health or connection is required by a
public agency. (1952 Code § 8-11-04.04)
10-2-5: WASTEWATER COLLECTION SYSTEM:
10-2-5-1: EVERY STRUCTURE MUST BE INDIVIDUALLY CONNECTED:
Every building, structure or sewer user connecting to the City sewer system shall be separately and independently connected, by a separate private
service line, to a public sewer, except as provided in section 10-2-9-1 of this chapter, and as follows:
A. Exception For Townhouses: Each sewer user within a townhouse shall not be required to be separately and independently connected by a separate
service line to a public sewer if: 1) for each building the private service line is of an adequate size to meet the wastewater requirements of the joint
users; and 2) the townhouse development includes, within its covenants or homeowners' agreement, suitable arrangements for maintenance of the
private service lines serving the development.
B. Exception For Industrial, Commercial, Apartments, Condominiums And Accessory Buildings: Each sewer user within an industrial, commercial,
apartment complex, condominium development or residential accessory building shall not be required to be separately and independently connected to
a public sewer if: 1) for each building and/or development, the private service lines are of adequate size to meet the wastewater requirements of the
joint users; and 2) the property is under single ownership on a single tax parcel. (1952 Code § 8-11-05.01)
10-2-5-2: SERVICE LINES; USER RESPONSIBILITIES:
A. Installation: The owner of any property connecting to the City sewer system is responsible for the installation, expense and risk associated with the
construction and operation of the private service line. The owner is also responsible for the installation, expense and risk of all other wastewater pipes,
machinery, plumbing fixtures and apparatus within the property, which may be required for collecting, treating and discharging wastewater from the
premises.
B. Maintenance:
1. The owner shall be responsible, at owner's expense, for:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 445/503
a. The cleaning, unstopping, maintenance and repair of the private service line, and shall keep the private service line, as well as all pipes, fixtures,
appliances and apparatus on the property, watertight and in good working order to prevent discharge of combined wastewater or prohibited
substances into the public sewer;
b. The replacement of any portion of the private service line which, in the opinion of the Public Works Department, has become so damaged or
disintegrated as to be unfit for further use, or is in such condition as to permit infiltration into the wastewater system or exfiltration of wastewater
into the surrounding soil; and
c. The cleaning, unstopping and maintenance of the public portion of the service line to remove rocks, roots and debris that originated from private
property and settled into the public service line. Repair of the public service line will be the responsibility of the City.
2. All repairs shall be completed within thirty (30) days after written notification from the Public Works Department. If the owner fails or refuses to
complete repairs required by the department, the department may cause the repairs to be completed and charge the owner for the costs of such
repairs. If the costs of the repairs are not paid by the owner they may be treated as any other delinquent service fees owed to the City.
C. Liability: The City is not responsible for any loss or damage caused by negligence or want of care on the part of the owner, or the contractor of the
owner, in installing, maintaining, using or operating private service lines, wastewater pipes, fixtures, appliances and apparatus. The owner shall hold
the City harmless from any loss or damage that may be directly, or indirectly, occasioned by the installation or malfunction of any private service line or
private appurtenances.
D. Compliance: All users shall comply with the limitations and prohibitions placed on the discharge of wastewater from their premises by standards set by,
or incorporated by reference in, this chapter, as well as all other requirements of this chapter. No user shall make, or permit another person to make, a
connection to such user's private service line which would allow the discharge of wastewater from property not otherwise served by the City sewer
system. (1952 Code § 8-11-05.02)
10-2-5-3: INSPECTIONS; RIGHT OF ACCESS:
A. Authority: The Public Works Department may inspect the equipment and facilities of any users at any reasonable time to ascertain compliance with
applicable ordinances, rules and regulations. Persons or occupants of premises where wastewater is created or discharged shall allow department
personnel ready access to the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, records examination and copying, and performance of their duties.
The department shall have the right to set upon the user's property such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling, inspection, compliance
monitoring and/or metering operations. Where a user has security measures in force which would require proper identification and clearance before
entry into its premises, the user shall make the necessary arrangements with the security guards so that, upon presentation of suitable identification,
department personnel will be permitted to enter without delay for the purposes of performing their specific responsibilities. While performing the
necessary work on private property, department personnel shall observe all security and safety rules applicable to the premises, as established by the
user.
B. Refusal To Admit: If a duly authorized representative of the department is refused admission to a user's premises, the department may discontinue
sewer service to the premises until the department has been afforded reasonable access to the premises and private sewer system, so as to
accomplish the inspection or sampling. (1952 Code § 8-11-05.03)
10-2-5-4: TAP-INS:
A. General: Responsibility for the construction and cost of the sewer tap-in and public service line, located in a public right-of-way or sanitary sewer
easement, shall be that of property owner whose property is being connected to the wastewater system, or the person causing the connection to be
made. Upon completion and acceptance by the Public Works Department, the sewer tap-in and public service line shall become a part of the City
sewer system.
B. Permit Required: A sewer tap permit, issued by the Public Works Department, is required prior to the construction or repair of any sewer tap-in,
including the plugging of any old tap at the time the new tap is constructed, as well as any construction or repair of any public sewer system pipe
located in a public right-of-way or sanitary sewer dedicated easement which is connected to an existing sewer lateral, trunk, interceptor or manhole.
Applications for the permit may be obtained from the department. All applicable sewer connection fees must be paid prior to issuance of a sewer tap
permit. This sewer tap permit will expire one hundred eighty (180) days from the date of issuance. A separate plumbing permit shall not be required for
tap-ins to the public sewer system, although plumbing permit requirements shall be applicable to all plumbing work upon private property.
1. Failure To Obtain Permit: Any person who shall commence any work for which a permit is required by this chapter, without first having obtained that
permit shall, if subsequently permitted to obtain the permit, pay double the permit fee fixed by subsection 10-2-7-3E of this chapter for such work.
2. Exception For Emergency Work: This provision shall not apply to emergency work when it shall be proved to the satisfaction of the department that
such work was urgently necessary, and that it was not practical to obtain a permit before commencement of the work. In all such cases, a permit
must be obtained as soon as it is practical to do so. A double fee shall be charged if there is an unreasonable delay in obtaining the permit.
3. Waiver For Certain Developments: The requirement of a sewer tap permit may be waived if a development has requirements of platting with
separate conditions for payment of sewer tap fees with the inspection fees.
C. Construction Specifications: Construction of the sewer tap-in shall conform to the City "sewer tap" specifications, available at the Public Works
Department, and issued to the applicant at the time of permit application. Only plumbers licensed in accordance with the provisions of title 9, chapter 4
of this Code, or contractors having a valid Idaho public works license, shall be authorized to make the actual tap-in to the Boise City sewer.
D. Approval Of Public Works Department Required: Prior to, and during, any work or alteration on any City sewer as part of a sewer tap-in, the proposed
sewer tap-in must be inspected and approved by a public works inspector. Request for inspection must be made to the Public Works Department at
least twenty four (24) hours prior to the proposed sewer tap-in. Inspections will be made during a normal working day.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 446/503
E. Failure To Inspect: Any person who connects to the City sewer system without inspection and approval by a public works inspector may be required, at
their expense, to excavate the pipeline facilities constructed and disconnect the sewer tap-in from the public sewer, in order for proper inspection to be
made. This disconnection must be made in compliance with section 10-2-5-5 of this chapter. (1952 Code § 8-11-05.04)
10-2-5-5: PLUGS:
A. Sewer Plug Permit Required: It shall be a violation of this section for any person to abandon, remove or cause to be abandoned or removed, any sewer
service lines attached or connected to the City sewer system without first obtaining a sewer plug permit from the Public Works Department.
Applications for the permit may be obtained from the department.
1. Failure To Obtain Permit: Any person who shall commence work without first obtaining the required permit shall, if subsequently permitted to obtain a
permit, pay double the permit fee provided for in subsection 10-2-7-3F of this chapter.
2. Exception For Emergency Work: This provision shall not apply to emergency work when it shall have been proved, to the satisfaction of the
department, that such work was urgently necessary and that it was not practical to obtain a permit before the commencement of the work. A double
fee shall be charged if there is an unreasonable delay in obtaining the permit.
B. Plug Or Cap Required: Any person abandoning, removing or causing to be abandoned or removed, a private service line attached or connected to the
City sewer system shall plug or cap such service line at a location between the service line and property (easement) line in a manner and location
approved by the Public Works Department. The cost and installation of the plug shall be the responsibility of the person who disconnects such service
line from the City sewer system.
C. Inspection Required: Prior to, and during, any work or alteration of the private service line as part of the plugging or capping, the proposed plug or cap
must be inspected by a public works inspector. Request for inspection should be made to the Public Works Department at least twenty four (24) hours
prior to the proposed sewer plugging. Inspections will be made during a normal working day.
D. Failure To Inspect: Any person who disconnects, plugs or caps a service line in violation of this section, may be required, at their own expense, to
excavate the service line to allow an inspection to be made. (1952 Code § 8-11-05.05)
10-2-5-6: CONSTRUCTION OF SEWER:
A. Location: All public sewers shall be installed only in the dedicated public streets or alleys or in easements that grant to the City rights that are at least
equal to rights it would enjoy in the dedicated streets or alleys.
B. Specifications: The size of the sewers required to serve any part of the City shall be determined by the Public Works Department. The slope, depth,
alignment and materials of construction of the sewers, as well as the methods to be used in excavation, placing of the pipe, jointing, testing, backfilling
the trench and all other work, shall conform to the requirements of this chapter, and any policies and specifications promulgated by the City, as well as
laws, rules and regulations of Federal, State and local entities. All phases of public sewer construction shall be inspected and approved by the City.
C. Licenses: No person, except plumbers licensed in accordance with the provisions of title 9, chapter 4 of this Code, or contractors having a valid Idaho
public works license, shall be authorized to install a public service line. No person except contractors with a valid Idaho public works license shall install
a public sewer.
D. Private Development Projects: All public sewers required to serve a proposed subdivision or other significant development shall be installed, or caused
to be installed, by the subdivider or developer in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
E. Ownership Transferred And Maintenance Assumed By City: Upon City issuance of a certificate of final completion, the City shall assume ownership and
maintenance of the public sewer. However, the developer shall be responsible for correcting any defects that shall be found or occur within the
warranty period. (1952 Code § 8-11-05.06)
10-2-5-7: FINANCING SEWERS:
The costs of constructing sewer trunk and lateral lines shall be financed and paid for as follows:
A. From the Sewage Works Fund created by this chapter and as authorized by the Council; or
B. By the creation of a local improvement district as provided by Idaho Code title 50, chapter 17; or
C. By the property owners specially benefitted by the construction of the trunk and lateral sewer; or
D. By a combination of subsections A, B and C of this section as in the judgment of the City Council may be fair and equitable in consideration of the
benefits accruing to the property owners within the area in which the sewer trunk and lateral lines will be constructed, as well as the financial condition
of the City and the property owners in the area. (1952 Code § 8-11-05.07)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 447/503
10-2-5-8: EXTENSIONS AND REIMBURSEMENT PERCENTAGES:
A. Construction: A user may, with prior approval of the City, finance and construct an extension to the sewer system, if the extension is designed and
constructed in accordance with City standards.
B. Reimbursement:
1. The user may be reimbursed, as outlined below, for the proportionate cost of the sewer benefiting adjacent or other property by entering into a
written agreement with the City if any of the following apply:
a. The extension is located outside the user's property (off site) and provides sewer service to adjacent or other property;
b. The extension is within the user's property (on site) and is a gravity sewer larger than eight inches (8") in diameter;
c. The eight inch (8") diameter gravity sewer within the user's property (on site) is required by Public Works to be deeper than twelve feet (12') to
serve upstream properties;
d. The extension is a permanent lift station and/or force main; or
e. The extension is a temporary lift station and/or force main which the City has required to be oversized in order to accommodate an area larger
than the developer's property.
2. To be eligible for reimbursement, the user must, unless otherwise approved by the City Engineer, do the following:
a. Design the sewer facilities in accordance with the City master sewer plan and receive City approval of the sewer construction plans and
specifications;
b. Construct sewers in accordance with the City approved plans and specifications;
c. Receive three (3) bids for the sewer construction and select the lowest responsive bid as determined in a public bid opening; and
d. Receive preliminary plat approval from City Council for the development being served by the sewer.
C. Amount Of Reimbursement:
1. Off Site Gravity Extensions: The amount of reimbursement owed to the user for off site sewer extensions shall be based upon actual construction
costs and may also include reasonable engineering and easement acquisition costs approved by the City.
2. On Site Gravity Extensions: The amount of reimbursement owed to the user of on site "oversizing or overdepth" line extensions shall be determined
by multiplying the percentages listed in the tables below, by the actual construction costs for the various pipe sizes and depths required for the
project. Engineering costs for on site oversizing and overdepth sewer construction are not eligible for reimbursement.
ON SITE SEWER PIPELINE REIMBURSEMENT PERCENTAGE
12 or less 0% 11.8% 21.7% 33.5% 44.9% 53.3% 59.8% 64.9% 68.6% 78.8% 82.7%
13 6.1% 17.9% 26.6% 37.1% 47.4% 55.1% 61.1% 65.9% 69.5% 79.2% 83.0%
14 12.1% 23.9% 31.4% 40.6% 49.9% 56.9% 62.5% 66.9% 70.3% 79.6% 83.2%
15 17.6% 29.4% 35.9% 44.0% 52.4% 58.8% 63.9% 68.0% 71.2% 80.0% 83.5%
16 22.7% 34.5% 40.2% 47.3% 54.7% 60.6% 65.3% 69.1% 72.1% 80.5% 83.8%
17 27.4% 39.2% 44.1% 50.4% 57.0% 62.3% 66.6% 70.2% 73.0% 80.9% 84.1%
18 31.8% 43.6% 47.8% 53.3% 59.3% 64.0% 68.0% 71.3% 73.9% 81.3% 84.4%
19 33.8% 45.6% 49.6% 54.7% 60.3% 64.9% 68.7% 71.8% 74.3% 81.6% 84.6%
20 35.9% 47.7% 51.3% 56.2% 61.4% 65.7% 69.3% 72.4% 74.8% 81.8% 84.8%
21 37.3% 49.6% 53.0% 57.6% 62.5% 66.6% 70.0% 73.0% 75.3% 82.1% 84.9%
22 39.8% 51.6% 54.7% 58.9% 63.6% 67.4% 70.7% 73.5% 75.7% 82.3% 85.1%
23 41.6% 53.4% 56.4% 60.3% 64.7% 68.3% 71.4% 74.1% 76.2% 82.6% 85.3%
24 43.4% 55.2% 57.9% 61.6% 65.7% 69.2% 72.1% 74.7% 76.7% 82.8% 85.5%
25 45.2% 57.0% 59.5% 62.9% 66.7% 70.0% 72.8% 75.2% 77.2% 83.1% 85.7%
26 46.9% 58.7% 61.0% 64.2% 67.8% 70.8% 73.5% 75.8% 77.7% 83.4% 85.9%
27 48.5% 60.3% 62.4% 65.4% 68.8% 71.6% 74.2% 76.4% 78.1% 83.6% 86.1%
28 50.0% 61.8% 63.8% 66.6% 69.7% 72.4% 74.8% 76.9% 78.6% 83.9% 86.3%
29 51.5% 63.3% 65.2% 67.7% 70.7% 73.2% 75.5% 77.5% 79.1% 84.2% 86.5%
Pipe Depth (Feet)
Pipe Size (Inches)
8 10 12 15 18 21 24 27 30 36 42
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 448/503
30 53.0% 64.8% 66.5% 68.8% 71.6% 74.0% 76.1% 79.0% 79.6% 84.4% 86.7%
ON SITE SEWER MANHOLE REIMBURSEMENT PERCENTAGE
12 or less 0% 1.9% 4.7% 10.5% 15.7% 22.7% 28.7% 43.0% 46.9% 59.2% 63.7%
13 7.6% 9.5% 12.0% 17.4% 22.2% 28.7% 34.2% 47.4% 51.0% 62.3% 66.5%
14 14.0% 15.9% 18.3% 23.3% 27.7% 33.9% 38.9% 51.2% 54.5% 65.0% 68.9%
15 19.6% 21.5% 23.7% 28.4% 32.6% 38.2% 42.9% 54.4% 57.5% 67.4% 71.0%
16 24.5% 26.4% 28.5% 32.9% 36.8% 42.0% 46.5% 57.3% 60.2% 69.4% 72.8%
17 28.9% 30.8% 32.7% 36.8% 40.5% 45.5% 49.7% 59.8% 62.5% 71.2% 74.4%
18 32.7% 34.6% 36.4% 40.4% 43.8% 48.5% 52.4% 62.0% 64.6% 72.8% 75.8%
19 36.2% 38.1% 39.8% 43.5% 46.8% 51.2% 55.0% 64.0% 66.4% 74.2% 77.1%
20 39.3% 41.2% 42.8% 46.3% 49.4% 53.6% 57.2% 65.8% 68.1% 75.5% 78.2%
21 42.1% 44.0% 45.5% 48.9% 51.8% 55.8% 59.2% 67.4% 69.6% 76.7% 79.3%
22 44.6% 46.5% 48.0% 51.2% 54.0% 57.9% 61.1% 68.9% 71.0% 77.7% 80.2%
23 46.9% 48.8% 50.3% 53.3% 56.0% 59.7% 62.8% 70.3% 72.3% 78.7% 81.1%
24 49.1% 51.0% 52.3% 55.3% 57.9% 61.4% 64.3% 71.5% 73.4% 79.6% 81.9%
25 51.0% 52.9% 54.2% 57.1% 59.5% 62.9% 65.8% 72.6% 74.5% 80.4% 82.6%
26 52.8% 54.7% 56.0% 58.7% 61.1% 64.3% 67.1% 73.7% 75.5% 81.2% 83.2%
27 54.5% 56.4% 57.6% 60.2% 62.5% 65.7% 68.3% 74.7% 76.4% 81.9% 83.9%
23 56.1% 58.0% 59.1% 61.7% 63.9% 66.9% 69.4% 75.6% 77.2% 82.5% 84.4%
29 57.5% 59.4% 60.6% 63.0% 65.1% 68.0% 70.5% 76.4% 78.0% 83.1% 85.0%
30 58.9% 60.8% 61.9% 64.2% 66.3% 69.1% 71.5% 77.2% 78.8% 83.7% 85.5%
3. Permanent Lift Station Extensions: The amount of reimbursement owed for the construction of a permanent lift station and/or force main shall be
based upon actual construction costs and may also include reasonable engineering and landscaping costs approved by the City.
4. Temporary Lift Station Oversizing: The amount of reimbursement owed for installation of an oversized temporary lift station and/or force main shall
be determined by estimating the cost of constructing a lift station and force main to serve only the development, subtracted from the actual
construction costs incurred by the developer. Engineering costs for the design of the lift station and/or force main are not eligible for reimbursement.
(1952 Code § 8-11-05.08)
10-2-5-9: DEVELOPER AGREEMENTS AND METHODS OF REIMBURSEMENT:
A written agreement, not to exceed ten (10) years, shall be prepared which provides for reimbursement of the user's proportionate costs of sewer
benefitting adjacent or other property. Depending on the reimbursement amount owed to the user and the amount of potential reimbursement credit, the
agreement will include one or more of the following reimbursement items in the order listed below, up to the reimbursement amount:
A. The equivalent assessment fees owed or paid by the user as required under subsection 10-2-6-3C of this chapter;
B. The inspection fees owed or paid by the user as required under subsection 10-2-6-5B of this chapter;
C. The trunk connection fees paid by the user as required by subsection 10-2-6-3A of this chapter;
D. Reimbursement of trunk connection fees and equivalent assessment fees received by the City as others connect to the sewer from an area,
downstream of the user's property, mutually agreed upon by the City and the user; and
E. Reimbursement of trunk connection fees and equivalent assessment fees, received by the City, as others connect to the sewer from an area, upstream
of the user's property, mutually agreed upon by the City and the user. (1952 Code § 8-11-05.09)
Pipe Depth (Feet)
Pipe Size (Inches)
8 10 12 15 18 21 24 27 30 36 42
Pipe Depth (Feet)
Pipe Size (Inches)
8 10 12 15 18 21 24 27 30 36 42
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 449/503
10-2-5-10: SEWER EASEMENT ACQUISITION POLICIES:
In order to provide for a uniform and equitable treatment of property owners of lands subject to City sewer easement acquisition, and to adequately protect
the best interests of the City, the following policies are adopted as procedural guides to be followed in sewer easement acquisition:
A. Define and map the proposed easement acquisition;
B. Research ownership or obtain a preliminary title policy for the property to be included in the easement;
C. Provide each owner of property within the proposed easement a written notice of the City intent to acquire such easement;
D. Obtain an "opinion of value" or "appraisal" for the property proposed for easement acquisition;
E. Offer the dollar amount stated in the "opinion of value" or "appraised value" to the property owner for purposes of acquisition if the "opinion of value" or
"appraised value" is acceptable to the City;
F. Conduct good faith negotiations with the property owner if the value offered is rejected; and
G. Obtain a final settlement of the easement acquisition purchase or proceed with condemnation action if appropriate. (1952 Code § 8-11-05.10)
10-2-5-11: LIFT STATIONS:
A. Designation Of Lift Stations: The Public Works Department shall designate a lift station as either temporary or permanent, consistent with the master
sewer plan, at the time such station is placed into service. The Public Works Commission may, upon request when special circumstances exist, change
the designation of a lift station.
B. Installation Of Temporary Lift Stations: Temporary lift stations may only be installed if the installation is in accordance with public policy and approved by
the Public Works Department. The party installing the temporary lift station shall be responsible for all construction costs and shall ensure that the
temporary lift station is completed in accordance with the requirements of the department. Ownership, maintenance and operation of the temporary lift
station shall transfer to City at the time the temporary lift station is accepted as operational by the department. (1952 Code § 8-11-05.11)
10-2-5-12: FOOD DISPOSAL UNITS:
A. Policy: It is the declared policy of the City to discourage and prevent discharge of food wastes into the sanitary sewer system when such food wastes
could be disposed of in another manner. Where disposal of food wastes, particularly by commercial and institutional users of the system is allowed, the
method and manner of such disposal shall be as required in the subsequent portions of this section.
B. Connection Of Food Disposal Units: Domestic and commercial food waste disposal units shall be connected and trapped separately from any other
fixture or compartment, except that a continuous waste with a flow directing partition will be acceptable for domestic units. All units may have either
automatic or hand operated water supply controls; however, domestic units shall be provided with an approved inlet cover having waterway passages
for use during grinding operations.
C. No Discharge Through Grease Interceptor: No waste from a food waste grinder shall be discharged into or through a grease interceptor.
D. Commercial Grinders: Commercial type food grinders shall be provided with not less than a two inch (2") waste line. Each waste line shall be trapped
and vented as provided in the Plumbing Code.
E. Food Waste Grinder Requirements: All food waste grinder equipment shall be designed to meet the following requirements:
1. Particle size: One hundred percent (100%) shall pass a no. 2 screen (2-mesh);
2. Ninety five percent (95%) shall pass a no. 4 screen (4-mesh);
3. Fibers shall not exceed two and one-half inches (21/2") in length;
4. Vegetable stems shall not exceed one inch (1") in length, and leaf sections shall not exceed one-half inch (1/2") in the largest dimension;
5. Equipment must be self scouring with no fouling surfaces to cause objectionable odors, freed from electrical or mechanical hazards, and of durable
construction;
6. Such food waste grinders shall be installed under and in direct connection with a sink or other approved receptacle, supplied with water and
discharged through a trap to a sanitary sewer system.
F. Installation Requirements For Commercial Grinders: Waste grinders and their installation in restaurants, institutions, food processing or storage plants
and similar operations shall meet the requirements of this chapter, as well as the Plumbing Code of the City. An installation will be permitted only upon
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 450/503
the finding of the Department of Public Works that other methods of disposal are not feasible and that the City sewer system can properly handle the
waste.
G. Food Waste Disposal Units Must Comply: The installation, operation and maintenance of any equipment or method to be used for food waste disposal
units shall comply with all the provisions of this chapter and the regulations of the building, housing, electrical, mechanical, plumbing and fire prevention
ordinances of the City, and if there is any conflict between the provisions of this chapter and the applicable building, housing, electrical, mechanical,
plumbing and fire prevention codes and ordinances of the City, such codes and ordinances shall prevail over the provision of this chapter. (1952 Code
§ 8-11-05.12)
10-2-6: FEE AUTHORITY; CREDITS:
10-2-6-1: ANNUAL REVIEW FOR FEES:
The fees imposed by this chapter shall be reviewed annually and revised periodically as required. (1952 Code § 8-11-06.01)
10-2-6-2: WHEN CONNECTION FEES ARE DUE:
Unless otherwise specified, the connection fees imposed by section 10-2-6-3 of this chapter must be paid prior to initiation of sewer service, change in use
of a property already connected to sewer, or any increase in the discharge levels of flow. (1952 Code § 8-11-06.02)
10-2-6-3: CAPITAL FEES:
A. Trunk Connection Fees:
1. A trunk connection fee shall be imposed upon every person initiating sewer service, changing use of a property already connected to sewer, or
increasing the discharge levels of flow. The fee shall be based on values typical of the discharger category, unless otherwise addressed by separate
contract.
2. Fees for a change in use or an increase in discharge levels are calculated on an incremental basis as described in subsection F of this section.
B. Treatment Connection Fees:
1. A treatment connection fee shall be imposed upon every person initiating sewer service, changing use of a property already connected to sewer, or
increasing the discharge levels of flow, BOD or TSS. The fee shall be based upon flow, BOD and TSS values typical of the discharger category,
unless otherwise addressed by separate contract. Fees for a change in use or an increase in discharge levels are calculated on an incremental basis
as described in subsection F of this section.
2. A treatment plant connection fee using a fee structure that includes ammonia-nitrogen (NH3-N) as a component may be charged if the City
determines, after reviewing the relationship between actual or anticipated BOD and ammonia-nitrogen (NH3-N) discharges, that an atypical
discharge is or will be occurring. An atypical discharge will be evaluated against the treatment system design and operating parameters. (A rate
system that includes ammonia-nitrogen will have a lower BOD rate than a rate system that does not include ammonia-nitrogen.)
C. Equivalent Assessment Fees: Any person initiating sewer service with the City sewer system who has not otherwise paid for, or contributed
proportionately toward, the costs and expenses of constructing a sewer adjacent to or passing through the property, whether that be by the City, a local
improvement district, or a private developer, and who subsequently desires to connect to the sewer system, shall be required to pay an additional
connection (equivalent assessment) fee computed as follows, unless otherwise approved by the Public Works Commission:
1. For lots up to eighty six thousand (86,000) square feet in area, the fee shall be calculated on the basis of the area of the lot;
2. For single-family flag lots whose area within one hundred twenty five feet (125') of the assessable frontage is less than six thousand (6,000) square
feet, or lots with no assessable frontage, a minimum equivalent assessment will be calculated based on a lot of less than six thousand (6,000)
square feet;
3. For lots greater than eighty six thousand (86,000) square feet in area, the fee shall be calculated on the basis of the area of the lot fronting the sewer
within one hundred twenty five feet (125') of the frontage. However, in no case shall the assessment be less than that for a lot of eighty six thousand
(86,000) square feet in area;
4. For single-family lots in excess of eighty six thousand (86,000) square feet in area, the frontage for the property shall only be assessed on the side of
the property for which the sewer service is being provided. For all other uses, the assessed frontage shall be calculated on each side of the lot in
which sewer is fronting the property, unless otherwise waived by the Public Works Commission. However, in no case shall the assessment be less
than that for a lot of forty three thousand five hundred sixty (43,560) square feet in area;
5. Large lots which can legally be further subdivided in the future, and which are not fully utilized by the existing development, will only be charged for
the improved area and/or logical boundary of future subdivision/development, with a minimum equivalent assessment fee equal for a lot of forty three
thousand five hundred sixty (43,560) square feet;
6. For large lots over two (2) acres in size, which front two (2) or more streets and can legally be subdivided in the future, the fee shall be calculated on
the average street frontage basis using the area of the lot fronting the sewer within one hundred twenty five feet (125') of the frontage. For example,
a lot with frontage on two (2) streets will have the entire area within one hundred twenty five feet (125') of the frontage calculated and this area
divided by two (2) to determine the average street frontage in square feet. However, in no case shall the assessment be less than that for a lot of
eighty six thousand (86,000) square feet in area;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 451/503
7. The equivalent assessment fee may be adjusted to reflect the benefit received by large, open space lots which have a low impact on the sewer
system or other criteria as determined by the Public Works Commission. When the equivalent assessment fees for these properties create undue
hardship, or fees for such properties are inequitable in the consideration of the Public Works Commission, the equivalent assessment fee shall be
calculated on single-family dwelling equivalents. The fee for properties complying with all the above criteria shall be calculated by multiplying the
number of single-family dwelling equivalents (SFDEs), based on fixture unit count, by the equivalent assessment amount for a lot of forty three
thousand five hundred sixty (43,560) square feet. The total equivalent assessment shall not be less than the assessment for a lot of eighty six
thousand (86,000) square feet.
D. New Development Eight Inch Equivalency:
1. For sewers constructed outside of a public right-of-way, an eight inch (8") equivalency fee shall be charged, based upon any or all of the following:
a. Relevant actual construction, engineering and inspection costs for other sewers constructed by the developer within the development;
b. The actual construction and engineering costs of the sewer on which the assessment is due, updated by Engineering News Record construction
cost index; or
c. Any other relevant factors that may affect the amount of the assessment.
2. This fee shall be in addition to any other applicable assessment fee and may be reduced by the Public Works Department to reflect additional costs
incurred by the developer to upgrade the sewer to current standards.
E. Public Service Line Fee: A fee shall be charged for each public service line provided by the City, based on the size of the service line.
F. Change Of Use: Any person changing use of a property already connected to sewer, or increasing the discharge levels of flow, BOD or TSS, shall pay
trunk and treatment fees. These fees will be based on the difference in flows and waste strengths applicable to the property change in use, or
increased levels of discharge, less the flows and waste strengths applicable to the most intensive original sewer use at the property within the past ten
(10) years. If for example, a single-family residence served by sewer is demolished and replaced with a restaurant, the fees will be based on the
difference between the typical flows and waste strengths for a restaurant and typical flows and waste strengths for a residence.
G. Prepayment Of Connection Fees: Any owner of an existing single-family residence within the City and the City area of impact, to which City sewer
system service is unavailable, may prepay the connection fees required by this section at the rates in effect at the time of prepayment, subject to the
following conditions:
1. The property for which connection fees are being prepaid must have an existing single-family residence constructed on it;
2. The property owner will be required to enter into an agreement with the City which shall absolve the City of any requirement to provide sewer service
to the property. This agreement shall be recorded in the Office of the Ada County Recorder;
3. A reasonable administrative fee shall be paid upon execution of the prepayment agreement to cover setup, monitoring and recording fees and costs;
4. The connection fees paid to the City prior to the provision of wastewater system service shall be paid prior to the date on which sewer becomes
available; and
5. Any connection fees paid to the City prior to the provision of wastewater system service shall be in cash and shall be nonrefundable. The deferral of
connection fees as provided for in section 10-2-8 of this chapter shall not be available to property owners electing to prepay connection fees.
H. Sewer Deposit For Future Connection Of New Subdivision: If a wet sewer is not adjacent to a subdivision or development of land in which the Council
has required, as a condition for approving the subdivision plat or development, construction and installation of a wet line sewer served by an interim
treatment system in accordance with detailed plans and specifications receiving prior approval, the subdivider or developer shall pay a deposit to the
City Treasurer. This deposit shall be paid prior to the certification of the plat by the City Engineer, for the future connection of the sewer or interim
treatment system to the wet sewer subsequently constructed and installed adjacent and adjoining the subdivision or development of land. The money
so paid shall be deposited to the Sewage Works Fund to be used for the purposes provided in section 10-2-1-8 of this chapter. (1952 Code § 8-11-
06.03)
I. Temporary Lift Station Upgrade Fee: If the Public Works Department has approved the use of a temporary lift station to serve a proposed development
and if the lift station is undersized to serve the geographical area which may contribute flow to the temporary lift station, the City Council may, as a
condition of approving the subdivision or development plat, require the developer to pay a fee for upgrading of the lift station and/or permanently
extending the sewer to serve the development if it is needed prior to the logical extension of the gravity sewer. (Ord. 19-15, 5-12-2015)
10-2-6-4: WASTEWATER SYSTEM OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE FEES:
A. Service Charges And Fees: This provision shall establish a system of periodic service charges and fees for the purpose of equitably imposing upon all
users the costs and expenses of operation, maintenance, repair and replacement of the wastewater system. The service charges and fees shall be
based upon: 1) the volume and content of effluent discharged into the wastewater system of the City; and 2) the costs and expenses of operation,
maintenance, repair and replacement of the wastewater system, such charges and fees having been determined to be the benefit derived by each
building, structure or user being charged. The system of periodic service charges and fees shall consist of the following categories: facility replacement,
operation and maintenance, and fixed charge for zero use.
1. Facility Replacement: The purpose of this category is to accumulate a reserve for replacement of the wastewater system. This reserve shall be
based on the total historical costs for the applicable facilities and equipment.
2. Operation And Maintenance: The purpose of this category is to recover, equitably from all users, the costs and expenses incurred by the City in
operating and maintaining the wastewater system.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 452/503
3. Fixed Charge For Zero Use: The purpose of this category is to equitably apportion among all customers a portion of those fixed costs which continue
to be incurred whether or not individual customers utilize the wastewater system. Such costs include, but are not limited to, costs attributable to
providing basic office staff for the administration of the City sewer system. Payment of these costs shall be made by all customers, including those
with zero flow discharge.
B. When Payment Is Due: Service charges and fees imposed pursuant to this section shall be received by the City by the due date shown on the invoice
or billing statement.
C. Deposits:
1. Deposits are not required for new service unless the user:
a. Is rated as a poor credit risk by a reputable credit bureau;
b. Has had an overdue bill three (3) times with any utility in the past four (4) years;
c. Has supplied false information at the time of application for service; or
d. Has filed for bankruptcy.
2. A deposit for residential service shall be equal to three (3) months worth of estimated charges. A deposit for commercial service shall be equal to two
(2) months worth of estimated charges. The deposit will be refunded or credited when the user no longer requires service or has paid all bills
satisfactorily for twelve (12) consecutive months.
3. Instead of paying a deposit, user may receive service if someone else signs a guarantee for his bill. This person, called the "guarantor" must be
rated as a good credit risk by a reputable credit bureau. The guarantor is responsible for an amount equal to the deposit, but will be released from
this obligation after twelve (12) consecutive months of satisfactory payments have been made by the user.
D. Unmonitored Connections: The monthly sewer service charge or fee for each property owner whose connection to the wastewater system is
unmonitored shall be based upon the winter water use of such owner or user, plus the fixed charge for zero use.
E. Monitored Connections:
1. The monthly service charge or fee for each sewer user whose connection to the wastewater system is monitored shall be established by the Public
Works Department based upon: a) flow; b) the concentration of BOD; c) the concentration of TSS; d) other special constituents that may require
treatment; and e) the fixed charge for zero use, and in accordance with monitored waste charges, unless otherwise specified by a separate contract.
2. If the City determines by reviewing the relationship between actual or anticipated BOD and ammonia-nitrogen (NH3-N) discharges that an atypical
discharge is or will be occurring, a monthly service charge or fee may be charged using ammonia-nitrogen (NH3-N) as an additional component. An
atypical discharge will be evaluated against the treatment system design and operating parameters. (A rate system that includes ammonia-nitrogen
will have a lower BOD rate than a rate system that does not include ammonia-nitrogen.)
F. Temporary Lift Stations: For each person served by a temporary lift station, there shall be a fixed, monthly charge until such time as the property owner
or sewer user is no longer served by the temporary lift station. If served by more than one temporary lift station, the temporary lift station maintenance
and operation fee shall only be charged for the nearest downstream station.
G. Users Served By Wells:
1. Well Meters For Commercial Users:
a. Each commercial property owner or sewer user not serviced by a public water supplier with water, but having a private well or water supply for
commercial or industrial purposes, shall install and maintain, at his or its own expense, a water meter capable of measuring the total gallons or
cubic feet per day of water being used for those purposes. Such meter shall be:
(1) Approved by the Department of Public Works prior to installation;
(2) Installed within sixty (60) days after receiving written approval from the department; and
(3) Situated upon the property to be accessible to the department at all times during normal working hours.
b. The Public Works Department may waive these requirements for commercial property owners if it can be determined that the user is a low
consumption user and monthly charges can be estimated by the department.
2. Residential Well Users: The monthly sewer service charge or fee for each property owner or user whose connection to sewer is unmonitored, and
whose record of water consumption is unmetered or unavailable, shall be fixed by the Public Works Department based upon the fees established in
subsection 10-2-7-2B of this chapter, and the cubic feet of water discharged into the City sewer system as determined by the department. However,
in the case of single-family dwellings with unmetered or unavailable water consumption records, the cubic feet discharge is determined as follows:
Number Of Residents Water Consumption/Month
1 200
2 400
3 700
4 900
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 453/503
5 1,100
6 1,300
7 1,500
8 and above 1,700
(1952 Code § 8-11-06.04)
10-2-6-5: MISCELLANEOUS FEES:
A. Account Initiation: This is a one-time fee that will be assessed upon the initiation of a new account. It will cover the administrative costs associated with
performing credit checks and establishing new account information.
B. Sewer Inspection Fees: Any person who shall install a trunk or lateral sewer shall pay a sewer inspection fee to cover the costs of inspection of the
installation and construction of trunk, branch, lateral and sewer mains and service lines, as well as inspection of the necessary and required service
connections, manholes, related structures and appurtenances in accordance with the plans and specifications on file with the Public Works
Department, and in accordance with the directions and specifications of the department. In the event sewer inspection is required during any time other
than a normal working day, the developer or his contractor shall reimburse the City at rates established by the department.
C. Deferral, Waiver, Prepayment And Permit Administrative Fees: Reasonable administrative fees will be charged for the processing of fee deferral and
waiver applications, prepayment agreements and the issuance of permits.
D. Disconnection And Reconnection Fees: Reasonable fees may be charged to cover all costs of disconnecting and/or reconnecting sewer service that
has been terminated because of nonpayment of fees.
E. Septage Dumping: A charge shall be imposed for each act of dumping septage, wastewater or effluent to a City wastewater treatment facility. This
charge shall be based on the actual gallonage of wastewater dumped as measured by approved measuring devices or according to marked gallonage
on the truck. The approved measuring devices shall be calibrated in one hundred (100) gallon increments and charges shall be made to the nearest
one hundred (100) gallons. A flat fee for dumping septage, wastewater or effluent after scheduled hours is also imposed.
F. Decant Facility Service: A charge shall be imposed for each act of receiving and disposing of sediment and debris from sewers and storm drains into a
City decant facility typically collected by means of a vehicle commonly referred to as a hydrocleaner.
G. Door Tag Fee: A fee shall be charged for hanging a door tag to warn of sewer service termination for the second and subsequent events to the same
customer at the same address. There shall be no charge for the first time a door tag is hung on a property.
H. Watershed Program Fee: Reasonable administrative fees may be charged to recover the cost of providing educational programs at the Boise
Watershed. (Ord. 23-17, 7-18-2017)
10-2-6-6: CREDITS:
A. Residential Pump Credit:
1. In the event installation of a pump is required to enable an existing single-family residential structure to be served by the public sewer system, the
user shall receive a credit of up to five thousand two hundred dollars ($5,200.00) against the fees imposed under subsection 10-2-6-3A of this
chapter, and the equivalent assessment (public service line fee not included) under subsection 10-2-6-3C of this chapter, if either of the following
situations exist:
a. The public sewer was constructed and accepted for service prior to January 1, 1996; or
b. The public sewer was constructed on or after January 1, 1996, but was not constructed to at least the sewer design policy depth guidelines
approved by the Public Works Commission.
2. However, the amount of the credit cannot exceed the fees imposed under subsections 10-2-6-3A and C of this chapter.
B. Credit For Treatment Connection Fees For Commercial Property:
1. For the purposes of this provision, the term "owner or operator" shall mean any person who has previously paid the City sewer connection fee
requirements for connection to the system.
2. Any owner or operator of a commercial, industrial or institutional business connected to the City sewer system who is changing the site of such
business to another location having access to the City sewer system, may apply for a credit of the treatment plant connection fees imposed by
subsection 10-2-6-3B of this chapter, pursuant to the procedures set forth in section 10-2-9-4 of this chapter.
3. The Public Works Department may give a credit for all or a portion of the connection fee requirements if it finds all of the following are applicable:
a. The nature of the business has not changed;
b. No additional treatment capacity will be required; and
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 454/503
c. Under the particular circumstances of the case, imposition of the connection fee requirements would impose an undue hardship upon the owner or
operator.
4. The right to seek a credit for connection fees is nontransferable. Credits on the original property shall be reduced by the amount of connection fee
waived.
5. The application for the treatment plant connection credit must be submitted prior to the time those connection fees are due.
C. Length Of Sewer Connection Credits: Nonuse of a City sewer system service connection for a period of ten (10) years shall constitute a relinquishment
of any right to the use of such service connection and the wastewater system, as well as the relinquishment of any sewer connection credits.
Resumption of service shall require payment of the current fees for new connections. Sewer connection credits are not transferable between parcels.
Credits will be utilized in the order construction plans are reviewed by public works staff. (1952 Code § 8-11-06.06)
10-2-7: FEES AND CHARGES:
10-2-7-1: CAPITAL FEES AND CHARGES:
A. Residential Trunk Connection Fees: The rate for each connection fee is in such amounts as established by the City Council. (1952 Code § 8-11-07.01;
amd. 2019 Code)
B. Residential Treatment Connection Fees: The rate for each treatment facility connection fee is in such amounts as established by the City Council. (Ord.
4-14, 2-4-2014; amd. 2019 Code)
C. Commercial Connection Fees: The rate for each connection is established on the basis of equivalent single-family residential units and is in such
amounts as established by the City Council.
D. Equivalent Assessment Fees: For lots up to eighty six thousand (86,000) square feet in area, the fee shall be calculated on the basis of the area of the
lot, in accordance with the fees established by the City Council.
E. Public Service Line Fees: A fee shall be charged for each public service line provided by the City, based upon the size of the service line and in such
amounts as established by the City Council.
F. Future Sewer Deposit: As required in subsection 10-2-6-3H of this chapter, the subdivider or developer shall pay a fee in such amount as established by
the City Council to the City Treasurer prior to certification of the plat by the City Engineer. (1952 Code § 8-11-07.01; amd. 2019 Code)
G. Temporary Lift Station Upgrade Fees: As required by subsection 10-2-6-3I of this chapter, the subdivider or developer shall pay a fee as calculated by
the Public Works Department for the developer's share of the possible upgrade of a temporary lift station serving the developer's development. (1952
Code § 8-11-07.01)
10-2-7-2: OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE FEES:
A. Fixed Charge For Zero Use: There shall be a minimum charge in such amount as established by the City Council for zero (0) cubic feet of water used.
B. Charges For Unmonitored Connections: The monthly sewer charge for users with unmonitored connections to the wastewater system shall be in such
amount as established by the City Council.
C. Charges For Monitored Connections: The monthly service charge for fee users with monitored connections to the wastewater system shall be in such
amounts as established by the City Council.
D. Temporary Lift Stations: The monthly charge for each person served by a temporary lift station shall be in such amount as established by the City
Council. (Ord. 35-18, 9-11-2018, eff. 10-1-2018; amd. 2019 Code)
E. Hardship (Low Income) Discount: Residential customers may apply for a hardship (low income) discount on residential sewer service, by making
application to the Public Works Department of the City. Applications shall be submitted annually with updated financial information confirming annual
family gross income. The Public Works Department may reduce the charges for sewer service by thirty percent (30%) upon determining that the
customer is experiencing financial hardship. Financial hardship shall be deemed to exist when an owner's annual family gross income is at or below the
low income level indicated for a family of similar size on the current "Low Income Guidelines" chart employed by the City in the administration of the
Community Development Block Grant Program, and shall be verified by the previous year's Federal Tax return. (Ord. 35-18, 9-11-2018, eff. 10-1-2018)
10-2-7-3: SPECIFIED FEES:
The following specified fees shall be in such amounts as established by the City Council: (Ord. 23-17, 7-18-2017; amd. 2019 Code)
A. Account Initiation Fee: A one-time fee assessed upon the initiation of a new account. If an additional service (e.g., solid waste service) is also started at
the same time, the fee will be split equally between sewer and the second service. (Ord. 35-18, 9-11-2018, eff. 10-1-2018; amd. 2019 Code)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 455/503
B. Sewer Inspection Fees: The sewer inspection fee shall be per linear foot of sewer installed, excluding service lines. For inspections which are required
during any time other than a normal working day, the contractor or developer shall reimburse the City at an hourly rate.
C. Administrative Fees:
1. Residential Deferral: There shall be charged an administrative fee, per agreement, for the processing of deferrals for trunk connection fees and
treatment facilities connection fees.
2. Commercial/Brewery/Restaurant Deferral: There shall be charged an administrative fee, per agreement, for the processing of deferrals for trunk
connection fees and treatment facilities connection fees.
3. Equivalent Assessment Deferral: There shall be charged an administrative fee for the processing of each deferral for equivalent assessment fees.
4. Commercial Treatment Credit: There shall be charged an administrative fee for the processing of each commercial treatment plant connection credit
application.
5. Waiver Application Fees: There shall be charged an administrative fee for the processing of each waiver application.
6. Prepayment Fees: There shall be charged an administrative fee for the processing of each prepayment agreement.
D. Commercial And Restaurant Down Payments Required: In the case of a deferral agreement between the City and a commercial, brewery or restaurant
user, an initial payment of a percentage of the imposed connection fees shall be required at the time the agreement is signed.
E. Tap-In Permit Fee: A permit fee shall be charged for each sewer tap.
F. Sewer Plug Permit Fee: A permit fee shall be charged for each structure, regardless of the number of service lines.
G. Disconnection And Reconnection Fees: There shall be a total fee for disconnecting and reconnecting sewer service. (Ord. 23-17, 7-18-2017; amd. 2019
Code)
H. Septage Dumping: There shall be a charge per thousand gallons of septage, sewage, or effluent dumped, but such charge shall never be less than the
minimum established by the City Council for each use or act of dumping. There shall be a surcharge for after hours dumping.
I. Decant Facility Service: The fees for decant disposal service shall be a minimum for up to one cubic yard of material, plus an additional fee for each
additional cubic yard rounded up to the nearest whole yard. This charge shall be based on the amount of materials deposited into the Decant Facility
as determined from a physical measurement of the debris pile by a Boise City employee. (Ord. 35-18, 9-11-2018, eff 10-1-2018; amd. 2019 Code)
J. Door Tag Fee: A door tag fee shall be charged to the customer for the second and all subsequent times a door tag is hung on the property prior to sewer
service termination.
K. Watershed Program Fee: An administrative fee may be charged for programs provided by the City at the Boise Watershed. (Ord. 23-17, 7-18-2017;
amd. 2019 Code)
10-2-8: FEE DEFERRAL PROCEDURES:
10-2-8-1: COMMERCIAL TRUNK AND TREATMENT CONNECTION FEES:
In order to promote the growth and economic development of the City, the payment of connection fees for commercial properties (other than restaurants)
may be deferred as follows:
A. Application: The owner or operator of the property shall submit an application provided by the Public Works Department;
B. Agreement: Upon receipt and verification of the application, the department shall prepare an agreement for the deferral of payment of the connection
fees;
C. Maximum Term: The term of the agreement shall not exceed two (2) years;
D. Assurances: The owner or operator shall post an irrevocable letter of credit, Certificate of Deposit, payment bond, security bond or other acceptable
assurances, as may be approved by the City Attorney's Office, for the sum of the connection fees and interest to be charged on the unpaid balance;
E. Payments; Interest: Payments shall be made in equal installments on a monthly or quarterly basis, at the option of the applicant and as prescribed by
the agreement. Interest shall be assessed at the Wall Street Journal's prime rate as published on the date the agreement is signed, plus three percent
(3%);
F. Recording Of Agreement: The agreement will be recorded in the Office of the Ada County Recorder; and
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 456/503
G. Default: In the event the property owner or authorized representative defaults on the terms of the agreement prior to final payment, sewer connection
fee credits will be granted to the property under the following conditions:
1. The total credit given will be based on the principal payments received, plus amounts collected from a letter of credit, bond or other assurance used
to secure the agreement, less any costs incurred by the City in collecting the remaining balance owed on the agreement; and
2. The credit will be recorded with the property as a single-family dwelling equivalent based on rates in effect at the time the agreement was executed;
H. Existing Structure: In the event the property is an existing structure at the time of sewer connection, and additional connection (equivalent assessment)
fees are imposed pursuant to subsection 10-2-6-3C of this chapter, the owner may incorporate the commercial trunk and treatment connection fees into
an agreement as set forth in section 10-2-8-5 of this chapter. (1952 Code § 8-11-08.010)
10-2-8-2: RESTAURANT TRUNK AND TREATMENT CONNECTION FEES:
In order to promote the growth and economic development of the City and in recognition of the unique impact of restaurants upon the City sewer system,
the payment of connection fees for restaurants may be deferred as follows:
A. Application: The owner or operator of the restaurant property shall submit an application provided by the Public Works Department;
B. Agreement For Deferral: Upon receipt and verification of the application, the department shall prepare an agreement for the deferral of the payment of
connection fees (the option to defer fees will not be extended to owners or operators, including partners within limited liability companies or
corporations, who have defaulted on previous restaurant deferrals, whose payments on previous deferrals were past due on 3 or more occasions or
who have outstanding sanitary sewer or solid waste utility billings with the City);
C. Maximum Term: The term of the agreement shall not exceed ten (10) years;
D. Assurances: The owner or operator shall post an irrevocable letter of credit, Certificate of Deposit, payment bond or other financial assurances
approved by the City Attorney's Office for the sum of the connection fees and interest to be charged on the unpaid balance;
E. Payments; Interest: Payments may be made in equal installments on a monthly or quarterly basis at the option of the applicant and as prescribed by the
agreement. Interest shall be assessed at the Wall Street Journal's prime rate as published on the date the agreement is signed; and
F. Recording Of Agreement: The agreement shall be recorded in the Office of the Ada County Recorder. (1952 Code § 8-11-08.02)
10-2-8-3: RESIDENTIAL TRUNK AND TREATMENT CONNECTION FEES:
Payment of connection fees, by an owner of an existing residential structure, may be deferred as follows:
A. Agreement For Deferral: The Public Works Department shall prepare an agreement for the deferral of the payment of fees;
B. Maximum Term: The term of the agreement shall not exceed fifteen (15) years;
C. Payments: Payments shall be made in equal installments on either a monthly, or quarterly basis, at the option of the applicant and as prescribed by the
agreement;
D. Interest: Interest on the unpaid balance will be assessed at the Wall Street Journal's prime rate, as published on the date the agreement is signed; and
E. Recording Of Agreement: The agreement shall be recorded in the Office of the Ada County Recorder. (1952 Code § 8-11-08.03)
10-2-8-4: DEFERRAL OF BREWERY TRUNK AND TREATMENT CONNECTION FEES:
In recognition of the unique impact of breweries upon the City sewer system, the payment of connection fees for breweries may be deferred as follows:
A. Application: The owner or operator of the brewery property shall submit an application provided by the Public Works Department;
B. Agreement: Upon receipt and verification of the application, the department shall prepare an agreement for the deferral of the payment of connection
fees. The option to defer fees will not be extended to owners or operators, including partners within limited liability companies or corporations, who
have defaulted on previous deferral agreements with the City or whose payments on previous deferrals were past due on three (3) or more occasions
or who have outstanding sanitary sewer or solid waste utility billings with the City;
C. Term: The term of the agreement shall not exceed ten (10) years;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 457/503
D. Financial Assurances: The owner or operator shall post an irrevocable letter of credit, Certificate of Deposit, payment bond, or other financial
assurances approved by the City Attorney's Office for the sum of the connection fees and interest to be charged on the unpaid balance;
E. Additional Capacity: The owner or operator shall agree to provide the City information necessary to determine future capacity use and agree to pay
connection fees for any additional capacity required by the brewery;
F. Payments; Interest: Payments may be made in equal installments on a monthly or quarterly basis at the option of the applicant and as prescribed by the
agreement. Interest shall be assessed at the Wall Street Journal's prime rate as published on the date the agreement is signed; and
G. Recording: The agreement shall be recorded in the Office of the Ada County Recorder. (Ord. 23-17, 7-18-2017)
10-2-8-5: DEFERRAL OF EQUIVALENT ASSESSMENT FEES:
Additional connection (equivalent assessment) fees imposed pursuant to subsection 10-2-6-3C of this chapter may be deferred as follows:
Payment of connection fees, by an owner of an existing structure, may be deferred as follows:
A. Agreement: The Public Works Department shall prepare an agreement for the deferral of the payment of fees;
B. Term: The term of the agreement shall not exceed fifteen (15) years;
C. Payments: Payments shall be made in equal installments on either a monthly or quarterly basis, at the option of the applicant and as prescribed by the
agreement;
D. Interest: Interest on the unpaid balance will be assessed at the Wall Street Journal's prime rate as published on the date the agreement is signed;
E. Recording: The agreement shall be recorded in the Office of the Ada County Recorder. (Ord. 23-17, 7-18-2017)
10-2-9: WAIVERS AND APPEALS:
10-2-9-1: WAIVER OF INDIVIDUAL PHYSICAL CONNECTION:
The requirement of individual physical connection may be waived by the Public Works Department if, under the particular circumstances of the case,
compliance would impose undue hardship on the property owner. Waivers shall not be granted for subdivisions that are being proposed for platting where
new roads and utilities must be constructed, or for more than one multi-family dwelling with separate ownership. In granting the waiver, the department
may impose such reasonable conditions as it deems appropriate. Any application for waiver shall be submitted to the department in accordance with the
waiver procedures set forth in section 10-2-9-4 of this chapter. Connection to sewer may still be required by other City departments or public agencies.
(1952 Code § 8-11-09.01)
10-2-9-2: WAIVER OF REQUIREMENT TO CONNECT:
A. Conditions: The Public Works Department may waive the connection requirements of section 10-2-4-3 of this chapter if the public health does not
require immediate connection and the department finds any of the following:
1. Within five (5) years prior to the date upon which connection fees are due, the individual wastewater disposal system serving the building for which a
connection waiver is sought, was installed or rebuilt in accordance with a permit issued by the Central District Health Department. If the individual
wastewater disposal system was installed three (3) years or less from the date sewer connection fees are due, a waiver may be granted for a period
not to exceed five (5) years from the date of installation. If the individual wastewater disposal system was installed more than three (3) years from the
date sewer connection fees are due, a waiver may be granted for a period of up to two (2) years from the date such waiver is sought;
2. The single-family dwelling for which a connection waiver is sought is located on a parcel of land five (5) acres or more in size;
3. The owner of a building is experiencing financial hardship. Financial hardship shall be deemed to exist when an owner's annual family gross income
is at or below the income level indicated for a family of similar size on the current "Moderate Income Guidelines" chart employed by the City in the
administration of the Community Development Block Grant Program, and shall be verified by the previous year Federal Tax return; or
4. The owner of the property has prepaid connection fees prior to sewer being available in accordance with subsection 10-2-6-3G of this chapter.
B. Application: Application for the waiver must be made by the building owner, prior to the date connection fees are due, in accordance with the waiver
procedures set forth in section 10-2-9-4 of this chapter. (1952 Code § 8-11-09.02)
10-2-9-3: WET LINE WAIVER:
The Public Works Department may waive the wet line connection requirement specified in section 10-2-4-1 of this chapter, subject to such reasonable
conditions that the department deems appropriate, if it finds all of the following applicable:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 458/503
A. Feasibility: The extension of wet line sewer to the structure is not financially feasible for the property owner and/or the City;
B. Adequate Service: Until sewer service is available, the structure can be adequately served by:
1. A septic tank which will be compatible with future sewer lines; or
2. Another existing sewage treatment alternative (package treatment plant, lagoon system or central septic tank) which is reasonably available and has
been approved and certified by the appropriate government agency as adequate to service the structure until sewer service becomes available. The
existence of the maintenance agreement for the alternate treatment system shall also be taken into consideration;
C. Compatibility: The proposed construction is compatible with the other goals and policies of the City Comprehensive Plan. (1952 Code § 8-11-09.03)
10-2-9-4: WAIVER PROCEDURES; COMMERCIAL TREATMENT CREDIT PROCEDURE:
A. Application: All requests for waivers, as well as a request for a commercial treatment credit must comply with the following procedures:
1. An application must be submitted to the Public Works Department on a form provided by the department. If the department does not provide such a
form, the application must be submitted to the department in writing; and
2. The application must state the specific grounds upon which the waiver is sought.
B. Department Decision; Appeal: Upon receipt of the application, the department shall review it and make a decision, in writing, within thirty (30) days. The
decision of the department may be appealed to the Public Works Commission.
C. Notice Of Appeal: Notice of appeal shall be filed with the department within fifteen (15) days of the department's written decision granting or denying the
waiver request, and should state the specific grounds upon which the appeal is based.
D. Meeting: Upon receipt of the notice of appeal, the Public Works Commission shall review it at a regularly scheduled meeting of the commission. Notice
of the time and place at which the commission shall review the appeal shall be provided to the applicant within five (5) days of the date scheduled for
review of the appeal. On the scheduled review date, the applicant may appear and present testimony to the Public Works Commission.
E. Burden Of Eligibility On Applicant: The applicant shall bear the burden of demonstrating eligibility for a requested waiver. The decision of the
commission granting or denying a waiver, as well as its findings, shall be in writing. The decision of the commission may be appealed in accordance
with section 10-2-9-9 of this chapter. (1952 Code § 8-11-09.04)
10-2-9-5: SEWAGE PUMP APPEAL FOR UNDUE HARDSHIP:
In the event a single-family building owner is required to install a pump and believes the required installation creates an undue hardship, the building
owner may file an appeal with the Public Works Commission, citing the reasons for the undue hardship and requesting a hearing before the commission.
The commission shall hold a hearing pursuant to the appeal procedures set forth in section 10-2-9-8 of this chapter. (1952 Code § 8-11-09.05)
10-2-9-6: SERVICE CHARGES AND CAPITAL FEES APPEALS:
A. Notice of all service charges and fees fixed and established by the Department of Public Works pursuant to section 10-2-6-4 of this chapter shall be
given by mailing notice thereof to the owner, if known, or the occupant or person in custody, control and possession of said property. Any property
owner, or user of the sewer system, feeling aggrieved by the service charges or rates established by the department may, within ten (10) days after the
mailing of said notice, file a notice of appeal with the Public Works Commission. The commission shall hold a hearing pursuant to the appeal
procedures set forth in section 10-2-9-8 of this chapter.
B. Capital fees fixed and determined by the Department of Public Works, pursuant to section 10-2-6-3 of this chapter may, within ten (10) days of notice of
the amount of such charges, be appealed to the Public Works Commission. The commission shall hold a hearing pursuant to the appeal procedures
set forth in section 10-2-9-8 of this chapter. (1952 Code § 8-11-09.06)
10-2-9-7: APPEAL OF DECISION TO DISCONNECT SEWER:
Decisions of the Public Works Director or designee to allow disconnection of sewer service may be appealed to the Public Works Commission, within ten
(10) calendar days of the date the hearing decision is rendered, using the provisions set forth in section 10-2-9-8 of this chapter. The decision of the
commission upon appeal may be appealed to the City Council in accordance with section 10-2-9-9 of this chapter. (1952 Code § 8-11-09.07)
10-2-9-8: APPEAL PROCEDURES:
A. Hearing Time Limit: The commission shall hold a hearing on the appeal not less than ten (10) nor more than sixty (60) days after receipt of notice of the
appeal.
B. Authority Of Commission: The commission shall have the power to revise, correct or confirm the charges. (1952 Code § 8-11-09.08)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 459/503
10-2-9-9: APPEAL FROM DECISION OF COMMISSION:
The decision of the commission may be appealed to the City Council by filing a notice of appeal with the City Clerk within ten (10) days of written notice of
the commission's decision. Such appeal may be filed by the aggrieved party or the Public Works Department. The Council shall have the power to
approve, amend or reverse the decision of the commission and the decision of the Council shall be final. (1952 Code § 8-11-09.09)
10-2-10: PROHIBITIONS:
10-2-10-1: INTERFERENCE WITH CITY SEWER SYSTEM PROHIBITED:
It is unlawful for any person to break, block, damage, destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any property, equipment or appliance constituting a part of
the City sewer system. It is unlawful to trespass upon the property of the City and interfere in any manner with the operation of the City sewer system, or
the property, equipment, manholes, piping or appliances of the wastewater collection system and treatment facilities. No person shall open any public
sewer manhole without the permission of the Public Works Department, nor shall any person deposit any type of refuse into the sewer manholes. (1952
Code § 8-11-10.01)
10-2-10-2: FALSIFYING INFORMATION:
Any user who knowingly makes false statements, representations or certifications in any application, record, plan or other document filed with the City, or
who falsifies, tampers with or knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring device or method required under this chapter, commits a misdemeanor under
this chapter. (1952 Code § 8-11-10.02)
10-2-10-3: UNLAWFUL TO OCCUPY OR USE BUILDING WITHOUT CONNECTION:
It shall be unlawful to occupy or use any building or structure in violation of this chapter, and any violation of this chapter shall be punishable as a
misdemeanor. (1952 Code § 8-11-10.03)
10-2-10-4: SEPTAGE DUMPING PROHIBITED:
Within the City and the City area of impact, it shall be unlawful for any person to deposit, dump, place or leave septage, sewage, effluent or other
byproduct from any individual or wastewater disposal system, at a location other than a designated treatment facility. Septage will not be accepted at any
City wastewater treatment facility or any site or facility discharging to a City wastewater treatment facility, except pursuant to a written agreement with the
City setting forth discharge terms, including payment of fees, which the City deems reasonable and necessary. (Ord. 16-14, 4-15-2014)
10-2-10-5: HARMFUL SUBSTANCES PROHIBITED:
Unless allowed by a service contract or industrial discharge permit, it shall be unlawful to permit or cause flow of any of the following substances into the
public sewer:
A. Any grease, fatty material, offal or garbage;
B. Any stone dust, sand, dirt, gravel, sawdust, metal filings, broken glass or any other material which may cause an obstruction in the sewer;
C. Gasoline, benzene, fuel oil, phenols or cresols, or any petroleum products or volatile liquids, or any wastes which create a fire explosion hazard;
D. Milk, or any liquid milk waste products, in quantities in excess of ten (10) gallons during each twenty four (24) hour period;
E. Any cyanide, phenols or other chemical substance which interferes with or prevents the functioning of the sewer system or wastewater treatment
facilities;
F. Paint or waste products from paint manufacturing;
G. Radioactive wastes;
H. Any material from cesspools and septic tanks, other than effluent;
I. Any other matter, substance or liquid deleterious to the sewer system and wastewater treatment facilities or which shall endanger the employees,
operation or treatment processes of wastewater disposal, or which shall cause encrustation or otherwise chemically or physically corrode or erode the
sewer system and wastewater treatment facilities. In no case shall wastes with a pH lower than 5.0 be permitted into the public sewer. (1952 Code § 8-
11-10.05)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 460/503
10-2-10-6: EMERGENCY SUSPENSION OF SERVICE:
The City may, after informal notice to the user in writing or in person or by telephone, order the suspension of wastewater system service if it appears to
the City that an actual or threatened discharge presents an imminent or substantial danger to the health or welfare of persons or the safety of property, or
substantial danger to the environment. (1952 Code § 8-11-10.06)
10-2-10-7: INFILTRATION PROHIBITED; STORMWATER; EXCESS DISCHARGE:
Inflows of surface and excessive infiltration are prohibited. Such prohibited sources of inflow shall include, but not be limited to, the following: heating or
cooling system discharges in excess of two thousand (2,000) gallons per day, stormwater connections, subwater drains, foundation drains, roof drains,
street drains. Infiltration greater than two hundred (200) gallons per day per inch diameter per mile of pipe shall be prohibited. Variances may be granted
as determined by the Public Works Department. (1952 Code § 8-11-10.07)
10-2-11: PENALTY AND REMEDIES:
10-2-11-1: CRIMINAL PENALTY:
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, subject to penalty as provided in
section 1-4-1 of this Code. (1952 Code § 8-11-11.01; amd. 2019 Code)
10-2-11-2: CIVIL REMEDIES:
In addition to, and exclusive of, the criminal remedy provided by this chapter, the City may institute any civil action provided by law including, but not
limited to, injunctive relief or other actions to prevent, restrain, enjoin, correct, abate, or to recover costs for a violation of this chapter. Furthermore, any
person violating any of the provisions of this chapter which shall cause the City:
A. Additional costs to collect, transmit and treat sewage produced within the City sewer system;
B. To be subject to civil penalties imposed by State or Federal Environmental Protection Agencies; or
C. To lose, or jeopardize the holding of, any permit for the use of the Boise River in conjunction with its sewerage treatment system;
shall be subjected to the full remedies available to the City under State and Federal law, including recovery of costs. (1952 Code § 8-11-11.02)
10-2-11-3: DELINQUENCY OF PAYMENTS:
A. All City sewer system charges and fees not paid within or by the time periods required by this chapter, or dates required under agreements entered into
in accordance with section 10-2-8 of this chapter, shall be considered delinquent.
B. All City sewer system and service charges and fees which are delinquent will be charged a late payment charge of one and one-half percent (1.5%) per
month, which will be added to the outstanding balance. In addition, all sewer system charges, excluding service charges, which are due and payable,
shall constitute a lien upon and against the property or premises being served by and connected to the City sewer system. The delinquent charges,
together with a penalty of ten percent (10%) added thereto shall be certified to the Tax Collector of Ada County in the manner and at the time required
by Idaho Code section 50-1008. (1952 Code § 8-11-11.03)
10-2-11-4: DISCONNECTION OF SEWER FOR NONPAYMENT:
A. Reasons For Disconnect: Sewer service can be discontinued for any of the following reasons:
1. Failure to pay sewer fees by the due date;
2. Failure to submit any deposits imposed pursuant to this chapter;
3. Failure to abide by the terms of a sewer fee payment arrangement or agreement;
4. Misrepresenting the identity of the user to receive service;
5. Failure to apply for service or connecting to the City sewer system without the knowledge or approval of the City;
6. Failure to abide by any provision of this chapter.
B. Notice And Right To Hearing:
1. Except in the event that public health requirements dictate immediate disconnection, written notice of the intent to terminate service shall be provided
to the user at least fourteen (14) calendar days prior to the disconnection/termination date. In the case of a rental arrangement, the property owner
will be sent a courtesy copy of the notice. The notice of termination shall contain the following:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 461/503
a. The user's name and last known mailing address;
b. The address or addresses where the service is being provided;
c. A statement of the basis for the proposed termination;
d. If the proposed termination is for nonpayment of fees, a statement of the amount of such nonpayment;
e. A statement that the user has ten (10) calendar days upon receipt of the registered letter to request a pretermination hearing before the Public
Works Director or his/her designee;
f. A statement that if the user does not request a hearing or appear at the hearing, the basis for the termination, including the amount of fees due, will
be deemed to be correct and the user's sewer service may be disconnected immediately thereafter.
2. The pretermination hearing shall be held no sooner than seven (7) calendar days from the date the request for hearing is made by the user. If the
user appears at the hearing, the Public Works Director or designee shall hear the user's evidence and testimony, review and examine the testimony
and evidence presented and render a decision based upon such testimony and evidence and upon the records of the City. The Public Works Director
or designee may render a decision at the hearing or may render a decision in writing, and in such case will mail or otherwise provide a written copy
of the decision to the user. The decision of the Public Works Director or designee may be appealed to the Public Works Commission within ten (10)
calendar days of the date the decision is rendered using the provisions set forth in section 10-2-9-8 of this chapter. If the user fails to request a
pretermination hearing, appear at the hearing or fails to timely appeal a decision of the Director or designee determining that the termination of
service should proceed, the Director or designee may issue an order to shut off and discontinue service to the user.
3. Prior to termination, the City shall notify the Central District Health Department, appropriate plumbing authority and the user's water service provider.
A request will be made by the City to shut off water service to the affected premises prior to sewer disconnection. Except in an emergency, sewer
service disconnection will not take place after twelve o'clock (12:00) noon on Fridays, Saturdays, Sundays, City holidays or after twelve o'clock
(12:00) noon on any holiday eves.
4. Reconnection of sewer will take place only after the reason for the termination has been remedied, including the payment of all overdue system fees
and charges, deposits, disconnection fees and reconnection fees. (1952 Code § 8-11-11.04)
Chapter 3
GEOTHERMAL SYSTEM REGULATIONS
10-3-1: PURPOSE AND SCOPE:
For the purpose of developing, managing and utilizing geothermal resources belonging to the City and for distributing said geothermal resources to users,
a system for the development, distribution and disposal of geothermal resources shall be constructed, extended, maintained, repaired, replaced, operated
and removed by the City by which to provide an adequate system for the development, distribution and disposal of geothermal resources for the purpose
of space heating and cooling and such other uses and purposes for which said system may be used. (1952 Code § 8-12-01)
10-3-2: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and phrases used in this chapter shall have the following meanings unless a different meaning clearly appears from the context:
COLLECTION PIPELINE: The main pipeline through which the spent geothermal resources are piped from the return lines of users to the disposal system.
RETURN LINES: The pipelines running from the property line of the user to the collection pipeline.
SERVICE LINES: Both the supply and return lines of the user.
SUPPLY LINES: The pipelines running from the transmission pipeline to the right-of-way line of the user.
TAP-IN: The saddles, valves and appurtenances necessary to conduct to the transmission and collection pipelines.
TRANSMISSION PIPELINE: The main pipeline through which the geothermal resources are piped from the well to the supply line of users. (1952 Code
§ 8-12-02)
10-3-3: SERVICE CONNECTION PROCEDURES:
A. Application: Any person desiring to connect a building or structure to the City geothermal system may apply for such service connection with the
Department of Public Works on forms provided for that purpose. The Director of Public Works, or his authorized representative, shall approve or deny
said application within thirty (30) days of its filing. A decision to deny shall be accompanied by written findings thereon.
B. Change In Use Or Change In Identity Of User: A new application must be made to, and approved by, the Department of Public Works upon any change
in the use of the property or in the identity of the user at a property.
C. Lapse In Use: If geothermal service is discontinued to any property for any reason and if a request to reactivate geothermal service to the property is
made, the request to reactivate geothermal service shall be made and considered in the same manner and in all respects as a new application.
D. Construction Of Tap-Ins And Service Lines And Installation Of Meters: The City shall construct all tap-ins and service lines and install meters. Upon
completion, the tap-ins and service lines shall become a part of the public geothermal system.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 462/503
E. Meters:
1. All geothermal service will be rendered only through meters.
2. Each user shall have a separate meter to register the amount of water utilized.
3. All meters will be furnished by, and remain the property of the City. The City reserves the right to establish the size and location of all meters and the
amount of space which must be left unobstructed for the installation and future maintenance and operation of the meter.
4. Meters will be maintained by the City as far as ordinary wear and tear is concerned, but the user shall be responsible to the City for any injury to, or
loss of, any meter arising out of or caused by the user's negligence or carelessness, or that of his servants, employees, members of his household or
any person upon his premises under or by his consent. The user shall not permit anyone, except an agent of the City or a person otherwise lawfully
authorized, to remove, inspect or tamper with the meter of the City, or other property of the City.
5. The user shall notify the City of any damage to, or of any cessation in registration of, the meter as soon as it comes to the user's knowledge.
6. If the user requests that the meter be located in a place where accessibility by the City is difficult, a remote readout shall be installed at the user's
expense.
F. Service Connection Standards And Inspections: All approved service connections to the geothermal systems shall comply with the following
requirements:
1. The applicant shall notify the Public Works Department no less than twenty four (24) hours prior to commencing connection work.
2. Except for the meter, all portions of geothermal service within the owner's building, or within the building owner's property lines, shall be the
responsibility of, and provided by, the building owner or user, and operation and maintenance of all such plumbing and related appurtenances shall
remain the responsibility of the building owner or user, except that, by written agreement between the City and the building owner or user,
responsibility of ownership, operation or maintenance of the geothermal service may be otherwise assigned. Service connection work and materials
located on the building owner's property shall be in conformance with written and illustrated minimum standards and specifications issued by the
Department of Public Works for such purposes.
3. Upon completion of the permitted service connection, the applicant shall promptly notify the Public Works Department to request a service
connection inspection.
4. Upon inspection by the Public Works Department, the applicant may be required to reperform his work, in whole or in part if, in the opinion of the
department, the initial service connection work does not comply with applicable department standards and specifications, or is otherwise hazardous
to public safety.
5. All completed and approved service connections shall remain inoperable, through deactivation of the meter, until such time as a service account is
activated.
G. Violations: It shall be a violation of this chapter for any person to construct or cause the construction of a service line or tap-in without approval of the
Department of Public Works. Separate plumbing, mechanical and other applicable permits shall not be required for tap-ins and service lines
constructed by the City to the geothermal system, although plumbing, mechanical and other permit requirements may be applicable to all work
performed by the property owner upon the property owner's property.
H. Inspection: All requests for inspection must be made to the Public Works Department at least twenty four (24) hours prior to the requested inspection.
Inspections will be made between the hours of eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. and five o'clock (5:00) P.M., Monday through Friday, excluding holidays.
I. Failure To Inspect: Should the applicant or his duly authorized agent connect facilities to the geothermal system without the facilities being inspected and
approved by the Public Works Department, the party responsible for the connection shall be required, at his expense, to excavate the connection, if
necessary, and disconnect the connection from the system, in order that a proper inspection can be made, whereupon compliance with this chapter will
be required if no application had been previously made. (1952 Code § 8-12-03)
10-3-4: USER SERVICE PROCEDURES:
A. Account Activation And Deactivation: After a service connection has been completed and approved, any person desiring geothermal service shall notify
the Public Works Department. The Public Works Department shall activate a service account for the user's connection and the Department of Public
Works shall activate the user's meter. Any user desiring to discontinue geothermal service shall notify the Public Works Department and upon
deactivation of the service account, the Department of Public Works shall deactivate the user's meter.
B. Service Deposits: Prior to activation of a service account, the City may require a reasonable cash deposit to ensure payment for the use of geothermal
resources to be furnished by the City. The City Council, by resolution, may establish deposit amounts and guidelines for requiring such deposits.
C. Determination Of Service Fees: There is hereby established a system of periodic service fees and charges for the purpose of equitably imposing upon
all users the costs and expenses of construction, operation, maintenance, repair and replacement of the geothermal system and facilities. The
determination of periodic service fees and charges may be based upon business needs of the system and other considerations, including, but not
limited to:
1. Facility Replacement: Accumulate a reserve for replacement within the service area of distribution and disposal facilities and works. Such reserve
shall be based on the total historical costs and estimated life of the applicable facilities and equipment. One rate schedule for service fees in this
category will be devised and shall be the basis for charges to all customers in the service area.
2. Construction, Operation And Maintenance: Recover, equitably from users, the costs and expenses incurred by the City in constructing, operating and
maintaining the geothermal distribution system.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 463/503
3. Fixed Charge For Zero Use: Apportion equitably among all users those fixed costs which continue to be incurred whether or not individual users
utilize the system. Such costs include, but are not limited to, costs attributable to providing basic office staff for the administration of the geothermal
system. Payment of these costs shall be made by all customers, including those with zero (0) flow.
4. Prevailing Natural Gas Rates: Establish a goal that geothermal rates should result in an estimated savings of at least twenty percent (20%) from the
prevailing prices users would have to pay for comparable natural gas service. City staff shall review service rates and make recommendations to the
Council whenever prevailing prices of similar natural gas service are changed.
D. Review And Revision Of Service Fees: The charges and fees hereinafter imposed shall be reviewed and revised periodically as required and the
charges and fees provided by this chapter are hereby levied and assessed against each lot, parcel or other property having any connection with the
geothermal system.
E. Service Fees: The amount and rate of service fees shall be established by resolution of the City Council. Geothermal customers will be sent written
notice of a proposed increase in geothermal service rates prior to Council consideration of the resolution. Any increase of geothermal service fees in
excess of five percent (5%) shall require published notice and a public hearing.
F. Billing Of Service Charges: The Treasurer shall mail regular billing statements to each user, which shall include:
1. Account handling charges, if any; and
2. Rate charges showing the type of user, number of gallons of water drawn from the system and the total charges therefor.
G. Estimated Bills: The City shall endeavor to have each user's meter read at regular intervals to determine the cost of the geothermal service. In the
event the City meter reader is unable to gain access to the premises to read the meter on his regular trip, the City may estimate the user's consumption
for the current billing period based on known consumption for a prior period adjusted for variation in temperature on a degree day basis; subsequent
readings will be adjusted for difference between estimated and actual. Estimated bills shall carry appropriate notice to that effect. (1952 Code § 8-12-
04)
10-3-5: DELINQUENT FEES, DISCONNECTION AND LIEN:
A. Payment: All service charges and fees not paid within thirty (30) days when due shall become delinquent.
B. Disconnection: In case of nonpayment or delinquency in payment of service fees required by this chapter, the Department of Public Works is hereby
authorized and directed to disconnect and plug the connection to the geothermal system.
C. Lien: The amount of all delinquent service fees which are due and payable shall constitute a lien upon and against the property or premises being
served by and connected to the geothermal system. The delinquent service fees, together with a penalty added thereto of ten percent (10%), or higher
as may be authorized by law, shall be certified to the Tax Collector, of Ada County in the manner and at the time required by Idaho Code. (1952 Code
§ 8-12-05)
10-3-6: TERMS AND CONDITIONS OF GEOTHERMAL SERVICE:
All users of the geothermal system shall be subject to the following terms and conditions:
A. Ownership, Use Of Water: All water within the geothermal system shall be and remain the property of the City and no user shall divert or utilize more
water than is reasonably necessary, in the opinion of the City, to serve the user and no user shall physically consume, remove or deplete any water
flowing within the system.
B. Substances Or Wastes In System: It shall be unlawful for any person to permit or cause the flow of any substances or wastes into the geothermal
system.
C. Emergency Maintenance And Repair: The City reserves the right to cease operation of the geothermal system, or any part thereof, and cancel such
services as may be provided by the system, for reasons of emergency maintenance and repair as determined by the Department of Public Works. The
City shall diligently endeavor to provide the earliest and widest possible user and public notice prior to such emergency actions.
D. System Operation: The City may, by resolution of the City Council, establish regular seasonal time periods of geothermal system operation and inoperation,
and provision of services to users shall be contingent on such resolutions.
E. Interruptions Or Cancellations: The City shall in no way assume any liability, direct or implied, for any user damages or injuries incurred as a result of
loss of the geothermal reservoir or temperature or of service interruption or cancellation, when such loss, interruption or cancellation is due to
circumstances beyond the control of the City, or due to operational actions authorized by this chapter.
F. Chemical Quality, Temperature, Pressure: The City shall in no way warrant or guarantee the chemical quality, temperature or pressure of the geothermal
fluid delivered to users, nor assume any liability, direct or implied, for corrosion, scaling or similar physical degradation of user service lines or private
equipment utilized beyond the meter of each user.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 464/503
G. Authorized User: Geothermal service supplied to a user is for the sole use of such user and shall not be remetered or submetered for sale to others, nor
shall the water be piped beyond the confines of said user's premises for use at other locations, without first obtaining written permission from the City.
H. Access: Representatives of the City shall be given access to the premises of the user at all reasonable hours for obtaining meter readings, for shutting
off the flow of geothermal service for reasons prescribed in this chapter, for inspection of piping and appliances, for inspecting, removing, repairing or
protecting from abuse or fraud any of the property of the City installed on the premises, and for any other purpose in the normal customary operations
associated with the conduct of business activity. Access shall be granted at all times for emergency purposes. The City may refuse geothermal service,
or suspend service, on refusal of legitimate access to the property. In the event of recurring inaccessibility, the City, at its option, may relocate its
metering equipment at the user's expense.
I. Authorized Personnel: Except in the case of an emergency, no one other than personnel of the City shall open or close any of the City service lines or
valves in any public or private line.
J. Leaks: The user shall give immediate notice to the City of leaks. All leaks in service lines from the user's meter to and through the building and back to
the general vicinity of the meter shall be promptly repaired by the user. On failure to make such repairs with reasonable dispatch, the City may turn off
the geothermal service and the service will not be turned on until the City has been reimbursed in full for all proper and necessary expenses incurred in
shutting off and turning on the water. No adjustment of bills on account of leakage shall be made unless leakage results from fault or neglect of
representatives or agents of the City. (1952 Code § 8-12-06)
10-3-7: GEOTHERMAL SYSTEM FUND:
A. Created; Use: There is hereby created a special fund to be known and designated as the Geothermal System Fund. All service charges and fees
received and collected pursuant to the provisions of section 10-3-4 of this chapter, and all monies and receipts from contract charges or from any other
source as provided by the provisions of this chapter, shall be deposited to the credit of the Geothermal System Fund and such monies are hereby set
aside and perpetually appropriated for, and shall be expended only for, the payment of:
1. Costs and expenses of maintenance, operation, replacement and repair of the geothermal system and facilities; and
2. Constructing and extending the geothermal system and facilities.
B. Duty Of Treasurer: The Treasurer shall bill and receive all service charges and fees required by this chapter. (1952 Code § 8-12-07)
10-3-8: FINANCING IMPROVEMENTS:
A. Authorized: Improvements to the geothermal system, including, but not limited to, the purchase, acquisition or condemnation of private property, and the
planning, design, construction, reconstruction, extension, enlargement, purchase or acquisition of the system and the facilities, may be financed and
paid for as follows:
1. From the Geothermal System Fund created by this chapter and as authorized by the Council; or
2. By the issuance of Municipal bonds; or
3. By the creation of local improvement districts as provided by Idaho Code title 50, chapter 17; or
4. By the property owners specially benefitted by the improvements; or
5. By any combination of the above or any other method which, in the judgment of the Council, may be fair and equitable in consideration of the
benefits accruing to the general public, benefits accruing to the property owners within the area in which the improvements will be constructed and
the financial condition of the City and the property owners in the area.
B. Contribution To Cost Of System: Any person, firm, partnership, corporation or association or property owner who has not otherwise paid for, or
contributed proportionately toward, the costs and expenses of constructing the geothermal system or improvements, whether that construction be by
the City, a local improvement district or a private developer, and who subsequently desires to connect to the geothermal system, shall be required to
pay the service charges and fees as required by this chapter.
C. Extensions: The extension to the geothermal system by the user, when accepted by the City, shall thereafter constitute a part of the geothermal system
of the City and all right, title and interest in and to such extensions shall be held by the City and be used, operated, maintained and managed by the
City as part of its geothermal system. (1952 Code § 8-12-08)
10-3-9: APPEAL FROM DEPARTMENT DECISION:
Any property owner, or user of the system, aggrieved by any decision rendered by the Department of Public Works pursuant to this chapter may appeal
such decision to the City Council. Such appeal shall be in writing, describing the decision and the grounds for the appeal, and shall be filed with the City
Clerk within ten (10) days after the date of the administrative decision. The City Council shall have the power to approve, revise or amend the decision of
the department and the decision of the City Council shall be final. (1952 Code § 8-12-11)
10-3-10: PENALTY:
Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall
be subject to penalty as provided in section 1-4-1 of this Code. (1952 Code § 8-12-09; amd. 2019 Code)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 465/503
10-3-11: CIVIL REMEDIES:
In addition to, and exclusive of the criminal remedy provided by this chapter, the following civil remedies may be invoked:
A. Injunction: The City may seek a temporary restraining order, or may institute injunctive, abatement or any other appropriate proceedings to prevent or
temporarily or permanently enjoin or abate existing or proposed violations of the provisions of this chapter.
B. Disconnection: The City may discontinue service to any user who fails to comply with the provisions of this chapter after ten (10) days' written notice to
comply, sent by registered mail to said user.
C. Damages: Any person, firm, company, corporation, partnership or association violating any of the provisions of this chapter and by such violation
causing the City additional costs to collect, transmit and treat water produced within the system, or causing the City to be subjected to civil penalties
imposed by State or Federal agencies, or causing the City to lose, or jeopardize the holding of, any permit for the use of the Boise River in conjunction
with its geothermal system, shall be subjected to the full remedies available to the City pursuant to State and Federal law. (1952 Code § 8-12-10)
Chapter 4
SOLID WASTE SERVICES
10-4-1: TITLE, PURPOSE AND GENERAL PROVISIONS:
10-4-1-1: TITLE:
This chapter shall be known as the BOISE CITY SOLID WASTE ORDINANCE. (Ord. 21-17, 5-23-2017)
10-4-1-2: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
The purpose and intent of this chapter is to:
A. Provide for the protection of air, soil, stormwater, groundwater and surface water from pollutants by establishing a system for the storage, handling,
collection and processing of solid waste with uniform requirements for direct and indirect contributors.
B. Promote the health, safety and general welfare of the citizens of the City, and enhance and preserve the quality and value of the resources of the City
by the proper management of solid waste.
C. Encourage and improve the opportunity for reuse, composting and recycling, to reduce the quantity of wastes disposed of by the City's residential,
commercial and industrial customers.
D. Equitably distribute the costs of the solid waste collection and disposal system. (Ord. 21-17, 5-23-2017)
10-4-1-3: APPLICABILITY:
This chapter shall apply to all persons within the corporate limits of the City, including those receiving solid waste services, eligible to receive solid waste
services and conducting the collection of solid waste. (Ord. 21-17, 5-23-2017)
10-4-1-4: REGULATORY CONSISTENCY:
This chapter shall be construed to assure consistency with State and Federal laws, rules and regulations, and other provisions of this Code. (Ord. 21-17,
5-23-2017)
10-4-1-5: DEFINITIONS:
The terms as used in this chapter shall have the following meanings:
ADA: The Americans with Disabilities Act.
APPLIANCES: Household equipment and major appliances, including, but not limited to, refrigerators, freezers, stoves, water heaters, swamp coolers, air
conditioners, dishwashers, washing machines and dryers.
ASBESTOS: Naturally occurring minerals that are resistant to heat and corrosion. May be found in products such as insulation for piping, floor tiles,
buildings, materials and vehicle brakes and clutches. Asbestos includes the mineral fibers, chrysotile, amosite, crocidolite, tremolite, anthophyllite,
actinolite and any of these materials that have been chemically treated or altered. Asbestos is regulated by OSHA and the EPA and must be managed and
disposed in accordance with Federal, State and local regulations.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 466/503
BULKY WASTE: A large item of a size or weight, that cannot be placed into the franchise hauler provided wheeled cart or dumpster, such as appliances
and furniture. Bulky waste does not include large quantities or piles of smaller items, construction debris, dead animals, hazardous waste or stable matter.
BUSINESS: An establishment used for selling, such as an office, manufacturing, production, entertainment, service or similar use, whether for profit or not.
Includes hotels and motels and other short term lodging uses, as well as any establishment located within a residential structure.
CARRY OUT SERVICE: Collection of solid waste achieved by entering upon a customer's property to convey the materials to the collection vehicle.
CITY: The City of Boise City, Idaho.
COMMERCIAL SERVICE: Centralized solid waste services for businesses, industries and some multi-family units and industries, using carts, dumpsters,
roll off or compactor containers, where the customer selects the number, size and frequency of collection services.
COMPOSTABLE MATERIALS: Materials which can be reused, processed or undergo biological activity to create a soil amendment. Compostable
materials include, but are not limited to, yard wastes, fruit and vegetable garden wastes, nonmeat eating animal wastes, untreated and unpainted wood
wastes, kitchen wastes, such as fruit and vegetable peels and cores, eggshells, coffee grounds and filters, tea bags and compostable paper products.
COMPOSTING: The conversion of yard, garden and kitchen wastes to decayed organic matter which can be used as a soil conditioner.
CUSTOMER: An occupant or owner of any premises, including residential, business, industry, institution or other establishment in the City for which solid
waste service is, or has been, provided.
DUMPSTER: A specially designed solid waste container, two (2) to eight (8) yards in size, that is delivered to a location, emptied by the franchise hauler
and can be removed from the location when no longer used.
DWELLING UNIT: A single unit providing complete independent living facilities for one or more persons, including permanent provisions for living,
sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation.
FRANCHISE HAULER: Any person authorized by the City to collect and haul any solid waste, who has executed a franchise agreement with the City.
GLASS: Bottles and jars, less than two (2) gallons in size. Materials not considered glass for purposes of the glass collection program include the
following: mirrors, plate or window glass, light bulbs and tubes, Pyrex, ceramics, porcelain, corks, bottle caps and lids.
HARDSHIP DISCOUNT: A reduction in the amount charged for residential solid waste services based upon the annual gross family income when it is at or
below the income level indicated for a family of similar size on the current low income guidelines chart used by the City in the administration of the
Community Block Grant Program.
HAZARDOUS WASTE: Any chemical, compound, mixture, substance or article which is designated by the United States Environmental Protection Agency
or appropriate agency or political subdivision of the State to be a hazardous waste, as those terms are defined by Federal or State law. De minimis
amounts of household hazardous wastes are by definition excluded from regulation under 40 CFR section 261.4(b)(I) and do not constitute hazardous
waste.
INSTITUTION: School, college, group home with more than eight (8) beds, dormitory, boarding house, nursing home, retirement center, in patient medical
facility, military installation, and any entity of a similar nature in the City.
LIQUID: A fluid, such as water, oil or alcohol, which is not solid matter and can leak or flow from a solid waste container.
LITTER: Solid waste scattered about the ground surface.
MEDICAL WASTE: Human or animal waste consisting of one or more of the following: tissue, cultures and stocks, body fluids (except urine), blood or
blood products, materials contaminated with blood or blood products, used surgical wastes, used or unused sharp instruments, including, but not limited
to, hypodermic needles, suture needles, syringes and scalpel blades.
MULTI-FAMILY DWELLING UNITS OR PREMISES: Residential premises with more than one dwelling unit on a single parcel or premises, such as town
homes or condominiums within a multi-family development. These include multiplex dwellings, apartments, condominiums and manufactured home parks.
Multi-family premises do not include short term residential properties, such as dwelling hotels, motels, hospitals, nursing homes or other congregate care
or institutional housing or facilities.
OVERFLOW STICKERS: Stickers provided to residential customers or purchased by customers which allow for trash to be placed in a personal can of
twenty (20) to thirty two (32) gallons for solid waste collection.
OVERFLOW TRASH: Solid waste left outside or placed above the top of a collection container. Overflow trash creates nuisances and affects safe and
orderly collection of the disposed solid waste.
OVERLOADING: Exceeding the designated weight capacity, allowing objects to protrude outside of the container, or stacking objects against containers
used for commercial or residential solid waste collection.
OWNER: Every person, including lessees and occupants, in possession, charge, custody or control of any residential, business, industry or institutional
premises within the City, where solid waste is created or accumulated.
PERMITTED HAULER: Any person authorized by the City to collect and haul solid waste, who has applied for and been granted a permit with the City.
PERSON: Any individual, partnership, association, firm, corporation, public agency or any other legal entity.
PREMIUM CARRY OUT SERVICE: Provides for the collection of solid waste by entering onto the customer's property. Premium carry out includes, but is
not limited to, such services as the franchise hauler using special collection equipment to access the customer's property, stopping to open driveway
gates, accessing a site on an unpaved or poorly maintained drive, or driveways greater than one hundred feet (100') in distance from a public road.
Premium carry out requires an extra service charge.
PUTRESCIBLE WASTE: Wastes that can leak, decay, stink or become putrid.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 467/503
RECYCLABLE MATERIALS: Products or substances, including, but not limited to, paper, rigid plastic containers numbered 1 - 7, corrugated cardboard,
metals, magazines and catalogs, newspapers, scrap paper, empty aerosol cans, glass bottles and jars or other substances capable of being reprocessed
or reused, which have passed through their originally intended usage and which have been discarded or placed for recycling by their owner, whether or not
such products have monetary value.
RESIDENTIAL PREMISES: A separate dwelling or residential unit in the City occupied by a person or group of persons which may be in a residence,
mobile home, condominium, duplex or multiplex where solid waste is placed and collected in approved solid waste containers. Each separate dwelling unit
shall be considered a separate premises for solid waste service.
RESIDENTIAL SERVICE: Wheeled cart service for individual residential premises using solid waste carts provided by the City's franchised hauler or in
customer owned cans for overflow trash collection.
ROLL OFF: Usually an open top solid waste container characterized by a rectangular footprint, utilizing wheels to facilitate rolling the container off and set
in place by a specially designed truck. Roll off container sizes are determined by the volume amount they can hold. Typical container sizes are from ten
(10) to forty (40) cubic yards. Roll off containers may not exceed weight limits as to ensure compliance with road use and safety regulations.
SELF-HAUL OF SOLID WASTE: A business owner or operator generating solid waste who collects and transports solid waste, using their own equipment
for proper disposal or recycling. The self-haul of the solid waste shall not create nuisances or litter during the collection and hauling of the solid wastes.
SOLID WASTE: All putrescible and nonputrescible solid and semisolid waste placed or intended for disposal, including, but not limited to, garbage, trash,
rubbish, demolition and construction wastes, industrial wastes, compostable wastes, dead animal remains, reusable or recyclable material, bulky waste or
large items, appliances, and other discarded solid and semisolid wastes.
TIRES: Any motor vehicle tire, new or used, whether or not it is in a condition to be reused, retreaded or otherwise salvaged.
TRASH: Materials discarded for disposal. Trash does not include materials which have been set aside for recycling, composting or other reuse in the City's
solid waste management system. Also known as refuse or garbage.
VACANT PROPERTY, PARCEL OR LAND: Unoccupied property, not currently used. A lot or parcel of land that is without any building, structure or
improvement. Vacant land does not include recreation, green or open space.
VECTOR: An organism that can transmit disease.
YARD WASTE: Plant material, such as leaves, grass, branches, brush, flowers, tree wood waste, and plant debris generated in the course of maintaining
yards and gardens. (Ord. 21-17, 5-23-2017)
10-4-2: RESIDENTIAL SOLID WASTE COLLECTION SERVICE:
Residential trash collection service, as provided through the City, is mandatory for all residential premises, whether the premises is a single unit or multiunit
dwelling. All residents or residential premises shall be charged a fee for this service. Fees for residential service are not based on the amount of solid
waste placed for disposal, nor frequency of solid waste collection. Vacant residential land is exempt from mandatory services and fees. Recycling and
compost collection services provided through the City are optional. (Ord. 21-17, 5-23-2017)
10-4-2-1: RESIDENTIAL SOLID WASTE SERVICE:
A. Regular Collection Service: Curbside and alley collection of trash and compostable materials shall be one time per week and collection of recyclables
shall be every other week. Solid waste generated off site or from a business cannot be disposed through residential services.
B. Carry Out And Premium Carry Out Service: Regular collection service with the additional provision that the franchise hauler shall enter onto the
customer's property to collect solid waste containers. The franchise hauler will not enter enclosed structures. The customer must execute an
agreement to save and hold harmless the City and the franchise hauler for any damages before this service can be instituted. The solid waste
containers must be placed in a visible and accessible location for collection. Customers pay an additional charge for carry out and premium carry out
services.
C. Disability Service And Premium Carry Out Service: For those residents who have qualified disabilities under the Americans with Disabilities Act, carry
out service is available at the regular service fee. Disability service is provided upon completion of a written certification from a licensed physician that
the resident's impairment qualifies as a disability and prevents them from utilizing curbside service and that no other person residing in the household
is capable of moving the solid waste carts to the collection site.
D. Multi-Family Premises: Multiple-family dwellings of less than nine (9) units may, where feasible and appropriate, choose to use residential services or
commercial solid waste services. Multiple-family dwellings of nine (9) or more dwelling units shall use commercial solid waste services.
E. Appliance Collection: Appliances shall be collected and hauled by the City's franchise hauler. Customers are responsible for contacting the franchise
hauler to schedule the pick up. The customer shall convey the appliances to the regular collection location. Freezers and refrigerators must be empty of
all food products in order for the franchise hauler to collect the appliance. An extra fee may be charged for freezers or refrigerators which are not empty
of materials prior to collection and hauling. Freezer and refrigerator doors must be removed or secured prior to collection and hauling. Appliances shall
be marked for disposal to allow easy identification for collection and hauling.
F. Large Item Collection: Bulky wastes and large items shall be collected and hauled by the City's franchise hauler. Customers are responsible for
contacting the franchise hauler to schedule the pick up. The customer shall convey the waste to the regular collection location.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 468/503
G. Seasonal Or Special Collections: The City may establish special dates for the collection of solid wastes in personal cans twenty (20) to thirty two (32)
gallons without extra fees or overflow stickers.
H. Temporary Commercial Service: Temporary commercial collection and hauling service at a residential premises is available for a maximum of one
hundred twenty (120) days per year to accommodate construction and demolition projects and other short term waste generation projects. This service
is only available for limited projects and does not replace regular solid waste service for the premises. Trash that is routinely generated at a residential
premises is not permitted in temporary commercial containers.
I. Curbside Glass Collection: Customers may subscribe to a curbside glass collection service and have their glass collected and hauled by the City's
franchise hauler. Customers are responsible for subscribing to the voluntary service. Rates for curbside glass collection will be established by
resolution or ordinance approved by the City Council. Glass will be collected in specially marked wheeled carts provided by the franchise hauler and
will be collected at least one time every four (4) weeks. (Ord. 21-17, 5-23-2017)
10-4-2-2: SERVICE ACCOUNTS FOR NONPROPERTY OWNERS; RESIDENTIAL AND COMMERCIAL PROPERTIES:
When solid waste service is requested by a person who is not the owner of the property at which the service will be provided, that person may be subject
to a deposit requirement, and may, upon the finding of a poor credit or payment history, be refused service, unless and until an additional person agrees to
accept responsibility for the account as a guarantor. The guarantor must be a person with a documented good credit history with the City or other public
utility, and a current City sewer or solid waste service customer. The guarantor may be released from his obligation for the service account upon a showing
that the customer has made consecutive on time payments for twelve (12) months. (Ord. 21-17, 5-23-2017)
10-4-2-3: RESIDENTIAL SOLID WASTE CONTAINERS:
A. Number, Size, Weight: Residential solid waste shall be placed in provided wheeled carts. Extra trash may be placed in customer owned garbage cans
with overflow stickers. If garbage cans are utilized, they may not be less than twenty (20) gallons nor more than thirty two (32) gallons size. The total
weight of a wheeled cart may not exceed the rated capacity of that cart size. Customer owned garbage cans shall not exceed sixty (60) pounds.
Wheeled carts cannot be overloaded and the lids must close flat for collection. Residential customers may use up to three (3) wheeled carts for trash
service. Recycling and composting are unlimited services and customers may set out additional materials in twenty (20) to thirty two (32) gallon
garbage cans that are identified as either recycling or compost. Compostable materials may also be set out in paper leaf bags.
B. Multi-Family Premises: For regular commercial solid waste service at multi-family premises, the customer shall be provided with one or more containers
in sizes as follows: two (2) (glass collection only) to eight (8) cubic yard dumpsters. Customer or franchisee owned compactor containers, forty (40)
cubic yard capacity or smaller, may also be utilized. The size and number of containers provided and the collection service is dependent upon the
collection location as determined by the City and the franchise hauler.
C. Lids, Waste: All carts shall be closed to prevent solid waste from being scattered, blown or spilled. Cart lids shall open freely and the contents of the
cart shall fall freely when inverted for emptying. Human and animal wastes shall be placed into sturdy plastic bags and closed tightly to prevent spillage
or breakage during trash collection. Corrugated cardboard must be flattened and cut to fit inside the wheeled recycling cart so that it can fall freely from
the cart when emptied. No plastic bags shall be used in recycling or compost carts.
D. Maintenance: Wheeled carts provided by the franchise hauler are owned by the franchise hauler and must remain with the premises. Carts shall not be
abused or damaged by the customer and should be routinely maintained by the customer. Damaged carts will be replaced by the franchise hauler, but
may be charged to the customer for damages beyond routine wear and tear. Customer owned cans shall be maintained in good condition and must be
of sturdy build and material, with sturdy handles. The can must be replaced by the customer if it becomes broken or is otherwise not functional, or if
requested by the franchise hauler due to safety concerns.
E. Location Requirements:
1. For residential service, solid waste carts and cans must be placed curbside, as close to the curb as possible, or in an alley if the property has alley
access. The carts and cans shall not block safe pedestrian, bicycle or vehicle access to streets, alleys, bike paths or the sidewalks. Carts and cans
shall be at least three feet (3') from other carts and obstructions, including mailboxes and utility poles. Carts must have overhead clearance of at
least fourteen feet (14') and be located away from overhanging obstructions, such as utility lines, trees or buildings.
2. For carry out service, carts must be stored in unlocked areas clearly visible to franchise hauler from the street or alley from which normal collections
are made. The carts shall not be located in an area accessible to uncontrolled pets.
3. Commercial solid waste containers located at multi-family premises shall comply with all requirements of section 10-4-3 of this chapter.
4. Solid waste service will not be provided if the collection requires franchise hauler personnel to pass through any doors or gates, cross flower beds or
lawns, or go through hedges at the service location, or if the collection personnel must place themselves in a situation which could jeopardize their
health or safety.
5. The City may designate collection locations, relocate collection sites or establish collection service hours to protect the public or franchise hauler's
safety or health.
F. Sanitary Condition: Customers shall be responsible for maintaining the solid waste carts and cans in a sanitary condition, including exterior and interior,
and the outside of carts and cans shall be free of accumulating grease, decomposing materials and litter. Alley collection locations shall be maintained
to ensure no vectors, rodents or animals are attracted to the site, and to ensure against nuisance conditions. The franchise hauler shall be responsible
for any spillage that occurs during collection services.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 469/503
G. Warning Notice: In cases of improper cart or can placement or a set out which causes an unsanitary condition or a litter problem, the franchise hauler
may issue a warning notice. If the condition persists, the City may take action pursuant to section 10-4-5-6, 10-4-5-7 or 10-4-5-8 of this chapter.
H. Appliances, Bulky Waste: Appliances and bulky waste set out for collection shall be clean of all waste, including food products, prior to collection, and
readily accessible to the franchise hauler. Doors shall be removed or secured for refrigerators or freezers, and the appliances or bulky waste shall be
marked for identification for collection. Prohibited wastes listed in subsection 10-4-4-1E of this chapter shall not be collected. (Ord. 21-17, 5-23-2017)
10-4-2-4: RESIDENTIAL COLLECTION:
A. Time Of Placement: Solid waste carts and cans shall be placed for collection by seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. on the regularly scheduled collection day, but
no sooner than the evening prior to collection. The containers may not remain at the curbside for a period greater than twenty four (24) hours.
B. Collection Days: Regularly scheduled collection days will be determined by the franchise hauler in conjunction with the City.
C. Return Collection: If the carts and cans are not emptied, due to missed collection, the customer may choose to store the solid waste until their next
scheduled collection day, or contact the franchise hauler for a return collection. If the missed collection is due to the carts or cans not being set out by
the required time or from improper placement or overloaded containers, the City may charge the customer a fee for the return collection.
D. Additional Collection: Customers may request additional collection from the franchise hauler. This collection shall be provided within twenty four (24)
hours of the customer request, excluding nonbusiness days and holidays. A collection fee for additional collections shall be established by the solid
waste schedule of fees.
E. Commercial Service At Residential Premises: Collection for commercial solid waste service at residential premises shall be at least once a month with
the exception that wet or putrescible wastes must be collected at least once a week. The City reserves the right to change the frequency of waste
collection. (Ord. 21-17, 5-23-2017)
10-4-2-5: RESIDENTIAL RECYCLING:
A. Voluntary Service: Residential recycling is a voluntary service available to all residential premises. Residential customers who choose to participate in
the recycling program shall be provided with a blue wheeled recycling cart(s).
B. Multi-Family Premises: Multi-family premises with commercial solid waste service may participate in the commercial recycling program provided by the
franchise hauler. The owner or manager shall be provided with one or more containers with a choice of sizes and collection frequency. The size and
number of containers provided and the collection service is dependent upon the collection location as determined by the City and the franchise hauler.
C. Commingling Materials: Recyclable materials, excluding glass, can be commingled into the blue recycling cart or commercial recycling container. Those
items defined as recyclable materials for collection may be modified from time to time or as needed.
D. Excluded Commingled Materials: Materials which are excluded from the commingled residential recycling cart or commercial recycling containers
include extruded polystyrene (often called styrofoam), plastic bags, film and wraps, yard wastes, glass, ammunition, pesticide containers, metal pipes,
hazardous wastes, plastic containers larger than two (2) gallons, and all other trash.
E. Special Recyclable Material:
1. Used motor oil shall be placed in a leakproof, transparent or translucent, unbreakable plastic container with a screw on lid, and placed near, but not
in, the compost, recycling or trash carts. No other fluids may be included. Containers must be one gallon size and there is a limit of two (2) gallons of
used motor oil per week set out for collection. Containers will not be returned to the customer.
2. Occasional overflow recycling must be placed into a rigid container, such as a cardboard box or customer owned can, from which the contents can
be easily emptied into the wheeled recycling cart and labeled for recycling.
3. Cardboard must be flattened and the customer must contact the franchise hauler for special collection of large quantities or oversized cardboard.
4. Glass shall be placed in designated glass collection carts as part of the subscription glass program, or delivered to designated glass collection sites
or placed in regular trash carts. Glass is prohibited in the blue commingled recycling carts. The glass collection program is limited to glass bottles
and jars. Contaminated recycling or glass collection carts will be tagged and will not be collected by the hauler.
F. Contaminated Recycling: Containers used for recyclable or compostable materials or glass collection shall not contain trash or materials which are not
allowed in the recycling, composting or glass collection programs. Services may be terminated to any customer who violates this provision.
Contaminated recycling, composting or glass containers will be emptied as trash and the customer may be charged for extra trash collection services.
(Ord. 21-17, 5-23-2017)
10-4-2-6: RESIDENTIAL CURBSIDE COMPOSTING:
A. Voluntary Service: Residential curbside composting is a voluntary service available to all residential premises.
B. Cart Provided: Residential customers who choose to participate in the composting program shall be provided with a gray wheeled cart with a green lid.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 470/503
C. Items May Be Modified: Those items defined as compostable materials for collection may be modified from time to time or as needed.
D. Christmas Trees: Christmas trees placed for composting shall be clear of all ornaments, lights, tinsel and tree stands and placed for collection in or next
to the composting cart. Trees should be cut to four feet (4') or less. Fill the composting cart first and place the other section of the tree next to the
composting cart. Branches and tree trimmings may also be set out for collection four feet (4') or less in length, less than sixty (60) pounds, and bundled
with string.
E. Leaf Collection: Leaves are collected as compostable materials. The composting cart should be filled first. Extra leaves should be placed next to the
cart in paper leaf bags. Extra paper leaf bags will be collected all year long.
F. Contaminated Containers: Containers used for compostable materials shall not contain trash or materials which are not allowed in the compost
collection program. The City or franchised hauler may terminate services to any customer who violates this provision. Contaminated composting
containers will be emptied as trash and the customer may be charged for extra trash collection services.
G. Unaccepted Materials: Materials not accepted in the composting cart include, but are not limited to: meat eating animal wastes, meats, dairy products,
oils/grease, leftovers, breads, grains, pasta, fish, dirt and rocks and other recyclable and trash materials. Other wastes shall not be mixed with the
compostable materials. Contaminated compostable materials will not be collected and will be emptied as trash and the customer may be charged for
extra trash collection.
H. Extra Materials: Extra compostable materials can be placed in paper leaf bags, cardboard boxes, or customer owned cans next to the composting cart.
Cans and boxes must be labeled "composting". Overflow compostable materials will not be accepted in plastic bags. Customer owned cans may not
exceed sixty (60) pounds and must be twenty (20) to thirty two (32) gallons. (Ord. 21-17, 5-23-2017)
10-4-3: COMMERCIAL SOLID WASTE COLLECTION SERVICE:
Commercial solid waste service shall include trash collection and disposal and recyclable materials collection for business, industrial and commercial
premises, including governmental agencies, schools, multi-family residential properties with nine (9) or more units or multi-family residential properties with
four (4) or more units where the City deems it in the best interest of the community to receive commercial service, and temporary construction activities.
(Ord. 21-17, 5-23-2017)
10-4-3-1: COMMERCIAL SOLID WASTE SERVICE:
A. Regular Selected Service: Scheduled collection of trash and recycling shall be conducted pursuant to section 10-4-3-5 of this chapter.
B. On Call Service: Collection will occur within the next working day after a customer request for collection, excluding nonbusiness days and holidays.
C. Temporary Service: Special dumpster or roll off container service to accommodate construction and demolition projects and other short term waste
generation projects. Temporary service for residential properties is limited to one hundred twenty (120) days per year unless a waiver is granted under
section 10-4-5-3 of this chapter.
D. Cart Service: Commercial trash and recycling service using wheeled carts. Commercial customers are limited to no more than six (6) wheeled trash,
recycling or glass carts per service site.
E. Large Item And Appliance Collection: Customers are responsible for contacting the franchise hauler to schedule the pick up of bulky wastes, or
appliances.
F. Self-Haul: The actual producers of the solid waste or the owners or occupants of the premises from which the solid waste was generated may collect,
convey and dispose of solid waste, provided they remain in compliance with all applicable provisions of this chapter.
G. Glass Collection: Glass may be collected and hauled by the City's franchise hauler. Customers are responsible for subscribing to the voluntary service.
Glass will be collected in dedicated, specially marked wheeled carts or dumpsters. Cart service is limited to two (2) carts per collection site. Collection
will be provided at least one time every four (4) weeks for wheeled carts. Dumpsters may be collected up to six (6) days per week. Customers shall
convey glass collection carts to the regular collection location on the designated collection day.
H. Multi-Family Residential Properties: The City may require any multi-family residential property with more than four (4) units to receive commercial
service when it is in the best interest of the community due to access, density or location. This applies to a development or property on a single parcel
of land and a development or property on multiple parcels of land which share vehicular access via drive aisle, parking or streets. (Ord. 21-17, 5-23-
2017)
10-4-3-2: SERVICE AGREEMENTS FOR COMMERCIAL CUSTOMERS:
All commercial customers shall sign a service agreement indicating a representative who will maintain responsibility for payment of the solid waste service
fees. The actual owner or owners of the business, shall be held personally liable by the City for all outstanding balances if the commercial customer
ceases to exist. In the event a property or waste management company is utilized by a commercial customer, the customer receiving the service shall
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 471/503
ultimately be responsible for ensuring compliance with this chapter and payment of all fees, penalties and interest. Service may be refused or a deposit
may be required for any commercial customer who has a documented poor payment history with the City or has no credit history with the City, unless and
until a guarantor is secured to retain responsibility for payment of the service account. The guarantor must be an individual with a documented good credit
history. The guarantor may be released from its obligation upon a showing that the customer receiving the service has made twelve (12) consecutive on
time monthly payments. (Ord. 21-17, 5-23-2017)
10-4-3-3: COMMERCIAL SOLID WASTE CONTAINERS:
A. Types: The commercial customer shall be provided one or more of the following containers: ninety five (95) gallon wheeled carts (limit 6), three (3) to
eight (8) cubic yard dumpsters, or ten (10) to forty (40) cubic yard roll off containers. Commercial customers also may utilize customer owned
compactor containers, no larger than forty (40) cubic yards in capacity. Compactor sizes, under forty (40) cubic yards, and locations, shall be approved
by the City prior to installation to ensure safe collection and to meet billing requirements.
B. Location Requirements:
1. Each developed parcel shall provide adequate space, screened from public view, for trash and recycling containers. A binding legal agreement for
shared trash and recycling collection locations is required.
2. The container location shall have sufficient foundation to support the weight of a fully loaded container; and the access to the container location shall
have sufficient foundation for the weight of the collection vehicle.
3. The City shall have final approval of container locations, space requirements and safety factors, including location of compaction containers to
ensure proper height and truck access clearances.
4. Roll off containers and dumpsters shall not be placed on a public street without prior approval from the Ada County Highway District.
5. Roll off containers and dumpsters shall not be placed in a manner that may obstruct the public right-of-way or pedestrian traffic without prior approval
from the City and the Ada County Highway District.
6. Site plans shall be submitted to the City for the review and inspection for all new construction or remodeling where commercial trash, recycling or
glass service will be used. The submittal shall include a scale drawing of the site and a detailed drawing of the proposed solid waste enclosure
clearly showing:
a. Lot lines;
b. Existing and planned buildings;
c. Proposed collection location and sight shielding;
d. All existing and planned sidewalks, curb cuts, drives, parking spaces, landscaping, freestanding signs, posts, poles (e.g., streetlight, telephone
and electric poles), overhead and underground utilities, and other structures that may affect collection;
e. The location of all public rights-of-way, fire hydrants, sidewalks and public transportation stops on the premises and adjacent to the premises;
f. Adjacent structures, including distances to the nearest residential areas;
g. Access roadways or drives intended for collection, ingress and egress, fire lanes, turnaround locations and vertical clearances;
h. Proposed path for the collection vehicles;
i. Adequate space will be provided for trash, recycling, and glass containers; and
j. Dimensions of all proposed trash, recycling and glass enclosures.
7. Site plan approval shall be based on compliance with the Public Works Department Policy for Solid Waste Commercial Service Site Design and
Location Requirements. Commercial service requirements shall be established by the department and updated as needed.
a. If the site is not developed as approved, the City may require site remediation or corrective action, including, but not limited to, acquisition of
different collection containers, removal and reconstruction of enclosure or site access at the owner's expense.
b. Modifications to the enclosure or site must be submitted to the Public Works Department for approval prior to modification.
8. The City may designate collection locations, relocate collection sites or establish collection service hours to protect the public or franchise hauler's
safety or health.
9. Customers with containers in locations that require special collection services, have access limitations, require designated hours of collection, or
entry into rooms to remove and service containers, may be required to enter into a special service agreement and be assessed additional service
fees.
C. Contents; Lids; Wet Wastes: Contents of a waste container or compactor must fall freely from the container when emptied, and the container lids must
close completely and swing freely open when emptied. Wet and/or putrescible wastes must be bagged prior to placement in a waste container or
compactor. Liquids shall not be placed in a container or compactor.
D. Sanitary Condition: Customers shall be responsible for maintaining the trash, recycling and glass containers in a sanitary condition, including exterior
and interior. The collection location shall be kept free of accumulating grease, decomposing materials, excess wastes, snow, ice, ponded water and
litter.
E. Load, Weight: Containers cannot be overloaded or overweight. (Ord. 21-17, 5-23-2017)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 472/503
10-4-3-4: ASSUMPTION OF RISK:
As a condition of service, owners accept all risk of property loss or liability for damages accruing from service operations, including container delivery,
placement, use or other weight related impacts from container service. Any special instructions regarding placement of, or use of, containers must be
disclosed by the property owner. (Ord. 21-17, 5-23-2017)
10-4-3-5: COMMERCIAL COLLECTION FREQUENCY:
A. Determination; Frequency: The times and days for trash, recycling or glass collection shall be determined by the franchise hauler in conjunction with the
City. The frequency of trash, recycling or glass service for a particular customer is at the discretion of the customer subject to the following minimum
requirements:
1. Regular trash service shall be a minimum of once per month.
2. Regular trash service for wet or putrescible wastes shall be a minimum of once per week.
3. Regular recycling service shall be a minimum of once per month.
4. On call and temporary service shall be a minimum of once per month.
B. Minimum Service Interval: The minimum service interval may be modified as follows:
1. The City may order an increase in frequency, on a case by case basis, upon a finding by the Public Works Department that protection of the
environment, public health or safety requires the increase.
2. The City may grant a request for a decrease in frequency upon a showing by the customer that the decrease will not affect the protection of the
environment, public health or safety.
C. Appeal: Upon an order to increase service interval time or a denial of a request to decrease service interval time, the affected customer may appeal the
decision to the Public Works Department in the manner outlined in section 10-4-5-4 of this chapter. (Ord. 21-17, 5-23-2017)
10-4-3-6: COMMERCIAL RECYCLING:
A. Sale, Exchange: Commercial businesses may sell or exchange recyclable materials over which the business has ownership.
B. Self-Haul Or Utilize Franchise Hauler: Commercial businesses may choose to self-haul their own recyclable materials or may elect to utilize the
collection and/or transportation services of franchise hauler.
C. Donation: Commercial businesses may choose to donate their recyclable materials to a not for profit organization.
D. Contaminated Containers: Containers used for recyclable materials or glass collection shall not contain trash or materials which are not allowed in the
recycling or glass collection programs. Services may be terminated to any customer who violates this provision. Contaminated recycling or glass
containers will be emptied as trash and the customer may be charged for extra trash collection services.
E. Limitations: Processing and storage of recyclable materials shall be limited to areas suitable and adequate for that purpose, and shall not cause or
contribute to a nuisance, and must be in compliance with all applicable laws, rules and regulations.
F. Prohibited Materials In Glass Cart: Glass must be placed in designated glass collection carts or dumpsters. All types of glass, light bulbs and tubes are
prohibited in the blue no sort recycling carts. The glass collection program is limited to glass bottles and jars. Materials which are prohibited in the glass
collection cart include the following: mirrors, plate or window glass, Pyrex, ceramics, porcelain, corks, bottle caps and lids. Contaminated recycling or
glass collection carts or dumpsters will be tagged and will not be collected by the franchise hauler. (Ord. 21-17, 5-23-2017)
10-4-4: REGULATIONS AND REQUIREMENTS:
10-4-4-1: GENERAL REQUIREMENTS AND PROHIBITIONS:
A. Mandatory, Optional Services: Trash collection service is mandatory for all residential premises in the City. Recycling and compost collection services
are optional.
B. Franchise Agreement Required; Exemption: No person shall engage in the collection, conveyance or disposal of solid waste without a franchise
agreement or a permit from the City unless, exempted by this chapter.
C. Overloading: No container used in the collection of solid waste shall be loaded above lid level or beyond its volume or weight capacity, or in such a
manner to be unstable or likely to cause damage, create litter or impact the public health or safety.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 473/503
D. Prohibited Deposits: No person shall cast, place, sweep or otherwise deposit solid waste anywhere in the City in such a manner that it may be carried
or deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk, parkway, waterway, stormwater sewer system, sanitary sewer, vacant lot, public place or any
other premises.
E. Prohibited Waste: No person may deposit or relinquish for collection or disposal through the City solid waste collection program any prohibited waste.
Prohibited wastes include the following:
1. Liquid wastes, including fats, oils and grease.
2. Motor vehicle tires.
3. Material regulated by the State or Federal government as hazardous waste, including, but not limited to, materials which contain corrosive,
flammable, reactive, explosive or toxic chemicals or compounds.
4. Equipment or machines containing refrigerants.
5. Medical or infectious wastes generated from business sources, such as hospitals, clinics, medical offices, surgical offices, dental offices, veterinarian
offices, nursing homes and laboratories; and medical or infectious waste generated by any other business. Generators of such waste shall manage,
store and dispose the waste in a manner to prevent it from being a hazard to any person or to the general public.
6. Dead animal remains in excess of twenty five (25) pounds, unless the remains are placed into plastic garbage bags and then into a tightly closed
airtight, watertight container or cart.
7. Wastes that exhibit extreme temperatures or harmful vapors.
8. Materials with chemical, physical or other properties which create a risk to the environment or public health and safety or which pose an operational
hazard for collection personnel.
9. Intact fifty five (55) gallon drums.
F. Collection Of Prohibited Waste: Customers who generate prohibited wastes shall make arrangements for the collection and disposal of the waste
through approved sources.
G. Ownership Of Solid Waste: All solid waste placed for collection shall be considered the property and the responsibility of the customer until the time of
collection, when it shall become the property and responsibility of the franchise hauler. No person shall take, examine, uncover, go in or through,
separate, gather, collect or salvage solid waste deposited in containers or otherwise placed for collection without the express permission of the owner
of the property, or the solid waste franchise hauler once the materials have been collected. Authorized government personnel are exempt from this
provision. This provision does not create or recognize a right or expectation of individual privacy with respect to solid waste placed for collection.
H. Approval For Deposit Required: No person shall place or deposit any materials in or around a solid waste container provided for a specific business or
premises, or in or around residential solid waste containers, except through the approval of the customer receiving service at the location or residence.
I. Unauthorized Accumulation: No person shall allow the accumulation of solid waste upon any premises within the City unless properly contained as
provided for in this chapter. Any unauthorized accumulation shall be considered a nuisance and prohibited, and shall be subject to the remedies found
in section 10-4-5-5 of this chapter.
J. Construction Activities: Solid waste resulting from construction activities shall be contained in a manner to prevent it from being blown, washed or
carried off the premises. All solid wastes at a construction site shall be collected and properly disposed of or recycled prior to the end of the
construction project. Construction solid waste may be self-hauled using self-contained equipment, such as a dump truck or attached wheeled trailer.
Construction solid wastes placed into a roll off or dumpster must be hauled by the City's franchise hauler.
K. Outdoor Disposal: No person may burn, bury, stockpile, store or dispose of solid waste outdoors within the City limits, except for properly managed
compostable materials.
L. Failure To Receive Collection: Failure of any residence or commercial premises to receive adequate solid waste collection service may be declared a
public nuisance and shall be subject to the remedies found in section 10-4-5-7 of this chapter.
M. City Authority: The City reserves the right to determine the appropriate size of container and frequency of solid waste collection service. The City shall
have the right to order the abatement of such nuisance at the expense of the owner or occupant of the premises. This shall not preclude the City or the
owner from seeking recovery against other responsible persons.
N. Scrap Tires: Scrap tires may be stored under the following conditions:
1. They must be stored in a manner that will prevent the creation of a nuisance and prevent vectors or pest breeding.
2. Commercial entities must remove all scrap tires at least once a month. Residences may store up to eight (8) scrap tires at one time.
3. Scrap tires must be stored out of the sight of the public. (Ord. 21-17, 5-23-2017)
10-4-4-2: FRANCHISE AGREEMENTS AND PERMITS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 474/503
A. Franchise Required: Any person using three (3) or more vehicles that provides collection services for solid waste, recyclable materials, oil, grease,
hazardous waste or medical waste within the City limits must execute a solid waste collection franchise agreement with the City.
B. Permit Required: Any person using fewer than three (3) vehicles that is engaged in the collection and hauling of recyclable materials, hazardous waste
or medical waste within the City limits must apply for and be granted a collection permit with the City. Permits may be issued on an annual or per
project basis. Permitted haulers for construction and demolition may only haul for their own construction or demolition projects in which they hold a
current Planning and Development Services Department (PDS) permit. Permitted haulers must have roll off containers and trucks identified with their
name and phone number. Permitted haulers must comply with all appropriate Federal, State and local regulations and requirements.
C. Exemptions: The following are exempt from the requirement to obtain a franchise or permit to collect, convey and dispose of solid waste:
1. The producers of solid waste.
2. A civic, community, benevolent or charitable nonprofit organization that collects, transports and markets source separated materials for recycling for
the sole purpose of raising funds for that organization.
3. Persons engaged in the occupation of demolition or construction contracting or landscaping may self-haul construction wastes, landscape wastes or
recyclable materials using self-contained equipment, such as a dump truck or attached wheeled trailer. If the construction or demolition company
obtains a permit for work on a site using their own equipment, the company may self-haul the construction and demolition wastes. They may not
allow the use of their equipment by other contractors or at nonpermitted sites. Construction wastes or recyclable materials placed into a roll off or
dumpster must be hauled by the City's franchise hauler.
D. Right Of City To Approve: The City shall have the exclusive right to select and approve all persons with whom the City shall enter into any franchise or
permit. (Ord. 21-17, 5-23-2017)
10-4-4-3: FRANCHISE HAULER RESPONSIBILITIES:
Any person providing trash or recycling collection services within the City will be authorized under a franchise agreement which shall outline the franchise
hauler's responsibilities. (Ord. 21-17, 5-23-2017)
10-4-4-4: FEES FOR SERVICE:
A. City Right: The City maintains the right to prescribe and regulate the rates, fees or charges made for services pertaining to solid waste management
and the collection and disposal of solid waste.
B. Schedule Of Fees: The City shall set fees for available services, such fees to be contained in a separate solid waste schedule of fees passed by
resolution or ordinance by the City Council. The City Council may amend by resolution or ordinance the fees and the types of available services from
time to time as necessary.
C. Account Initiation Fee: An account initiation fee as found in the solid waste schedule of fees shall be assessed at the initiation of City billing service for
each new account.
D. Hardship Discount: Residential customers may apply for a hardship discount of thirty percent (30%) on residential solid waste service, excluding central
solid waste service, by making application to Public Works Utility Billing Services.
E. Deposits: Deposits in an amount equal to three (3) months projected service, rounded to the nearest dollar, may be required for initiating, continuing or
restoring any residential or commercial regular solid waste service for customers with limited or poor credit histories, a poor payment history with the
City or any public utility, or who have supplied false information at the time of application for service. Deposits, less any outstanding balance, will be
refunded or credited when the customer cancels service or has made timely payments on the service account for twelve (12) consecutive months.
F. On Call, Temporary Service Deposits: Deposits may be required for initiating, continuing or restoring any on call or temporary solid waste service,
rounded to the nearest dollar, for customers with limited or poor credit histories, or for those customers who have a poor payment history with the City
or any public utility. Deposits for on call or temporary services are listed in the solid waste schedule of fees. Deposits will be refunded or credited when
the customer cancels service, less any outstanding balance, or has made timely payments on the service account for twenty four (24) consecutive
months.
G. Suspension For Nonpayment: Once an account has been suspended for nonpayment of fees, the City shall not reinstate service until the account
holder has deposited with the Public Works Utility Billing Services a sum equal to three (3) months projected service charge for the account.
Additionally, the account holder will be responsible for paying an administrative fee.
H. Waiver Request: Residential customers may request a waiver of all or part of the rates, fees or charges imposed pursuant to this chapter for issues
such as military service, or extreme or unusual circumstances, or if they reside outside of the City for extended periods. Such request shall comply with
the waiver procedures outlined in section 10-4-5-3 of this chapter.
I. Charitable Organizations: Charitable organizations may be eligible for a waiver of temporary collection service and landfill fees and may request a waiver
of solid waste fees. (Ord. 21-17, 5-23-2017)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 475/503
10-4-5: ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT:
10-4-5-1: PUBLIC WORKS COMMISSION:
A. Advise City Council: Pursuant to the authority granted by title 2, chapter 6 of this Code, the Public Works Commission shall advise the City Council on
policy matters pertaining to the solid waste collection system.
B. Authority: The commission shall have the authority to:
1. Study, evaluate and maintain continuing review and appraisal of the effectiveness of the existing collection system, programs, policies and activities
to ensure that they are operated and maintained so as to meet the requirements of Federal, State and local bodies;
2. Review and recommend rates and fees for the use of, and the services rendered by, the solid waste collection system;
3. Review and make recommendations for changes or additions to this chapter regulating solid waste; and
4. Propose and promulgate rules, regulations, policies and guidelines for the control and management of solid waste collection systems within their
control. (Ord. 21-17, 5-23-2017)
10-4-5-2: DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC WORKS DEPARTMENT:
The Director shall have the authority and responsibility to:
A. Compliance: Ensure compliance with local, State and Federal rules and regulations regarding solid waste collection and disposal.
B. Guidelines, Policies: Establish guidelines and/or policies for the operation of the solid waste collection system. (Ord. 21-17, 5-23-2017)
10-4-5-3: WAIVERS:
A. Request: Any person may request a waiver of any provision of this chapter.
B. Submittal: A request for waiver must be submitted to the Public Works Department in writing and must provide specific reasons for which the waiver is
sought.
C. Response: The Public Works Department shall provide a written response within thirty (30) days of receipt of a request for waiver.
D. Appeal Of Decision: The decision of the Public Works Department may be appealed to the Public Works Commission pursuant to the requirements for
appeals found in section 10-4-5-4 of this chapter. (Ord. 21-17, 5-23-2017)
10-4-5-4: APPEALS:
A. Time Limit For Filing: Appeals from decisions of the Public Works Department must be filed within fifteen (15) days of receipt of the written decision
which is the basis of the appeal.
B. Submittal: Appeals must be in writing, stating the specific reasons for the appeal, and submitted to the Public Works Department for review by the
Public Works Commission at a regularly scheduled hearing.
C. Notice Of Hearing: Notice of the time and place at which the commission will review the appeal shall be provided to the applicant no later than five (5)
days prior to the scheduled hearing.
D. Appearance; Burden Of Proof: The person who filed the appeal may appear at the hearing and present evidence or testimony. They will bear the
burden of proving the decision of the Public Works Department was not reasonable.
E. Final Decision; Further Appeal: Final decisions of the Public Works Commission shall be in writing and may be appealed to the City Council by filing a
notice of appeal with the City Clerk within ten (10) days of receipt of the commission's finding. The decision of the City Council shall be final. (Ord. 21-
17, 5-23-2017)
10-4-5-5: DELINQUENT ACCOUNTS:
A. Late Payment Fee: Charges and fees must be received by the City prior to the due date shown on the invoice or billing statement. All charges and fees
not paid within or by the time periods established by the City shall be considered delinquent and such delinquent accounts shall be charged a late
payment fee of one and one-half percent (1.5%) per month to be added to the balance.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 476/503
B. Suspension Of Service: Solid waste service for delinquent accounts may be suspended until such time as all charges and fees are paid. This shall
include all solid waste service accounts, both commercial and residential, for a delinquent account holder.
C. New Service Prohibited: Any person who has a delinquent balance, including fees and interest, on any City held account, whether or not the account
has been closed or suspended, is prohibited from obtaining any new solid waste service, either commercial or residential.
D. Appeal: Persons who have had their solid waste service suspended may appeal the decision to the Public Works Commission as provided for in section
10-4-5-4 of this chapter. (Ord. 21-17, 5-23-2017)
10-4-5-6: ADMINISTRATIVE ENFORCEMENT:
The City may utilize administrative enforcement procedures with the intent to remedy violations of this chapter without the necessity of civil or criminal
enforcement proceedings. The administrative enforcement proceeding shall be initiated upon service by the City of written notice upon a person in
violation of this chapter, with a description of the violation and possible enforcement actions the City will utilize. Within twenty (20) days of receipt of a
written notice of violation, the customer shall respond to the City, advising of its position with respect to the allegation of violation, and thereafter, shall be
granted an opportunity to meet with the City to discuss the violation and establish a plan for correction of the violation. Submission of a response does not
relieve the customer of liability for any violations of this chapter. The City retains the right to take any necessary enforcement action without first issuing a
notice of violation, and the use of administrative actions shall not preclude the City from seeking any other remedies or penalties provided for in this
chapter. (Ord. 21-17, 5-23-2017)
10-4-5-7: PUBLIC NUISANCES:
A. Declaration Of Nuisance: In addition to any other remedies and penalties provided for by this chapter, the City may declare a nuisance where conditions
caused or permitted to exist in violation of this chapter are considered a threat to the environment, public health, safety and general welfare.
B. Abatement: Any condition deemed a nuisance may be summarily abated by the City or the City may take civil action to abate, enjoin or otherwise
compel the cessation of the nuisance.
C. Cost Of Abatement: The cost of abatement shall be borne by the owner of the property. The City shall also seek payment from the owner for all costs
associated with the abatement, including, but not limited to, investigation costs, administrative costs, costs of suit and reasonable attorney fees for all
administrative or civil proceedings for the nuisance violation.
D. Additional Remedies: The City retains the right, in addition to any other penalties and remedies provided herein, civil or criminal, to levy a special
assessment against property deemed a nuisance, as provided for in Idaho Code section 50-334. (Ord. 21-17, 5-23-2017)
10-4-5-8: VIOLATIONS CONSTITUTE MISDEMEANORS:
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Upon conviction, the penalty may be a fine or imprisonment as
provided in section 1-4-1 of this Code. Each day the violation is committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate violation of this chapter,
punishable as above. (Ord. 21-17, 5-23-2017; amd. 2019 Code)
10-4-5-9: CIVIL ACTIONS FOR VIOLATIONS:
In addition to, and exclusive of, any criminal penalty provided by this chapter, the City retains the right to utilize all civil remedies provided under State or
Federal law to recover any expenses incurred by the City due to a violation of this chapter. This shall include all costs associated with the collection and
disposal of solid waste undertaken by the City after a violation of this chapter, any Federal penalties levied against the City directly attributable to a
violation of this chapter, as well as any investigation or legal expenses incurred in enforcing this chapter. (Ord. 21-17, 5-23-2017)
10-4-5-10: NONEXCLUSIVITY OF REMEDIES:
All remedies and penalties under this chapter are in addition to and do not supersede or limit any and all other remedies and penalties, both civil and
criminal. The remedies provided for herein shall be cumulative and not exclusive. (Ord. 21-17, 5-23-2017)
Chapter 5
PRETREATMENT REGULATIONS
10-5-1: PURPOSE AND POLICY:
A. This chapter sets forth uniform requirements for users of the publicly owned treatment works (POTW) and enables the City to protect public health and
the environment in conformity with all applicable local, State and Federal laws, including the Clean Water Act (33 USC 1251 et seq.) and the general
pretreatment regulations (40 CFR part 403).
B. The objectives of this chapter are:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 477/503
1. To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the POTW which will interfere with the normal operation of the system or contaminate the resulting
Municipal sludge;
2. To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the POTW which do not receive adequate treatment and which will pass through the system into
receiving waters or the atmosphere or otherwise be incompatible with the system;
3. To improve the opportunity to recycle and reclaim wastewater and sludge from the POTW; and
4. To protect the public using and the personnel operating the POTW.
C. This chapter provides for the regulation of users of the POTW through the enforcement of administrative regulations. This chapter authorizes the
issuance of indirect discharge permits; authorizes monitoring, compliance and enforcement activities, including recovery of costs relating to industrial
user noncompliance; establishes administrative review procedures; requires user reporting; and provides for the setting of fees for the equitable
distribution of costs resulting from the program described herein. This chapter does not provide for the recovery of operations, maintenance or
replacement costs of the POTW or the costs associated with the construction of collection and treatment systems used by industrial users in proportion
to their use of the POTW, which are the subject of separate enactments. (1952 Code § 8-14-01)
10-5-2: PRETREATMENT PROGRAM ADMINISTRATOR:
Except as otherwise provided herein, the City Public Works Director or his/her designee shall administer, implement and enforce the provisions of this
chapter. (1952 Code § 8-14-02)
10-5-3: DEFINITIONS:
The use of the singular shall be construed to include the plural and the plural shall include the singular as indicated by the context of its use.
The following words and phrases used in this chapter shall have the following meanings unless a different meaning clearly appears from the context:
ACT: The Clean Water Act (33 USC 1251 et seq.), as amended.
APPLICABLE PRETREATMENT STANDARDS: For any specified pollutant, City prohibited discharge standards, City specific limitations on discharge,
State of Idaho pretreatment standards, or the Federal categorical pretreatment standards (when effective), whichever standard is appropriate or most
stringent.
APPROVAL AUTHORITY: The Director in an NPDES State with an approved State pretreatment program and the appropriate Regional Administrator in a
non-NPDES State or NPDES State without an approved State pretreatment program.
AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE OF THE USER: A. If the user is a corporation:
1. The president, secretary, treasurer or a vice president of the corporation in charge of a principal business function, or any other person who
performs similar policy or decision making functions for the corporation; or
2. The manager of one or more manufacturing, production or operating facilities, provided, the manager is authorized to make management
decisions which govern the operation of the regulated facility, including having the explicit or implicit duty of making major capital investment
recommendations, and initiate and direct other comprehensive measures to assure long term environmental compliance with environmental laws
and regulations; can ensure that the necessary systems are established or actions taken to gather complete and accurate information for control
mechanism requirements; and where authority to sign documents has been assigned or delegated to the manager in accordance with corporate
procedures;
B. If the user is a partnership or sole proprietorship: a general partner or proprietor, respectively;
C. If the user is a Federal, State or local governmental facility: the ranking elected official, or a director or highest official appointed or designated to
oversee the operation and performance of the activities of the government facility, or his/her designee;
D. The individuals described in subsections A through C of this definition may designate another authorized representative if the authorization is in
writing, the authorization specifies the individual or position responsible for the overall operation of the facility from which the discharge originates, or
a position of equivalent responsibility, or having overall responsibility for environmental matters for the company, and the written authorization is
submitted to the City.
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMPs): Schedules of activities, prohibitions of practices, maintenance procedures and other management practices
to implement the prohibitions in this chapter. BMPs also include treatment requirements, operating procedures and practices to control plant site runoff,
spillage or leaks, sludge or waste disposal, or drainage from raw materials storage.
BYPASS: The intentional diversion of wastestreams from any portion of a user's treatment facility.
CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARD: Any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by the U.S. EPA in accordance with
sections 307(b) and (c) of the Act (33 USC 1317) which apply to a specific category of users and which appear in the appropriate subparts of 40 CFR
chapter I, subchapter N.
CATEGORICAL USER: A user regulated by one or more of EPA's categorical pretreatment standards.
CITY: The City of Boise City, the Boise City Council, an official of Boise City, the Boise City sewer system, the Boise City Public Works Director or his or
her duly authorized designee, representative or agent, or the POTW.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 478/503
COMPOSITE SAMPLE: The sample resulting from the combination of individual wastewater samples taken at selected intervals based on an increment of
either flow or time.
COOLING WATER/NONCONTACT COOLING WATER: Water used for cooling which does not come into direct contact with any raw material, intermediate
product, waste product or finished product. Cooling water may be generated from any use, such as air conditioning, heat exchangers, cooling or
refrigeration to which the only pollutant added is heat.
DOMESTIC USER (RESIDENTIAL USER): Any person who contributes, causes or allows the contribution of wastewater into the POTW that is of a similar
volume and/or chemical makeup as that of a residential dwelling unit.
EFFLUENT LIMITATION: Any restriction imposed by the City on quantities, discharge rates and mass or concentration of pollutants that are discharged by
the users into the POTW. Also referred to as local limit.
EXISTING SOURCE: For a categorical industrial user, an existing source is any source of discharge, the construction or operation of which commenced
prior to the publication by EPA of proposed categorical pretreatment standards, which will be applicable to such source if the standard is thereafter
promulgated in accordance with section 307 of the Act.
EXISTING USER: For noncategorical users, an existing user is defined as any user that is discharging wastewater prior to the effective date hereof.
GRAB SAMPLE: A sample which is taken from a wastestream on a one-time basis without regard to the flow in the wastestream and without consideration
of time.
INDIRECT DISCHARGE: The discharge or the introduction of nondomestic pollutants into the POTW from a source regulated under section 307(b), (c) or
(d) of the Act.
INDIRECT DISCHARGE PERMIT (INDUSTRIAL WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT, DISCHARGE PERMIT): An authorization or equivalent control
document issued by the City to users discharging wastewater to the POTW. The permit may contain appropriate pretreatment standards and requirements
as set forth in this chapter.
INDUSTRIAL USER OR USER: A source of indirect discharge of effluent into the POTW by means of pipes, conduits, pumping stations, force mains,
constructed drainage ditches, surface water intercepting ditches, and all constructed devices and appliances appurtenant thereto. This term includes
Federal, State and local facilities as part of the regulated community, and shall not include "domestic user", as defined in this section.
INDUSTRIAL WASTE: Solid, liquid or gaseous waste resulting from any industrial, manufacturing, trade or business process, or from the development,
recovery or processing of natural resources.
INTERFERENCE: A discharge which alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, either: a) inhibits or disrupts the POTW,
its treatment processes or operations; b) inhibits or disrupts sludge processes, use or disposal; or c) is the cause of a violation of the discharge permit
(including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation) or of the prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal in compliance with any of the
following statutory/regulatory provisions or permits issued thereunder (or more stringent State or local regulations): section 405 of the Clean Water Act, the
Solid Waste Disposal Act (SWDA), including title II, more commonly referred to as the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA), and including
State regulations contained in any State sludge management plan prepared pursuant to subtitle D of the SWDA, the Clean Air Act and the Toxic
Substances Control Act.
MAXIMUM ALLOWABLE INDUSTRIAL LOADING (MAIL): The estimated maximum loading of a pollutant that can be received at the POTW headworks
from all permitted industrial users and other controlled sources without causing pass through or interference.
MINOR INDUSTRIAL USER (MIU): A nonresidential user, with an indirect discharge to the POTW, that does not meet the criteria of a significant industrial
user, but whose operation and discharge may warrant inspection and/or issuance of a discharge permit to ensure compliance with discharge prohibitions,
pretreatment facility operation, spill prevention measures, required BMPs and pollution prevention assistance.
NPDES: National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System Permit Program as administered by the U.S. EPA or the State.
NEW SOURCE: A. Any building, structure, facility or installation from which there is or may be a discharge of pollutants, the construction of which
commenced after the publication of proposed pretreatment standards under section 307(c) of the Act, which will be applicable to such source if such
standards are thereafter promulgated in accordance with that section; provided, that:
1. The building, structure, facility or installation is constructed at a site at which no other source is located; or
2. The building, structure, facility or installation totally replaces the process or production equipment that causes the discharge of pollutants at an
existing source; or
3. The building, structure, facility or installation is constructed for production or wastewater generating processes which are substantially independent
of an existing source at the same site. Substantial independence shall be determined by factors, such as the extent to which the new facility is
integrated with the existing plant, and the extent to which the new facility is engaged in the same general type of activity as the existing source.
B. Construction on a site at which an existing source is located results in a modification rather than a new source if the construction does not create a
new building, structure, facility or installation meeting the criteria of subsection A2 or A3 of this definition, but otherwise alters, replaces or adds to
existing process or production equipment.
C. For purposes of this definition, construction of a new source is deemed to commence when:
1. The owner or operator of the facility has entered into a binding contractual obligation for the purchase of facilities or equipment which are intended
to be used in its operation within a reasonable time. Options to purchase or contracts which can be terminated or modified without substantial loss,
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 479/503
and contracts for feasibility, engineering and design studies do not constitute a contractual obligation herein; or when
2. The following are begun as part of a continuous on site construction:
a. Any placement, assembly or installation of facilities or equipment; or
b. Significant site preparation work, including clearing, excavation or removal of existing buildings, structures or facilities, which is necessary for
the placement, assembly or installation of new source facilities or equipment.
NEW USER (NEW DISCHARGER): A new user is not a new source and is defined as a user that applies to the City for a new building permit or any
person or business that occupies an existing building and plans to discharge wastewater to the City collection system after the effective date hereof.
OTHER WASTES: Decayed wood, sawdust, shavings, bark, lime, refuse, ashes, garbage, offal, oil, tar, chemicals and all other substances except sewage
and industrial wastes.
POTW (PUBLICLY OWNED TREATMENT WORKS): Any sewage treatment works owned and operated by the City and the sewers and conveyance or
treatment appurtenances discharging thereto, whether or not owned by the City. The term also means Boise City since the U.S. Environmental Protection
Agency issues the NPDES permits to Boise City.
PASS THROUGH: The occurrence of an indirect discharge which exits the POTW into waters of the United States in quantities or concentrations which,
alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, is a cause of a violation of any requirement of the POTW's NPDES permit
(including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation).
pH: A measure of the acidity or alkalinity of a substance, expressed in standard units.
POLLUTANT: Any substance discharged into a POTW or its collection system which is prohibited or limited by sections 10-5-4 through 10-5-7 and 10-5-9
of this chapter. This term includes, but is not limited to, dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions,
chemical wastes, biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discarded equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt and industrial, Municipal and
agricultural wastes.
PRETREATMENT: The reduction of the amounts of pollutants, the elimination of pollutants or the alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in
wastewater to a less harmful state prior to or in lieu of discharging or otherwise introducing such pollutants into a POTW.
PRETREATMENT REQUIREMENT: Any substantive or procedural requirement related to pretreatment, including categorical pretreatment standards
and/or BMPs, imposed on an industrial user.
PRETREATMENT STANDARDS OR STANDARDS: Prohibited discharge standards, categorical pretreatment standards, local limits and/or BMPs
established by the City.
PROHIBITED DISCHARGES (PROHIBITED DISCHARGE STANDARDS): Absolute prohibitions against the discharge of certain substances. These
prohibitions appear in sections 10-5-4 and 10-5-9 of this chapter.
SEPTIC TANK WASTE (SEPTAGE): Any sewage from holding tanks, such as vessels, chemical toilets, campers, trailers and septic tanks.
SEVERE PROPERTY DAMAGE: Substantial physical damage to property, damage to the treatment facilities which causes them to become inoperable, or
substantial and permanent loss of natural resources which can reasonably be expected to occur in the absence of a bypass. Severe property damage
does not mean economic loss caused by delays in production.
SEWAGE: Water carried human wastes, or a combination of water carried wastes from residences, business buildings, institutions and industrial
establishments.
SEWER: Any pipe, conduit, ditch or other device used to collect and transport sewage from the generating source.
SHALL: Mandatory.
SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER (SIU): A. Any industrial user of the POTW that:
1. Is subject to categorical pretreatment standards under 40 CFR 403.6 and 40 CFR chapter I, subchapter N; or
2. Any other industrial user that: discharges an average of twenty five thousand (25,000) gpd or more of process wastewater to the POTW (excluding
sanitary, noncontact cooling and boiler blowdown wastewater); or contributes a process wastestream which makes up five percent (5%) or more of
the average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity to the treatment facility receiving the waste; or is designated as such by the City as defined
in 40 CFR 403.3(f), on the basis that the industrial user has a reasonable potential, either singly or in combination with other contributing
industries, for adversely affecting the POTW's wastewater collection and treatment system, the quality of sludge, the system's effluent quality, or
air emissions generated by the system or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirements including BMPs and control of slug discharges.
B. Upon the subsequent finding that a user, which had met the above criteria, no longer has reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW's
operation or for violating any applicable pretreatment standard or requirement, the City may at any time, on its own initiative or in response to a
written request from the user and in accordance with procedures in 40 CFR 403.8(f)(6), determine that such user should not be considered a
significant industrial user.
C. Upon a finding that a significant industrial user meets the criteria and all conditions in 40 CFR 403.3 (v)(2), the City may designate the user a
nonsignificant categorical industrial user.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 480/503
SIGNIFICANT NONCOMPLIANCE: A. Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined here as those in which sixty six percent (66%) or more of
all of the measurements taken for the same pollutant parameter during a six (6) month period exceed (by any magnitude) a numeric pretreatment standard
or requirement, including instantaneous limits, as defined or described in this chapter;
B. Technical review criteria (TRC) violations, defined here as those in which thirty three percent (33%) or more of wastewater measurements taken for
the same pollutant parameter during a six (6) month period equals or exceeds the product of the numeric pretreatment standard or requirement,
including instantaneous limits, as defined or described in this chapter multiplied by the applicable factor (1.4 for BOD, TSS, fats, oil and grease, and
1.2 for all other pollutants except pH);
C. Any other violation of a pretreatment standard or requirement, including instantaneous limits or narrative standard, that the City believes has caused,
alone or in combination with other discharges, interference, pass through or endangered the health and safety of City personnel or the general
public;
D. Any discharge of pollutants that has caused imminent endangerment to the public or to the environment, or has resulted in the City's exercise of its
emergency authority to halt or prevent such a discharge;
E. Failure to meet, within ninety (90) days of the scheduled date, a compliance schedule milestone contained in an indirect discharge permit or
enforcement order for starting construction, completing construction or attaining final compliance;
F. Failure to provide within forty five (45) days after the due date, any required reports, including baseline monitoring reports, reports on compliance
with categorical pretreatment standard deadlines, periodic self-monitoring reports, and reports on compliance with compliance schedules;
G. Failure to accurately report noncompliance; or
H. Any other violations, including a violation of BMPs, which the City determines will adversely affect the operation or implementation of the City
Pretreatment Program.
SLUG LOAD: Any discharge at a flow rate or concentration which could cause a violation of the discharge standards in sections 10-5-4 through 10-5-7 of
this chapter, or any discharge of a nonroutine, episodic nature, including, but not limited to, an accidental spill or a noncustomary batch discharge.
STORMWATER: Any flow occurring during or following any form of natural precipitation, and resulting from such precipitation, including snowmelt.
TOXIC POLLUTANTS: Pollutants or combination of pollutants listed as toxic in regulations promulgated by the Administrator of the Environmental
Protection Agency under section 307 (33 USC 1317) of the Act.
TREATMENT PLANT OR WASTEWATER TREATMENT PLANT: That portion of the POTW which is designed to provide treatment of Municipal sewage
and industrial waste.
UPSET: An exceptional incident in which a user unintentionally and temporarily is in a state of noncompliance with the standards set forth in sections 10-5-
4 through 10-5-7 and 10-5-9 of this chapter, due to factors beyond the reasonable control of the user and excluding noncompliance to the extent caused
by operational error, improperly designed treatment facilities, inadequate treatment facilities, lack of preventive maintenance or careless or improper
operation thereof.
USER: See definition of industrial user.
WASTEWATER: Industrial waste, or sewage or any other waste, including that which may be combined with any groundwater, surface water or
stormwater, that may be discharged to the POTW. (Ord. 25-14, 7-8-2014)
10-5-3-1: ABBREVIATIONS:
The following abbreviations shall have the designated meanings:
ASPP Accidental Spill Prevention Plan
BMP Best Management Practices
BOD Biochemical oxygen demand
CFR Code of Federal Regulations
EPA U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
gpd Gallons per day
IDP Indirect discharge permit
IU Industrial user
LEL Lower explosive limit
NAICS North American Industrial Classification System
NPDES National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 481/503
POTW Publicly owned treatment works
RCRA Resource Conservation and Recovery Act
SIC Standard Industrial Classification
SWDA Solid Waste Disposal Act (42 USC 6901 et seq.)
TSS Total suspended solids
USC United States Code
(Ord. 25-14, 7-8-2014)
10-5-4: PROHIBITED DISCHARGE STANDARDS:
10-5-4-1: GENERAL PROHIBITIONS:
No user shall introduce or cause to be introduced into the POTW any pollutant or wastewater which causes pass through or interference. These general
prohibitions apply to all users of the POTW, whether or not they are subject to categorical pretreatment standards or any other Federal, State or local
pretreatment standards or requirements. (1952 Code § 8-14-04.01)
10-5-4-2: SPECIFIC DISCHARGE PROHIBITIONS:
A. Substances Prohibited: No user shall contribute or cause to be discharged, directly or indirectly, any of the following described substances into the
POTW:
1. Any wastewater having a pH less than 5 or having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment or
personnel of the system.
2. Any toxic and nontoxic pollutants, including oxygen demanding pollutants (BOD, etc.) in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction, to injure or
interfere with any wastewater treatment process, to constitute a hazard to humans or animals or to exceed the limitations set forth in categorical
pretreatment standards.
3. Any liquids, solids or gases which by reason of their nature or quantity are, or may be, sufficient, either alone or by interaction with other substances,
to cause fire or explosion or be injurious in another way to the POTW or to the operation of the POTW. At no time shall two (2) successive readings
on an explosion hazard meter, at the point of discharge into the system (or at any point in the system), be more than five percent (5%), nor any single
reading over ten percent (10%) of the lower explosive limit (LEL) of the meter. Prohibited materials include, but are not limited to, gasoline, kerosene,
naphtha, benzene, toluene, xylene, ethers, alcohols, ketones, aldehydes, peroxides, chlorates, perchlorates, bromates, carbides, hydrides, sulfides
and any other substances which the City deems to be a fire hazard or a hazard to the system.
4. Pollutants which create a fire or explosive hazard in the POTW, including, but not limited to, wastestreams with a closed cup flashpoint of less than
one hundred forty degrees Fahrenheit (140°F) (60°C) using the test methods specified in 40 CFR 261.21.
5. Any solid or viscous substances which will or may cause obstruction to the flow in a sewer or other interference with the operation of the wastewater
system, such as, but not limited to: grease, garbage with particles greater than one-half inch (1/2") in any dimension, animal guts or tissues, paunch
manure, bones, hair, hides or fleshings, entrails, whole blood, feathers, ashes, cinders, sand, spent lime stone or marble dust, metal glass, straw,
shavings, grass clippings, rags, spent grains, spent hops, wastepaper, wood, plastics, gas, tar, asphalt residues, and residues from refining, or
processing of fuel or lubricating oil, mud or glass grinding or polishing wastes.
6. Petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oil, or products of mineral oil origin, in amounts that will cause interference or pass through.
7. Any noxious or malodorous liquid, gases or solids which either singly or by interaction are capable of creating a public nuisance or hazard to life or
are sufficient to prevent entry into the sewers for their maintenance and repair.
8. Pollutants which result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors or fumes within the POTW in a quantity that may cause acute worker health and safety
problems.
9. Any substance which may cause the POTW effluent or treatment residues, sludges or scums to be unsuitable for reclamation and reuse, or to
interfere with the reclamation process. In no case shall a substance discharged to the POTW cause the POTW to be in noncompliance with sludge
use or disposal criteria, guidelines or regulations developed under section 405 of the Act; any criteria, guidelines or regulations affecting sludge use
or disposal developed pursuant to the Solid Waste Disposal Act, the Clean Air Act, the Toxic Substances Control Act or State standards applicable to
the sludge management method being used.
10. Any substance which will cause the POTW to violate its NPDES and/or other disposal system permits.
11. Any substance with objectionable color not removed in the treatment process, such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning
solutions.
12. Any wastewater having a temperature which will inhibit biological activity in the POTW treatment plant resulting in interference; but in no case,
wastewater with a temperature at the introduction into the POTW treatment plant which exceeds one hundred four degrees Fahrenheit (104°F)
(40°C). If, in the opinion of the City, lower temperatures of such wastes could harm either the sewers, sewage treatment process or equipment; have
an adverse effect on the receiving streams or otherwise endanger life, health or property; or constitute a nuisance, the City may prohibit such
discharges.
13. Any wastewater at a flow rate and/or pollutant discharge rate which is excessive over a relatively short time period so that there is a treatment
process upset and subsequent loss of treatment efficiency.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 482/503
14. Any wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or concentration as exceed limits established by the City in
compliance with applicable State or Federal regulations.
15. Any wastewater which causes a hazard to human life or creates a public nuisance.
B. Processing Or Storing Prohibited Substances: Pollutants, substances or wastewater prohibited by this chapter shall not be processed or stored in such
a manner that could result in their discharge to the POTW. (1952 Code § 8-14-04.02)
10-5-4-3: STORM DRAINAGE AND GROUNDWATER:
Stormwater, groundwater, rain water, street drainage, subsurface drainage or yard drainage shall not be discharged through direct or indirect connections
to the wastewater collection system unless specifically authorized by the City. The City may approve the discharge of such water only when no reasonable
alternative method of disposal and/or treatment is available. If authorization is granted for the discharge of such waters into the sewer, an indirect
discharge permit may be issued. The user shall pay all applicable charges and fees and meet such other conditions as required by the City. (1952 Code
§ 8-14-04.03)
10-5-4-4: UNPOLLUTED WATER:
Unpolluted water in excess of two thousand (2,000) gallons per day, including, but not limited to, cooling water, process water or blowdown from cooling
towers or evaporative coolers shall not be discharged through direct or indirect connection to the sewer unless specifically authorized by the City. The City
may approve the discharge of such water only when no reasonable alternative method of disposal and/or treatment is available. If authorization is granted
for the discharge of such waters into the sewer, an indirect discharge permit may be issued. The user shall pay all applicable charges and fees and meet
such other conditions as required by the City. (1952 Code § 8-14-04.04)
10-5-4-5: HAZARDOUS WASTE:
Any substance that exhibits a characteristic of a hazardous waste or is listed as a hazardous waste pursuant to 40 CFR 261, shall not be discharged
through direct or indirect connections to the wastewater collection system unless a permit is issued by the City. The City may approve the discharge of
such wastes only if the user has complied with all State and Federal hazardous waste management regulations; no reasonable alternative method of
disposal and/or treatment is available; and the discharge will not cause upset, pass through or interference, or otherwise endanger life, health or property.
If a permit is granted for the discharge of such wastes, the user shall pay the applicable charges and fees and meet such other conditions as required by
the City. (1952 Code § 8-14-04.05)
10-5-4-6: LIMITATIONS ON POINT OF DISCHARGE:
No person shall discharge any substances directly into a manhole or other opening into the sewer other than through an approved building sewer
connection unless specifically authorized by the City. If authorization is granted, an indirect discharge permit may be issued. The user shall pay all
applicable charges and fees and meet such other conditions as required by the City. (1952 Code § 8-14-04.06)
10-5-4-7: SEPTAGE AND VEHICLE TRANSPORTED WASTE:
A. Authorization Required For Discharge: No vehicle transported septage or other waste shall be discharged through direct or indirect connections to the
sewer unless specifically authorized by the City. If authorization is granted for the discharge of such wastes into the sewer, an indirect discharge permit
may be issued. The user shall pay all applicable charges and fees and meet such other conditions as required by the City.
B. RV Sanitary Waste Disposal Stations: Recreational vehicle sanitary waste disposal stations available to the public shall be subject to the provisions of
this chapter. Issuance of an indirect discharge permit and payment of appropriate fees may be required. Recreational vehicle septage waste disposal
through an approved building sewer connection at a private residence is permitted.
C. Additional Requirements: The City, in its discretion, may impose additional requirements, including training, licensing and issuance of a discharge
control permit for each waste hauler providing services to IUs required to install and maintain pretreatment facilities for pollutants prohibited by this
chapter. (Ord. 25-14, 7-8-2014)
10-5-4-8: SPECIAL CLEANUP PROJECTS:
Wastewater generated from, including, but not limited to, the cleanup of spills, leaking underground storage tanks, monitoring wells or other similar
sources shall not be discharged through direct or indirect connections to the sewer unless an indirect discharge permit is issued by the City. The City may
approve the discharge of such wastewater only when no reasonable alternative method of disposal and/or treatment is available. If a permit is granted for
the discharge of such wastewaters into the sewer, the user shall pay the applicable charges and fees and meet such other conditions as required by the
City. Each temporary discharge permit must be reviewed and reissued if the user wishes to discharge past the original expiration date. (1952 Code § 8-14-
04.08)
10-5-5: CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARDS:
Categorical pretreatment standards as amended and promulgated by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) pursuant to the Act and found in
the appropriate parts of 40 CFR chapter I, subchapter N, are hereby incorporated and shall be enforceable by this chapter. (1952 Code § 8-14-05)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 483/503
10-5-6: STATE REQUIREMENTS:
State requirements and limitations on discharges to the POTW shall be met by all users that are subject to such standards in any instance in which they
are more stringent than Federal requirements and limitations, or those in this chapter or any other applicable ordinance. (1952 Code § 8-14-06)
10-5-7: LOCAL LIMITS:
The City shall, from time to time, establish quantitative or other limitations where necessary to protect against pass through and interference and to provide
for protection of the POTW, worker safety, public health or environment.
A. Concentrations Specified: In addition to categorical pretreatment standards referenced in section 10-5-5 of this chapter, no user shall discharge
wastewater containing concentrations (and/or mass limitations) of substances in excess of the following:
Ammonia [R] mg/L
Arsenic [R] mg/L
BOD5 [R] mg/L
Cadmium [R] mg/L
Chromium [R] mg/L
Copper [R] mg/L
Cyanide [R] mg/L
Lead [R] mg/L
Mercury 0.0007 mg/L
Molybdenum [R] mg/L
Nickel [R] mg/L
Nitrogen (total) [R] mg/L
Phosphorus [R] mg/L
Selenium [R] mg/L
Silver [R] mg/L
Zinc [R] mg/L
Total oil and/or grease [R] mg/L
Total phenols [R] mg/L
Total suspended solids [R] mg/L
[R] - Reserved for effluent limitation at a later date.
B. Industry Specific BMPs: Where possible and appropriate, the City may establish and implement industry specific BMPs (Best Management Practices) in
conjunction with or in lieu of numerical local limits. Such BMPs shall be considered pretreatment standards and are fully enforceable under this chapter.
C. More Stringent Limit Or Standard: Based upon assessment of need and on a user specific basis, the City may incorporate pollutant specific BMPs or
concentration or mass limits into indirect discharge permits. Whenever a user is subject to both a categorical pretreatment standard and a local limit for
a given pollutant, the more stringent limit or pretreatment standard shall apply. (Ord. 25-14, 7-8-2014)
10-5-8: SPECIAL AGREEMENTS:
A. Authorized: The City reserves the right to enter into special agreements with users setting out special terms under which they may discharge to the
POTW. In no case will a special agreement waive compliance with a categorical pretreatment standard or Federal pretreatment requirement.
B. Adjustment Or Variance: However, the user may request a net gross adjustment to a categorical standard in accordance with 40 CFR 403.15. They may
also request a variance from the categorical pretreatment standard from the approval authority in accordance with 40 CFR 403.13. (1952 Code § 8-14-
08)
10-5-9: DILUTION:
No user shall increase the use of potable or process water or, in any other way, attempt to dilute a discharge as a partial or complete substitute for
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 484/503
adequate treatment to achieve compliance with the local limits or the categorical pretreatment standards. The City may impose mass limitations on users
that are using dilution to meet the pretreatment standards or requirements of this chapter, or in other cases where the imposition of mass limitations is
deemed appropriate by the City. (1952 Code § 8-14-09)
10-5-10: DEADLINE FOR COMPLIANCE WITH APPLICABLE PRETREATMENT REQUIREMENTS:
A. Compliance by existing sources covered by categorical pretreatment standards shall be within three (3) years of the date the standard is effective,
unless a shorter compliance time is specified in the appropriate standard. The City shall establish a final compliance deadline date for any existing user
not covered by categorical pretreatment standards or for any categorical user when local limits for said user are more restrictive than EPA's categorical
pretreatment standards. New source dischargers and new users are required to comply with applicable pretreatment standards within the shortest
feasible time (not to exceed 90 days from the beginning of discharge). New sources and new users shall install and have in operating condition, and
shall start up, all pollution control equipment required to meet applicable pretreatment standards before beginning to discharge.
B. Any indirect discharge permit issued to a categorical user shall not contain a compliance date beyond any deadline date established in EPA's
categorical pretreatment standards. Any other existing user or a categorical user that must comply with a more stringent local limit, and is in
noncompliance with any local limits, shall be provided with a compliance schedule placed in an indirect discharge permit to ensure compliance within
the shortest time feasible. (1952 Code § 8-14-10)
10-5-11: ACCIDENTAL DISCHARGES:
A. Protection Required: Each user shall provide protection from the accidental discharge of prohibited or regulated materials or substances established by
this chapter. Where deemed necessary by the City, facilities to prevent accidental discharge of prohibited materials shall be provided and maintained at
the user's cost and expense. Significant industrial users are required to notify the City immediately of any changes at its facility affecting potential for a
slug load discharge. When required, an accidental spill prevention plan (ASPP) showing facilities and operating procedures to provide this protection
shall be submitted to the City for review and approval before construction of the facility or implementation of procedures. Any user required to develop
and implement an ASPP shall submit a plan which addresses, at a minimum, the following elements:
1. Description of discharge practices, including nonroutine batch discharges;
2. Description of stored chemicals;
3. Procedures for immediately notifying the POTW of any accidental or slug discharge. Such notification must also be given for any discharge which
would violate any of the standards in sections 10-5-4 through 10-5-7 and 10-5-9 of this chapter. Accidental spill or slug load notification instructions
shall be posted in conspicuous places on the user's premises advising employees whom to call; and
4. Procedures to prevent adverse impact from any accidental or slug discharge. Such procedures include, but are not limited to, inspection and
maintenance of storage areas, handling and transfer of materials, loading and unloading operations, control of plant site runoff, worker training,
building of containment structures or equipment, measures for containing toxic pollutants (including solvents) and/or measures and equipment for
emergency response.
B. Accidental Spill Prevention Plan Required: Each existing user shall complete and submit its ASPP within sixty (60) days after notification by the City.
Each user shall implement its ASPP as submitted after such ASPP has been reviewed and approved by the City. Review and approval of such plans
and operating procedures by the City shall not relieve the user from the responsibility to modify its facility as necessary to meet the requirements of this
chapter.
C. Notification Of Accident: Users shall notify the City wastewater treatment plant immediately upon the occurrence of a slug load or accidental discharge
of substances prohibited by this chapter. The notification shall include location of discharge, date and time thereof, type of waste, concentration and
volume, and corrective actions. Within five (5) days following an accidental discharge, the user shall submit to the City a detailed written report
describing the cause of the discharge and the measures to be taken by the user to prevent similar future occurrences. Any user that discharges a slug
load of prohibited materials shall be liable for any expense, loss or damage to the POTW, in addition to the amount of any fines imposed on the City on
account thereof under State or Federal law. (1952 Code § 8-14-11)
10-5-12: PRETREATMENT FACILITIES:
10-5-12-1: GENERAL REQUIREMENTS:
Users shall provide necessary wastewater pretreatment as required to comply with this chapter and shall achieve compliance with all applicable
pretreatment standards within the time limitations as specified by appropriate statutes, regulations and ordinances. Any facilities required to pretreat
wastewater to a level acceptable to the City shall be provided, properly operated and maintained at the user's expense. Detailed plans showing the
pretreatment facilities shall be submitted to the City for review and must be acceptable to the City before construction of the facility. The review of such
plans shall in no way relieve the discharger from the responsibility of modifying its facility or operations as necessary to produce an effluent acceptable to
the City under the provisions of this chapter. Within a reasonable time after the completion of the wastewater pretreatment facility, the user shall furnish its
operations and maintenance procedures for the City to review. Any subsequent significant changes in the pretreatment facilities or method of operation
shall be reported to and be accepted by the City prior to the user's initiation of the changes. (1952 Code § 8-14-12.01)
10-5-12-2: ADDITIONAL PRETREATMENT MEASURES:
Whenever deemed necessary, the Pretreatment Coordinator may require users to restrict their discharge during peak flow periods, designate that certain
wastewaters be discharged only into specific sewers, relocate and/or consolidate points of discharge, separate sewage wastestreams from industrial
wastestreams, and such other conditions as may be necessary to protect the POTW, personnel operating the POTW, the public health or to determine the
user's compliance with the requirements of this chapter. (1952 Code § 8-14-12.02)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 485/503
10-5-12-3: INTERCEPTORS:
Suitable and adequate grease and oil or sand interceptors shall be provided for the proper handling of wastewater containing grease, oil, sand or other
substances prohibited by this chapter; except that such interceptors shall not be required for residential users. All interception units shall be of a type and
capacity approved by the City and shall be so located to be easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. Such interceptors shall be provided, inspected,
cleaned regularly in accordance with established BMPs, and maintained in proper operating condition by the user and at the user's expense. The
introduction of chemical, bacterial, enzyme or any other additive into an interceptor, directly or indirectly, that causes interference with the normal operation
of the unit or causes pass through of prohibited substances is prohibited. Interceptor maintenance and cleaning records shall be maintained by the user
and made available to pretreatment inspectors for review upon request. (1952 Code § 8-14-12.03)
10-5-13: FEES:
A. General Charges And Fees: Users of the POTW shall pay reasonable charges and fees to compensate the City for its costs associated with permitting,
monitoring, inspection, surveillance and laboratory analyses required by the Federal pretreatment program and this chapter. Sewer system connection
and service charges and fees are established by a separate ordinance. (1952 Code § 8-14-13.01)
B. Charges And Fees Related To Noncompliance: If costs are incurred beyond normal operation through involvement with noncomplying users, the City
will charge the noncomplying user such costs and fees as provided for in section 10-5-24-3 of this chapter. (1952 Code § 8-14-13.02)
10-5-14: WASTEWATER DISCHARGES:
It shall be unlawful to discharge sewage, industrial wastes or other wastes to any sewer within the jurisdiction of the City, and/or to the POTW, without
having first complied with the terms of this chapter, or without having first obtained the City approval of a compliance schedule submitted by the user.
(1952 Code § 8-14-14)
10-5-15: WASTEWATER DISCHARGE DATA DISCLOSURE:
10-5-15-1: GENERAL DISCLOSURE:
All users proposing to connect to or to discharge sewage, industrial wastes and other wastes to the POTW shall disclose and submit all relevant
information as requested by the City. (1952 Code § 8-14-15.01)
10-5-15-2: DISCLOSURE FORMS:
A. Requirements; Time Limits: Significant industrial users shall complete and file with the City a data disclosure form prescribed by the City. Existing
sources shall file data disclosure forms within one hundred eighty (180) days of promulgation of an applicable categorical pretreatment standard and
ninety (90) days upon notification by the City. New sources shall file a data disclosure form at least ninety (90) days prior to commencement of their
discharge to the POTW. Certain new and existing users may be required to submit data disclosure forms as prescribed herein. This data disclosure
form satisfies the requirement of the user baseline monitoring report as described in 40 CFR 403.12(b). The disclosure to be made by the user shall be
made on written forms provided by the City and shall include:
1. Disclosure of name, address and location of the facility, including the name of the operator and owner.
2. Disclosure of industrial classification (NAICS) number according to the most current edition of the North American Industrial Classification System
Manual as published by the United States Office of Management and Budget.
3. Identification of the pretreatment standards applicable to each regulated process.
4. Disclosure of wastewater constituents and characteristics. The user shall submit the results of sampling and analysis identifying the nature and
concentration (daily maximum and average), or mass where appropriate, of regulated pollutants in the discharge from each regulated process.
Although the City may specify additional or more frequent samples, a minimum of one sample, representative of daily operations, is required to
compile the data necessary to comply with this section. Sampling and analyses shall be performed in accordance with section 10-5-20 of this
chapter.
5. Disclosure of time and duration of discharges, including copies of flow charts.
6. Disclosure of average daily and maximum daily wastewater flow rates, in gallons per day, including any daily, monthly or seasonal variations, of all
regulated or manufacturing process streams and other streams as necessary to allow use of the combined wastestream formula of 40 CFR 403.6(e).
All flows shall be measured unless other verifiable techniques are approved by the City due to cost or infeasibility.
7. Disclosure of site plans, floor plans, plumbing plans and details to show all sewers, sewer connections, inspection manholes, sampling chambers
and appurtenances by size and location.
8. Description of activities, facilities and plant processes on the premises, including all materials which are or may be discharged to the sewers or
works of the City and a brief description of the nature, average rate of production and standard industrial classification of the operations.
9. A statement regarding whether or not compliance is being achieved with this chapter on a consistent basis and if not, whether additional
pretreatment is required for the user to comply with this chapter. The statement on compliance shall be certified to by a qualified professional and
reviewed and signed by an authorized representative of the user.
10. Where additional pretreatment and/or operation and maintenance activities will be required to comply with this chapter, including categorical
standards, the user shall provide a compliance schedule consisting of a declaration of the shortest schedule by which the user will provide such
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 486/503
additional pretreatment and/or implementation of additional operational and maintenance activities. A compliance schedule pursuant to this section
must meet the requirements outlined in section 10-5-16 of this chapter.
11. All data disclosure forms shall be signed by an authorized representative of the user, as defined in section 10-5-3 of this chapter, and when required
by the City, a registered professional engineer.
12. Each product produced by type, amount, process or processes and rate of production.
13. Type and amount of raw materials used, including chemicals used in process which may be discharged to sanitary system (average daily and
maximum daily).
14. List of environmental control permits held by or for the facility.
B. Acceptance Or Rejection: The City will evaluate the completeness of the data disclosure form furnished by the user and may require additional
information. The City may require inspection and sampling manholes and/or flow measuring or recording and sampling equipment to assure
compliance with this chapter. Within thirty (30) days, after full evaluation and acceptance of the data furnished, the City shall notify the user of the City's
acceptance through the issuance of an indirect discharge permit, or rejection thereof. Incomplete or inaccurate applications will not be processed and
will be promptly returned to the user with an explanation of necessary revisions. Any schedules or timetables submitted by the user shall be subject to
review and approval by the City. The City may deny any application for an indirect discharge permit. (Ord. 25-14, 7-8-2014)
10-5-16: COMPLIANCE SCHEDULES FOR MEETING APPLICABLE PRETREATMENT STANDARDS:
A. Schedule Of Milestone Dates: The schedule will contain milestone dates for the commencement and completion of major events leading to the
construction and operation of additional pretreatment required for the user to comply with the requirements of this chapter, including categorical
standards. Examples of such milestone dates include hiring an engineer, completing preliminary plans, executing contract for major components,
commencing construction, completing construction and other acts which may be necessary to achieve compliance with this chapter.
B. Maximum Time: Under no circumstance shall the City permit a time increment of any single step directed toward compliance which exceeds nine (9)
months.
C. Progress Report: Not later than fourteen (14) days following each milestone date in the schedule and the final date for compliance, the user shall submit
a progress report to the City, including no less than a statement as to whether or not it complied with the increment of progress represented by that
milestone date and, if not, the date on which it expects to comply with this increment of progress, the reason for delay and the steps being taken by the
user to return the construction to the approved schedule. (1952 Code § 8-14-16)
10-5-17: INDIRECT DISCHARGE PERMIT (IDP):
10-5-17-1: MINOR INDUSTRIAL USERS:
The City may, in its discretion, issue a general discharge permit to a minor industrial user (MIU) to ensure compliance with applicable pretreatment
standards and requirements, including implementation of an accidental spill prevention plan, installation and operation of pretreatment facilities, or required
BMPs. If a permit is issued, the user shall pay the applicable charges and fees and meet such other conditions as required by the City. (Ord. 25-14, 7-8-
2014)
10-5-17-2: SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USERS:
A. Permit Required: No significant industrial user shall discharge wastewater into the POTW without first obtaining an indirect discharge permit. Any
violation of the terms and conditions of an indirect discharge permit shall be deemed a violation of this chapter and subjects the user or permittee to the
sanctions set out in this chapter. Obtaining an indirect discharge permit does not relieve a permittee of its obligation to comply with all Federal and
State pretreatment standards or requirements or with any other requirements of Federal, State and local laws.
B. Issuance Of Permit: The City shall issue to each significant industrial user an indirect discharge permit, which will be based on information in the data
disclosure form and include:
1. Any fees and charges to be paid upon initial issuance.
2. Limits on the average and maximum wastewater pollutant concentrations, loadings or characteristics.
3. Limits on average and maximum rate and time of discharge or requirements for flow regulations and equalization.
4. Self-monitoring requirements, including flow monitoring frequency and method, sampling frequencies, number, types and standards for tests.
5. Authorized points of discharge and regulated processes.
6. Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection and sampling facilities.
7. Compliance schedules.
8. Special conditions as the City may reasonably require, such as sampling locations or circumstances of a given discharge.
9. Reporting requirements, including, but not limited to, notification of accidental spills, noncompliance and discharge/process changes.
10. Requirements for submission of special technical reports or discharge reports where same differs from those prescribed by this chapter.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 487/503
11. Any special agreements the City chooses to continue or develop between the City and the permittee.
12. Standard conditions as apply to all significant industrial users.
C. Term Of Permit: Indirect discharge permits shall be issued for a specific time period, not to exceed five (5) years. Each permit shall indicate an effective
date and an expiration date.
D. Transferability: Indirect discharge permits are issued to a specific user for a specific operation and are not assignable to another user or transferable to
any other location without prior written approval of the City.
E. Void Of Permit: Indirect discharge permits shall be voidable upon cessation of operations or transfer of business ownership. The indirect discharge
permit issued to a particular user is void upon the issuance of a new indirect discharge permit to that user.
F. Waiver Of Sampling: The City may authorize a significant industrial user subject to a categorical pretreatment standard to forego sampling of a pollutant
regulated by categorical pretreatment standard if the user has demonstrated through sampling and other technical factors that the pollutant is neither
present nor expected to be present in the discharge, or is present only at background levels from the intake water and without an increase in the
pollutant due to activities by the user. The authorization is subject to the conditions as outlined in CFR 403.12(e)(2)(i) through (vii).
G. Reduction Of Reporting Requirements: The City may authorize a significant industrial user subject to a categorical pretreatment standard to reduce its
reporting requirement to no less frequently than once a year, unless required more frequently in a pretreatment standard or by the approval authority,
where the user meets all of the conditions outlined in CFR 403.12(e)(3). (1952 Code § 8-14-17.02)
10-5-17-3: EXTRAJURISDICTIONAL USERS:
Any user located beyond the City limits required to obtain an indirect discharge permit shall submit a permit application (DDF) as outlined in section 10-5-
15 of this chapter. (1952 Code § 8-14-17.03)
10-5-17-4: TEMPORARY INDIRECT DISCHARGE PERMITS:
The City may issue indirect discharge permits to address temporary nondomestic discharges to the POTW. Each temporary discharge must receive prior
written approval from the City. Wastewater sources that are subject to temporary permitting include, but are not limited to, stormwater, groundwater,
cooling water, process water, cleanup water from spills, leaking underground storage tanks and monitoring wells. Each temporary discharge permit must
be reviewed and reissued if the user wishes to discharge past the original expiration date. Users issued temporary indirect discharge permits shall pay all
applicable charges and fees and meet such other conditions as required by the City. (1952 Code § 8-14-17.04)
10-5-17-5: APPEALS:
Users will be provided with a draft permit for their review and comment prior to permit issuance. Any person, including the user, may petition the City to
reconsider the terms of an indirect discharge permit as follows:
A. Time Limit For Filing: The written petition must be filed with the Public Works Department within twenty (20) days of the permit issuance. Failure to
submit a timely petition for reconsideration shall be deemed a waiver of the right to appeal.
B. Content Of Petition: In its petition, the appealing party must indicate the specific permit conditions objected to, the reasons for this objection, and shall
present alternative conditions to meet the intent of this chapter.
C. No Stay Of Permit: The effectiveness of the permit shall not be stayed pending the appeal.
D. Response By Public Works Department: The Public Works Director or his/her designee shall provide written action to the appealing party within ten (10)
working days from the date the appeal was filed. If the Public Works Director or his/her designee fails to respond within ten (10) working days, the
petition for reconsideration shall be deemed denied.
E. Appeal To Public Works Commission: Decisions of the Public Works Director or his/her designee regarding the petition for reconsideration may be
appealed to the Public Works Commission by filing a written request for appeal with the Public Works Department within fifteen (15) days of the
decision of the Public Works Director or his/her designee. The Public Works Commission shall address the appeal at its next scheduled meeting. The
appealing party may appear and present evidence and testimony at such meeting. The decision of the Public Works Commission regarding the petition
shall be in writing.
F. Appeal To City Council: The decision of the Public Works Commission may be appealed to the City Council by filing a notice requesting appeal with the
City Clerk's Office within fifteen (15) days of receipt of the written decision.
G. Appeal To District Court: Decisions of the City Council may be appealed to the District Court for the Fourth Judicial District of the State. (1952 Code § 8-
14-17.05)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 488/503
10-5-17-6: MODIFICATIONS:
The terms and conditions of an indirect discharge permit may be subject to modification by the City at any time as limitations or requirements are modified
or other just cause exists. Any permit modifications which result in new conditions shall include a reasonable time schedule for compliance as determined
by the City. Other reasons for modification include, but are not limited to, the following:
A. To incorporate any new or revised Federal, State or local pretreatment standards or requirements;
B. To address significant alterations or additions to the user's operation, processes or wastewater since the time of permit issuance or the last modification;
C. A change in the POTW that requires either a temporary or permanent reduction or elimination of the authorized discharge;
D. To incorporate special conditions resulting from the issuance of a special order or an enforcement action;
E. Information indicating that the permitted discharge poses a threat to the City POTW, City personnel or the receiving waters;
F. Violation of any terms or conditions of the wastewater discharge permit;
G. Misrepresentations or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in the wastewater discharge permit application or in any required reporting;
H. Revision of or a grant of variance from categorical pretreatment standards pursuant to 40 CFR 403.13; or
I. To correct typographical or other errors in the indirect discharge permit. (1952 Code § 8-14-17.06)
10-5-17-7: REISSUANCE:
A user, required to a have an indirect discharge permit, shall submit a written request for permit renewal at least sixty (60) days prior to permit expiration.
The City shall then provide the user with the necessary renewal forms and instructions. A user, whose existing indirect discharge permit has expired and
has submitted its renewal application request within the specified time period, shall be deemed to have an effective indirect discharge permit until the City
issues or denies a new indirect discharge permit. A user, whose existing indirect discharge permit has expired and that fails to submit its renewal
application request within the specified time period, shall be deemed to be discharging without an indirect discharge permit. (1952 Code § 8-14-17.07)
10-5-17-8: REVOCATION:
Indirect discharge permits may be revoked for, but not limited to, the following reasons:
A. Failure to notify the City of significant changes to the wastewater prior to the changed discharge;
B. Failure to provide prior notification to the City of changed conditions;
C. Misrepresentation or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in the data disclosure form or subsequent permit renewal submittals;
D. Falsifying self-monitoring reports;
E. Tampering with monitoring equipment;
F. Refusing to allow the City timely access to the facility premises and records;
G. Failure to meet discharge limitations;
H. Failure to pay fines;
I. Failure to meet compliance schedules;
J. Failure to complete a wastewater survey or the wastewater discharge permit application;
K. Failure to provide advance notice of the transfer of a permitted facility;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 489/503
L. If the City has to invoke its emergency provisions;
M. Violation of any pretreatment standard or requirement, or any terms of an indirect discharge permit or this chapter. (1952 Code § 8-14-17.08)
10-5-18: STANDARDS MODIFICATIONS:
All categorical pretreatment standards adopted by the U.S. EPA after the promulgation of this chapter shall be enforceable by the City through this chapter.
Where a user, subject to a categorical pretreatment standard, has not previously submitted a data disclosure form as required by section 10-5-15 of this
chapter, the user shall file a data disclosure form with the City within one hundred eighty (180) days after the promulgation of the applicable categorical
pretreatment standard by the U.S. EPA. In addition, any user operating on the basis of a previous filing of a disclosure statement, shall submit to the City
within one hundred eighty (180) days after the promulgation of an applicable categorical pretreatment standard, the additional information required by
subsections 10-5-15-2A3, A4, A6 and A10 of this chapter. If deemed necessary by the City, where categorical pretreatment standards are more stringent,
the indirect discharge permit will be modified. The user shall be informed of any proposed changes in this chapter at least thirty (30) days prior to the
effective date of change. Any changes or new conditions in this chapter shall include a reasonable time schedule for compliance. (1952 Code § 8-14-18)
10-5-19: USER NOTIFICATION AND REPORTING REQUIREMENTS:
10-5-19-1: FINAL COMPLIANCE REPORT:
Within ninety (90) days following the date for final compliance by the user with applicable pretreatment standards and requirements set forth in this
chapter, or an indirect discharge permit, or within ninety (90) days after commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the POTW by a new user,
including new source users, any user when required shall submit to the City a report indicating the nature and concentration of all prohibited or regulated
substances contained in its discharge, and the average and maximum daily flow in gallons. The report shall state whether the applicable pretreatment
standards or requirements are being met on a consistent basis and, if not, what additional operation, maintenance and/or pretreatment is necessary to
bring the user into compliance with the applicable pretreatment standards or requirements. This statement shall be signed by an authorized representative
of the user, as defined in section 10-5-3 of this chapter. For categorical users, this report shall contain the information outlined in subsections 10-5-15-2A3,
A4, A6 and A11 of this chapter. (1952 Code § 8-14-19.01)
10-5-19-2: PERIODIC COMPLIANCE REPORT:
A. Required: Any user subject to a pretreatment standard set forth in this chapter, after the compliance date of such pretreatment standard, or, in the case
of a new user, after commencement of the discharge to the POTW, shall submit to the City at six (6) month intervals as prescribed in the indirect
discharge permit, unless required more frequently by the City, a report indicating the nature and concentration of prohibited or regulated substances in
the effluent which are limited by the pretreatment standards hereof. In addition, this report shall include a record of all measured or estimated average
and maximum daily flows during the reporting period. Flows shall be reported on the basis of actual measurement, provided however, where cost or
feasibility considerations justify, the City may accept reports of average and maximum flows estimated by verifiable techniques. This report shall also
include any additional information as may be required by this chapter or the indirect discharge permit, including production data and flow
measurements from any dilute or non-regulated wastestreams.
B. Content: Reports of users shall contain all results of sampling and analyses of the discharge, including the flow and the nature and concentration, or
production and mass where required by the City. All sample results shall indicate the time, date and place of sampling, and methods of analyses, and
shall certify that the discharge sampled is representative of discharges of normal work cycles and expected pollutant discharges from the user. The
frequency of monitoring by the user shall be prescribed within the indirect discharge permit. If a user sampled and analyzed more frequently than what
was required in its indirect discharge permit, it must submit all results of sampling and analyses of the discharge as part of its self-monitoring report.
C. Other Users: All users not required to obtain an indirect discharge permit shall provide appropriate reports to the City as may be required. (1952 Code
§ 8-14-19.02)
10-5-19-3: NONCOMPLIANCE NOTIFICATION, RESAMPLING AND REPORTING:
If sampling performed by a user indicates a violation, the user shall notify the City within twenty four (24) hours of becoming aware of the violation. The
user shall also repeat the sampling within five (5) days and submit the results of the repeat analysis to the City within thirty (30) days after becoming aware
of the violation, except the user is not required to resample if:
A. The City performs sampling at the user at a frequency of at least once per month; or
B. The City performs sampling at the user between the time when the user performs its initial sampling and the time when the user receives the results of
this sampling. (1952 Code § 8-14-19.03)
10-5-19-4: NOTIFICATION OF SIGNIFICANT PRODUCTION CHANGES:
Any user operating under an indirect discharge permit incorporating equivalent mass or concentration limits shall notify the City within two (2) business
days after the user has a reasonable basis to know that the production level will significantly change within the next calendar month. Any user not
providing a notice of such anticipated change will be required to comply with the existing limits contained in its indirect discharge permit. (1952 Code § 8-
14-19.04)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 490/503
10-5-19-5: HAZARDOUS WASTE NOTIFICATION:
A. Required; Content:
1. Any user that is discharging more than fifteen kilograms (15 kg) of hazardous wastes, as defined in 40 CFR 261 (listed or characteristic wastes) in a
calendar month or any facility discharging any amount of acutely hazardous wastes, as specified in 40 CFR 261.30(d) and 261.33(e), is required to
provide a one time notification in writing to the City, EPA Regional Waste Management Division Director and Idaho Division of Environmental Quality.
Any existing user exempt from this notification, shall comply with the requirements contained herein within thirty (30) days of becoming aware of a
discharge of fifteen kilograms (15 kg) of hazardous wastes in a calendar month or the discharge of acutely hazardous wastes to the City sewer
system. Such notification shall include:
a. The name of the hazardous waste as set forth in 40 CFR part 261;
b. The EPA hazardous waste number; and
c. The type of discharge (continuous, batch or other).
2. If an industrial user discharges more than one hundred kilograms (100 kg) of such waste per calendar per month to the sewer system, the
notification shall also contain the following information to the extent it is known or readily available to the industrial user:
a. An identification of the hazardous constituents contained in the wastes;
b. An estimation of the mass and concentration of such constituents in the wastestreams discharged during that calendar month; and
c. An estimation of the mass of constituents in the wastestreams expected to be discharged during the following twelve (12) months.
B. Exception For Self-Monitoring: These notification requirements do not apply to pollutants already reported under the self-monitoring requirements.
Whenever the EPA publishes final rules identifying additional hazardous wastes or new characteristics of hazardous waste, a user shall notify the City
of the discharge of such a substance within ninety (90) days of the effective date of such regulations. In the case of any notification made pursuant to
this section, an industrial user shall certify that it has a program in place to reduce the volume and toxicity of hazardous wastes generated to the
degree it has determined to be economically practical. (1952 Code § 8-14-19.05)
10-5-19-6: NOTICE OF POTENTIAL PROBLEMS, INCLUDING ACCIDENTAL SPILLS AND SLUG LOADS:
Any user shall notify the City immediately of all discharges that could cause problems to the POTW, including any slug loads, as defined in section 10-5-3
of this chapter. The notification shall include the concentration and volume and corrective action. Steps being taken to reduce any adverse impact should
also be noted during the notification. Any user that discharges a slug of pollutants shall be liable for any expense, loss or damage to the POTW, in addition
to the amount of any fines imposed on the City under State or Federal law. (1952 Code § 8-14-19.06)
10-5-19-7: NOTIFICATION OF CHANGED DISCHARGE:
All users shall promptly notify the City in advance of any substantial change in the volume or character of pollutants in their discharge, including significant
manufacturing process changes, pretreatment modifications, and the listed or characteristic hazardous wastes for which the user has submitted initial
notification under section 10-5-19-5 of this chapter. (1952 Code § 8-14-19.07)
10-5-20: ANALYTICAL AND SAMPLING TECHNIQUES:
10-5-20-1: ANALYTICAL REQUIREMENTS:
All pollutant analyses, including sampling techniques, whether performed by the user, an independent contractor or the City, shall be performed in
accordance with the techniques prescribed in 40 CFR part 136, and amendments thereto, unless otherwise specified in an applicable categorical
pretreatment standard. Where 40 CFR part 136 does not include a sampling or analytical technique for the pollutant in question, sampling and analyses
shall be performed in accordance with sampling and analytical procedures approved by the Administrator of the U.S. EPA. (1952 Code § 8-14-20.01)
10-5-20-2: SAMPLE COLLECTION:
A. Techniques: Except as indicated in subsection B of this section, the user must collect wastewater samples using flow proportional composite collection
techniques. The City may authorize the use of time proportional sampling or the appropriate minimum number of grab samples where the user
demonstrates that this will provide a representative sample of the effluent being discharged. In addition, grab samples may be required to show
compliance with instantaneous discharge limits.
B. Grab Samples: Unless otherwise prescribed by the City, samples for oil and grease, temperature, pH, cyanide, phenols, sulfides and volatile organic
compounds must be obtained using grab collection techniques. Multiple grab samples collected during a twenty four (24) hour period may be
composited prior to analysis.
C. Location Of Collection: Samples shall be collected immediately downstream from pretreatment facilities, if such exist, or immediately downstream from
the regulated or manufacturing process if no pretreatment exists or as determined by the City and contained in the user's indirect discharge permit.
(1952 Code § 8-14-20.02)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 491/503
10-5-21: MONITORING FACILITIES:
A. Monitoring Facility: When required, each user shall provide and operate at the user's own expense, a monitoring facility to allow inspection, sampling
and flow measurement of each sewer discharge to the City. Each monitoring facility shall be situated on the user's premises, except where such a
location would be impractical or cause undue hardship on the user. The City may concur with the facility being constructed in the public street or
sidewalk area, providing that the facility is located so that it will not be obstructed by landscaping or parked vehicles. There shall be ample room in or
near such sampling facility to allow accurate sampling and preparation of samples for analysis. The facility, sampling and measuring equipment shall
be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition at the expense of the user. Where required by Federal, State or local regulations,
such monitoring facilities shall be provided at the end of a process or production unit, or following treatment of a particular process or production unit,
from which regulated toxic pollutants are discharged.
B. Construction Standards And Specifications: All monitoring facilities shall be constructed and maintained in accordance with all applicable construction
standards and specifications. Construction shall be completed within one hundred twenty (120) days (or such longer period as may be allowed by the
City) of receipt by the user of the indirect discharge permit. (1952 Code § 8-14-21)
10-5-22: INSPECTION AND SAMPLING:
A. Right To Enter: The City shall have the right to enter the facilities of any user to ascertain whether the purpose of this chapter, and any indirect
discharge permit or order issued hereunder, is being met and whether the user is complying with all requirements thereof. The user shall allow the City,
or its representatives, upon presentation of credentials of identification, to enter upon the premises of the user at all reasonable hours, including all
hours of operation or discharging for the purposes of inspection, sampling or records examination. The City shall have the right to set up on the user's
property, or require installation of, such devices as are necessary to conduct flow monitoring and sampling of the user's operations. (1952 Code § 8-14-
22.01)
B. User Security: Where a user has security measures in force which require proper identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the user
shall make necessary arrangements with its security personnel so that, upon presentation of suitable identification, City staff will be permitted to enter
without delay for the purposes of performing specific responsibilities. (1952 Code § 8-14-22.02)
C. Right To Safe And Ready Access: The City shall have safe and ready access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling,
records examination and copying, and performance of any additional duties. Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the
facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the user at the written or verbal request of the City and shall not be replaced. The
costs of clearing such access shall be born by the user. Unreasonable delays in allowing the City safe access to the user's premises shall constitute a
violation of this chapter. (1952 Code § 8-14-22.03)
D. Search Warrants: If the City is refused access to a building, structure or property, or any part thereof, and is able to demonstrate probable cause to
believe that there may be a violation of this chapter, or that there is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a routine inspection and sampling
program designed to verify compliance with this chapter or any permit or order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public health, safety and
welfare of the community, then the City shall seek issuance of a search warrant from the District Court in the Fourth Judicial District of Idaho. (1952
Code § 8-14-22.04)
10-5-23: CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION:
Information and data on a user obtained from data disclosure forms, reports, surveys, indirect discharge permits and monitoring programs, and from City
inspection and sampling activities, shall be available to the public or other governmental agency without restriction unless the user specifically requests,
and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the City, that the release of such information would divulge information, processes or methods of
production entitled to protection as trade secrets under applicable State law. When requested and demonstrated by the user that the information furnished
be kept confidential, the portions of a report which might disclose trade secrets or secret processes shall not be made available for inspection by the
public, but shall be made available immediately upon request to governmental agencies for uses related to the NPDES Program or Pretreatment Program,
and in enforcement proceedings involving the user furnishing the information. Wastewater constituents and characteristics and other "effluent data" as
defined by 40 CFR 2.302 will not be recognized as confidential information and will be available to the public without restriction. Any such claim must be
asserted at the time of submission by clearly indicating the words "confidential business information" on each page containing such information. If no claim
is made at the time of submission, all information will be available to the public. (1952 Code § 8-14-23)
10-5-24: ADMINISTRATIVE ENFORCEMENT REMEDIES:
10-5-24-1: USER PROHIBITED CONDUCT:
A user shall not: a) fail to report accurately the wastewater constituents and characteristics of its discharge; b) fail to report significant changes in
wastewater constituents or characteristics; c) refuse reasonable access to the user's premises by representatives of the City for the purpose of inspection
or monitoring; or d) violate any State or Federal pretreatment regulation, the provisions of the indirect discharge permit, the provisions of this chapter or
any order of the City with respect thereto. The City may seek any or all of the remedies or penalties provided in this chapter (including termination of
wastewater treatment service) against any user that violates any of the foregoing prohibitions. The City may seek the issuance of a temporary or
permanent injunction, as deemed appropriate, for legal and/or equitable relief. Enforcement of pretreatment violations will generally be in accordance with
the City pretreatment program enforcement response plan. The City reserves the right, however, to take other action against any user when the
circumstances warrant. Further, the City is empowered to take more than one enforcement action against any noncompliant user. These actions may be
taken concurrently. Issuance of a compliance order, administrative fines, penalties and/or cease and desist orders shall not be a bar against, or
prerequisite for, taking any other action against a noncompliant user. (1952 Code § 8-14-24.01)
10-5-24-2: NOTIFICATION OF VIOLATION; ADMINISTRATIVE ADJUSTMENT:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 492/503
Whenever the City finds that any user has violated the prohibitions in section 10-5-24-1 of this chapter, the City shall cause to be served upon such user a
written notice either in person or by certified or registered mail, return receipt requested, stating the nature of the alleged violation or violations. The notice
may also state what fine, penalty or other remedy the City will seek against the user for such alleged violation or violations. Within twenty (20) days of the
date of receipt of the notice, the user shall respond personally or in writing to the City advising of its position with respect to the allegations. Thereafter, the
user shall be given the opportunity to meet with representatives, employees or agents of the City to discuss the veracity of the allegations, to establish a
plan for the satisfactory correction of the violations and preclusion of a recurrence thereof, and to pay the fine or otherwise comply with the penalty or
remedy being sought by the City for the violation or violations. Submission of a response in no way relieves the user of liability for any violations occurring
before or after receipt of written notice of noncompliance from the City. Nothing in this section shall limit the authority of the City to take any action,
including emergency actions or any other enforcement action, without first issuing a notice of violation. (1952 Code § 8-14-24.02)
10-5-24-3: RECOVERY OF COSTS INCURRED BY CITY:
Any user that violates any of the provisions of this chapter or that discharges or causes a discharge producing a deposit or obstruction or causes damage
to or impairs the City wastewater disposal system shall be liable to the City for any expense, loss or damage caused by such violation of discharge. The
City shall charge the user for the cost incurred by the City for any monitoring, surveillance, cleaning, repair or replacement work caused by the violation or
discharge, and for costs incurred by the City in investigating the violation and in enforcing this chapter against the user, including reasonable administrative
costs, inspection fees, fees for testing, attorney fees, court costs and all expenses of litigation. Refusal to pay the assessed costs shall constitute a
violation of this chapter, enforceable under the provisions of this section 10-5-24 and section 10-5-25 of this chapter. (1952 Code § 8-14-24.03)
10-5-24-4: SHOW CAUSE HEARING:
Where the violation of section 10-5-24-1 of this chapter is not corrected by timely compliance through the administrative adjustment procedure set forth at
section 10-5-24-2 of this chapter, the City may order any user that suffers or permits a violation of section 10-5-24-1 of this chapter, to show cause before
the Public Works Commission or its designee why the proposed enforcement action (which may include suspension of service) should not be taken. A
written notice shall be served on the user by personal service or by certified or registered mail, return receipt requested, specifying the time and place of a
hearing to be held by the Public Works Commission or its designee regarding the violation, the reasons why the enforcement action is to be taken, the
proposed enforcement action and directing the user to show cause before the commission or its designee why the proposed enforcement action should
not be taken. The notice of the hearing shall be served no less than ten (10) days before the hearing. Service of the notice may be made on any agent,
officer or authorized representative of a user. The information and evidence presented at the hearing shall be considered by the commission or its
designee, who shall then enter appropriate findings of fact, conclusions of law, and orders with respect to the alleged violations of the user. Appeal of such
orders may be taken within twenty (20) days by the user to the City Council, which may grant a hearing to take additional evidence or render its decision
based upon the record of the Public Works Commission proceedings. A show cause hearing shall not be a bar against, or prerequisite for, taking any other
action against a noncompliant user. (1952 Code § 8-14-24.04)
10-5-24-5: ADMINISTRATIVE FINES:
When the City finds that a user has violated or continues to violate any provision of this chapter, an indirect discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or
any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the City may fine such user in an amount not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). Such fines
shall be assessed on a per violation, per day basis. In the case of monthly or other long term average discharge limits, fines may be assessed for each
day during the period of violation. Issuance of an administrative fine shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the
user. (1952 Code § 8-14-24.05)
10-5-24-6: ADMINISTRATIVE ORDERS-CONSENT, COMPLIANCE AND CEASE AND DESIST:
A. Agreement For Voluntary Compliance: The City may enter into consent orders, assurances of voluntary compliance or other similar documents
establishing an agreement with any user responsible for noncompliance. Such documents will include specific action to be taken by the user to correct
the noncompliance within a time period specified by the document. Such documents shall have the same force and effect as the administrative orders
issued pursuant to subsections B1 and B2 of this section and shall be judicially enforceable. Use of a consent order shall not be a bar against, or
prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user.
B. Administrative Orders: When the City finds that a user has violated or continues to violate any provision of this chapter, a wastewater discharge permit
or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the City may:
1. Issue a compliance order to the user responsible for the discharge directing that the user come into compliance within a time specified in the order. If
the user does not come into compliance within the time specified in the order, sewer service may be discontinued unless adequate treatment
facilities, devices or other related appurtenances are installed and properly operated. Compliance orders may also contain other requirements to
address the noncompliance, including additional self-monitoring, and management practices designed to minimize the amount of pollutants
discharged to the sewer; or
2. Issue a cease and desist order to the user directing it to cease and desist all such violations and directing the user to:
a. Immediately comply with all requirements; and
b. Take such appropriate remedial or preventive action as may be needed to properly address a continuing or threatened violation, including halting
operations and/or terminating the discharge.
C. Other Action Against User: Issuance of an administrative order shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user.
(1952 Code § 8-14-24.06)
10-5-24-7: EMERGENCY SUSPENSION OF SERVICE AND REVOCATION OF INDIRECT DISCHARGE PERMIT:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 493/503
The City may, after informal notice to the user in writing or in person or by telephone, revoke the indirect discharge permit and order the suspension of the
wastewater treatment service to a user when a user fails to comply with an administrative order issued pursuant to section 10-5-24-6 of this chapter, or it
appears to the City that an actual or threatened discharge: a) presents or threatens an imminent or substantial danger to the health or welfare of persons
or substantial danger to the environment; or b) threatens to interfere with the operation of the POTW. Any user notified of the City suspension order shall
immediately cease all discharges. In the event of failure of the user to comply with the suspension order, the City may immediately take all necessary
steps to halt or prevent any further discharge by such user into the POTW. The City shall have authority to physically cap, block or seal the user's sewer
line (whether on public or private property) in order to terminate service under this section. The City shall have the right to enter upon the user's property to
accomplish the capping, blocking or sealing of the user's sewer line. The City shall reinstate the wastewater treatment service upon clear and convincing
proof by the user of the elimination of the noncomplying discharge or condition creating the threat as set forth in this chapter. (1952 Code § 8-14-24.07)
10-5-24-8: ANNUAL PUBLICATION:
The City shall publish annually, in a newspaper of general circulation that provides meaningful public notice within the City jurisdiction, a list of those users
which, during the previous twelve (12) months, were in significant noncompliance with applicable pretreatment standards or other pretreatment
requirements. (1952 Code § 8-14-24.08)
10-5-25: JUDICIAL ENFORCEMENT REMEDIES:
10-5-25-1: CIVIL PENALTIES:
Any user that violates an order of the City, or that fails to comply with: a) any provision of this chapter; or b) any regulation, rule or permit of the City issued
pursuant to this chapter, shall be liable to the City for a civil penalty. The amount of such civil penalty shall be not more than one thousand dollars
($1,000.00) per violation. Each day upon which a violation occurs or continues shall constitute a separate violation. In the case of a monthly or other long
term average limit, penalties shall accrue for each day during the period of the violation. Such penalties may be recovered by judicial actions commenced
by the City as provided in section 10-5-25-2 of this chapter. In addition, the City may commence an action to terminate the user's wastewater treatment
service. (1952 Code § 8-14-25.01)
10-5-25-2: INJUNCTIVE RELIEF:
When the City finds that a user has violated or continues to violate any provision of this chapter, an indirect discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or
any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the City may petition the District Court in the Fourth Judicial District of the State for the issuance of a
temporary or permanent injunction, as appropriate, which restrains or compels the specific performance of the indirect discharge permit, order, or other
requirement imposed by this chapter on activities of the user. The City may also seek such other action as is appropriate for legal and/or equitable relief. A
petition for injunctive relief shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against a user. (1952 Code § 8-14-25.02)
10-5-25-3: CRIMINAL PROSECUTION:
A. Any user that wilfully or negligently violates any provision of this chapter, an indirect discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other
pretreatment standard or requirement shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by fines and/or imprisonment to the maximum
extent allowable under State law. Criminal fines shall be imposed on a per violation, per day basis.
B. Any user that wilfully or negligently introduces any substance into the POTW which causes personal injury or property damage shall, upon conviction,
be guilty of a misdemeanor and be subject to a penalty and/or imprisonment to the maximum extent allowable under State law. This penalty shall be in
addition to any other cause of action for personal injury or property damage available under State law.
C. Any user that knowingly makes any false statements, representations or certifications in any application, record, report, plan, or other documentation
filed, or required to be maintained, pursuant to this chapter, an indirect discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or that falsifies, tampers with, or
knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring device or method required under this chapter shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor,
punishable by fines and/or imprisonment to the maximum extent allowable under State law. (1952 Code § 8-14-25.03)
10-5-26: AFFIRMATIVE DEFENSES TO DISCHARGE VIOLATIONS:
10-5-26-1: OPERATING UPSETS:
A. Notice To City; Requirements: Any user that experiences an upset in operations which places the user in a temporary state of noncompliance with this
chapter shall inform the City thereof within twenty four (24) hours of first awareness of the commencement of the upset. Where such information is
given orally, a written follow up report thereof shall be filed by the user with the City within five (5) days. An upset shall constitute an affirmative defense
to an action brought for noncompliance with applicable pretreatment standards if certain conditions are met. The user that wishes to establish the
affirmative defense of upset shall demonstrate, through properly signed, contemporaneous operating logs, or other relevant evidence that:
1. An upset occurred and the user can identify the cause of the upset;
2. The facility was at the time being operated in a prudent and workman like manner and in compliance with applicable operation and maintenance
procedures; and
3. The user has submitted the following information to the City within twenty four (24) hours of becoming aware of the upset (if this information is
provided orally, a written submission must be provided within 5 days):
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 494/503
a. Description of the upset, the cause thereof and the upset's impact on the user's compliance status.
b. Duration of noncompliance and, if the noncompliance continues, the time by which compliance is reasonably expected to occur.
c. All steps taken or to be taken to reduce, eliminate and prevent recurrence of such an upset or other conditions of noncompliance.
B. Burden Of Proof: In any enforcement proceeding, the user seeking to establish the occurrence of an upset shall have the burden of proof. Users will
have the opportunity for a judicial determination on any claim of upset only in an enforcement action brought for noncompliance with applicable
pretreatment standards.
C. Control Of Discharge: Users shall control production of all discharges to the extent necessary to maintain compliance with applicable pretreatment
standards upon reduction, loss or failure of its treatment facility until the facility is restored or an alternative method of treatment is provided. This
requirement applies in the situation where, among other things, the primary source of power of the treatment facility is reduced, lost or fails. (1952
Code § 8-14-26.01)
10-5-26-2: PROHIBITED DISCHARGE STANDARDS:
A user shall have an affirmative defense to an enforcement action brought against it for noncompliance with the prohibitions in section 10-5-4-1 and
subsections 10-5-4-2A2, A5, A6, A8 and A12 of this chapter if it can prove that it did not know, or have reason to know, that its discharge, alone or in
conjunction with discharges from other sources, would cause pass through or interference and that either: a) a local limit exists for each pollutant
discharged and the user was in compliance with each limit directly prior to, and during, the pass through or interference; or b) no local limit exists, but the
discharge did not change substantially in nature or constituents from the user's prior discharge when the POTW was regularly in compliance with its
NPDES permit, and in the case of interference, was in compliance with applicable sludge use or disposal requirements. (1952 Code § 8-14-26.02)
10-5-26-3: BYPASS PROVISION:
A. Conditions: Users may allow any bypass to occur which does not cause applicable pretreatment standards or requirements to be violated, but only if it
is also for essential maintenance to assure efficient operation. These bypasses are not subject to the following:
1. If a user knows in advance of the need for a bypass, it shall submit prior notice to the City, if possible at least ten (10) days before the date of the
bypass.
2. A user shall submit oral notice of an unanticipated bypass that exceeds applicable pretreatment standards to the City within twenty four (24) hours
from the time the user becomes aware of the bypass. A written submission shall also be provided within five (5) days of the time the user becomes
aware of the bypass. The written description shall contain:
a. Description of the bypass and its cause.
b. Duration of the bypass, including the exact dates and times, and if the bypass has not been corrected, the anticipated time it is expected to
continue.
c. All steps taken or planned to reduce, eliminate and prevent recurrence of the bypass.
3. Bypass is prohibited, and the City may take enforcement action against a user for a bypass, unless:
a. Bypass was unavoidable to prevent loss of life, personal injury or severe property damage;
b. There were no feasible alternatives to the bypass, such as the use of auxiliary treatment facilities, retention of untreated wastes or maintenance
during normal periods of equipment downtime. This condition is not satisfied if adequate back up equipment should have been installed in the
exercise of reasonable engineering judgment to prevent a bypass which occurred during normal periods of equipment downtime or preventative
maintenance; and
c. The user submitted notices as required under subsections A1 and A2 of this section.
B. Approval By City: The City may approve an anticipated bypass, after considering its adverse effects, if the City determines that it will meet the three (3)
conditions listed in subsection A3 of this section. (1952 Code § 8-14-26.03)
10-5-27: RECORDS RETENTION:
All users subject to this chapter shall retain and preserve for no less than three (3) years, any records, books, documents, memoranda, reports,
correspondence and any and all summaries thereof, relating to monitoring, sampling and chemical analyses made by or in behalf of a user in connection
with its discharge. This records retention period shall be automatically extended for the duration of any litigation concerning the user or POTW, or where
the user has been specifically notified of a longer retention period by the City. All records that pertain to matters which are the subject of administrative
adjustment or any other enforcement or litigation activities brought by the City pursuant hereto shall be retained and preserved by the user until all
enforcement activities have concluded and all periods of limitation with respect to any and all appeals have expired. (1952 Code § 8-14-27)
10-5-28: RIGHT OF REVISION:
The City reserves the right to amend this chapter to provide for more stringent limitations or requirements on users of the POTW where deemed necessary
to comply with the objectives set forth in section 10-5-1 of this chapter. (1952 Code § 8-14-28)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 495/503
Chapter 6
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND DISCHARGE CONTROL
10-6-1: TITLE, PURPOSE AND GENERAL PROVISIONS:
10-6-1-1: TITLE:
This chapter shall be known as the BOISE CITY STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND DISCHARGE CONTROL ORDINANCE and may be so cited.
(1952 Code § 8-15-01.01)
10-6-1-2: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
A. Specified: The purpose and intent of this chapter is to:
1. Protect and enhance the water quality of our watercourses, water bodies, groundwater and wetlands in a manner pursuant to and consistent with the
Clean Water Act.
2. Control nonstormwater discharges to storm drains and reduce pollutants in stormwater discharges.
3. Provide design, construction, operation and maintenance criteria for permanent and temporary on site stormwater management facilities to control
stormwater runoff.
4. Encourage the recharge of groundwater, where appropriate, and prevent the degradation of groundwater quality.
B. Further Regulation: Discharges into the municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) may be subject to further regulation by the U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency and local agencies owning and operating an MS4. Local agencies owning and operating portions of the MS4 in the City include, but
are not limited to: the Ada County Highway District, Ada County Drainage District 3, Boise State University, and the Idaho Department of Transportation
District 3. (1952 Code § 8-15-01.02)
10-6-1-3: DEFINITIONS:
The terms as used in this chapter shall have the following meanings:
AUTHORIZED ENFORCEMENT AGENT: The Director of Public Works and/or any individual designated by the Director of Public Works as an authorized
enforcement agent.
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMPs): Schedules of activities, prohibitions of practices, maintenance procedures and other management practices
to prevent or reduce the pollution of waters of the United States. BMPs also include treatment requirements, operating procedures and practices to control
site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or waste disposal, or drainage from raw material storage.
BOISE CITY NONSTORMWATER DISPOSAL BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES: Best Management Practices adopted by reference by this chapter for
nonstormwater disposal.
CFR: The Code of Federal Regulations.
CITY: The City of Boise City, Idaho.
CLEAN WATER ACT (CWA): Federal Water Pollution Control Act enacted by Public Law 92-500, as amended by Public Laws 95-217, 95-576, 96-483 and
97-117; 33 USC section 1251 et seq.
COMPREHENSIVE DRAINAGE PLAN: A stormwater management plan that covers all current and anticipated development on a site greater than ten (10)
acres and sites planned for phased development.
DEVELOPMENT: Any construction, reconstruction, conversion, structural alteration, relocation or enlargement of any structure within the jurisdiction of
Boise City, as well as any manmade change or alteration to the landscape, including, but not limited to, mining, drilling, dredging, grading, paving,
excavating and filling.
DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC WORKS: The Director of the Boise City Public Works Department.
DISCHARGE: Any addition or introduction of any pollutant, stormwater or any other substance whatsoever into the Municipal storm sewer system (MS4),
waters of the State or into waters of the United States.
DISCHARGER: Any person who causes, allows, permits or is otherwise responsible for a discharge, including, without limitation, any operator of a
construction site or industrial facility.
FIREFIGHTING WATER: Any water, and any substance or materials contained therein, used in an emergency to control or extinguish a fire.
ILLICIT CONNECTION: Any physical connection to a publicly maintained storm drain system composed of nonstormwater which has not been permitted
by the public entity responsible for the operation and maintenance of the system.
ILLICIT DISCHARGE: Any discharge to a storm drain that is not composed entirely of stormwater, except discharges pursuant to an NPDES permit.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE: A surface which prevents or retards the penetration of water into the ground, including, but not limited to, roofs, sidewalks,
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 496/503
patios, driveways, parking lots, concrete and asphalt paving, gravel, compacted native surfaces and earthen materials, and oiled, macadam or other
surfaces which similarly impede the natural infiltration of stormwater.
MAJOR MODIFICATION: An alteration to an existing or planned stormwater drainage facility that does one or more of the following: changes the volume,
surface area, depth, capacity, inflow rates, outflow rates or level of treatment by five percent (5%) or more; changes the treatment process; adds more
than one thousand (1,000) square feet of impervious surface; or increases the tributary impervious drainage area to an individual drainage facility
component by more than ten percent (10%).
MUNICIPAL NPDES PERMIT: An area wide NPDES permit that is issued to a government agency or agencies for the discharge of pollutants from any
point source into the waters of the United States.
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4): A conveyance or system of conveyance (including roads with drainage systems, Municipal
streets, catch basin, curb, gutters, ditches, manmade channels or storm drains) owned or operated by a public body (created under State law) having
jurisdiction over disposal of sewage, industrial wastes, stormwater or other wastes, including special districts under State law, such as sewer district, flood
control district or drainage district, or similar entity that discharges to the waters of the United States and which are not part of a publicly owned treatment
works (POTW) as defined at 40 CFR section 122.2.
NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (NPDES) PERMIT: A permit issued by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Region
X, in compliance with the Federal Clean Water Act for the discharge of pollutants from any point source into the waters of the United States.
NONSTORMWATER DISCHARGE: Any discharge that is not entirely composed of stormwater.
OWNER OR OPERATOR: The owner or operator of any facility or activity subject to regulation under the Federal NPDES Program, including operational
and day to day control over facility activities.
PERSON: Any individual, firm, association, club, organization, corporation, partnership, business trust, company or other entity which is recognized by law
as the subject of rights or duties.
POLLUTANT: Dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, filter backwash, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, chemical wastes, biological
materials, radioactive materials (except those regulated under the Atomic Energy Act of 1954, as amended) (42 USC section 2011 et seq.), heat, wrecked
or discarded equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt and industrial, Municipal and agricultural waste discharged into water, and as otherwise defined in 40 CFR
section 122.2.
PREMISES: Any building, lot, parcel of land or portion of land, whether improved or unimproved, including adjacent sidewalks and parking strips.
REDEVELOPMENT: A project for which a building permit is required that proposes to add, replace and/or alter impervious surfaces affecting the existing
drainage system, other than routine maintenance, resurfacing or repair. A project which meets the criteria of a major modification, as defined in this
section, shall be considered a redevelopment.
STORMWATER: Water runoff and surface drainage associated with rainstorm events and snow melt.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT: The process of collection, conveyance, storage, treatment and disposal of stormwater to ensure control of the magnitude
and frequency of runoff and to minimize the hazards associated with flooding. Also includes implementing controls to reduce the discharge of pollutants,
including management practices, control techniques and systems, design and engineering methods.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT DESIGN MANUAL: The Design Standards Manual prepared by the Boise City Public Works Department, which provides
design, performance and review criteria for stormwater management practices.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN: Details of the drainage system, structures, BMPs, concepts and techniques that will be used to control
stormwater, including drawings, engineering calculations, computer analyses, maintenance and operations procedures, and all other supporting
documentation.
U.S. EPA: United States Environmental Protection Agency.
VARIANCE: A modification of the requirements of this chapter.
WATERS OF THE STATE: All the accumulations of water, surface and underground, natural and artificial, public and private, or parts thereof, which are
wholly or partially within, which flow through or border upon, the State.
WATERS OF THE UNITED STATES: Waters as defined in 40 CFR section 122.2.
WETLAND: An area that is inundated or saturated by surface or ground water at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal
circumstances does support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps,
marshes, bogs and similar areas. (1952 Code § 8-15-01.03)
10-6-1-4: APPLICABILITY:
This chapter shall apply to all activities which may potentially affect the MS4, any private storm drain, or any body of water within the City and any activity
which discharges pollutants into such systems, except for those activities contained entirely on Federal or State or County lands and that do not impact
adjacent jurisdictions. Additionally, permanent and temporary stormwater management controls and facilities, constructed as part of any activities listed in
this chapter, which are located within the City limits, are also subject to this chapter. The stormwater management standards shall apply to industrial,
commercial, institutional and multi-family residential development, as well as subdivision projects with private access. (1952 Code § 8-15-01.04)
10-6-1-5: REGULATORY CONSISTENCY:
This chapter shall be construed to assure consistency with the requirements of the Federal Clean Water Act and acts amendatory thereof or
supplementary thereto, applicable implementing regulations and the Municipal NPDES permit and any amendments, revisions or reissuance thereof.
Activities regulated by this chapter may be subject to further regulation by the specific public entity owning and operating an MS4. No permit or approval
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 497/503
issued pursuant to this chapter shall relieve a person of the responsibility to secure permits and approvals required for activities regulated by any other
applicable rule, code, act, permit or ordinance. (1952 Code § 8-15-01.05)
10-6-2: DISCHARGE REGULATIONS AND REQUIREMENTS:
Any illicit discharge to any storm drain, including both the MS4 and private storm drains, is a violation of this chapter, unless exempted by provisions of
sections 10-6-2-6 and 10-6-2-7 of this chapter. (1952 Code § 8-15-02)
10-6-2-1: GENERAL REQUIREMENTS AND PROHIBITIONS:
A. Reduction Of Pollutants: Any person engaged in activities which will or may result in pollutants entering a storm drain shall undertake reasonable
measures to reduce such pollutants. Examples of such activities include, but are not limited to: improper application, over use and disposal of
herbicides, pesticides and fertilizers; activities related to automobile businesses, including service stations, automobile dealerships, car washes and
body shops; and light industrial facilities which may be a source of pollutants.
B. Accumulation Prohibited: No person shall throw, deposit, leave, maintain, keep or permit to be thrown, deposited, placed, left or maintained, any refuse,
rubbish, garbage or other discarded or abandoned objects, articles and accumulations, in or upon any street, alley, sidewalk, storm drain inlet, catch
basin, conduit or other drainage structures, parking area, or upon any public or private plot of land so that the same might be or become a pollutant,
except where such pollutant is being temporarily stored in properly contained waste receptacles or is part of a well defined compost system.
C. Leaking Containers: No person shall cause or permit any dumpster, solid waste bin or similar container to leak such that any pollutant is discharged into
any street, alley, sidewalk, storm drain, inlet, catch basin, conduit or other drainage structures, business place or upon any public or private plot of land
in the City.
D. Property Maintenance: The occupant or tenant, the owner, lessee or proprietor of any real property in the City where there is located a paved sidewalk
or parking area shall maintain said paved surface free of dirt or litter to the extent reasonable and practicable and provide an adequate means for the
disposal of refuse, rubbish, garbage or other articles so as to prevent such matter from entering a storm drain. Sweepings from said sidewalk shall not
be swept or otherwise made or allowed to go into the gutter or roadway, but shall be disposed of in receptacles maintained on said real property.
E. Water Pollution: No person shall throw or deposit any pollutant in any fountain, pond, lake, stream or any other body of water in a park or elsewhere
within the City, except as otherwise permitted under local, State or Federal law. (1952 Code § 8-15-02.01)
10-6-2-2: ILLICIT CONNECTIONS:
It is prohibited to establish, use, maintain or continue illicit drainage connections to the MS4, or to commence or continue any illicit discharges to the MS4.
(1952 Code § 8-15-02.02)
10-6-2-3: PARKING LOTS AND SIMILAR STRUCTURES:
A. Best Management Practices: Persons owning or operating a paved parking lot, gas station pavement, paved private street or road, or similar structure,
or conducting routine building wash downs, shall clean and maintain those structures consistent with the City nonstormwater disposal Best
Management Practices prior to discharging to a storm drain.
B. Drainage Requirements:
1. All water from nonstormwater sources or incidental stormwater sources (i.e., blown through openings and windows or transported on vehicles) that
enter newly developed or significantly redeveloped covered parking garages are to be directed to the sanitary sewer disposal system, unless that
alternative is not reasonably feasible. Newly developed or significantly redeveloped covered permanent parking garages may drain into a storm drain
when no feasible alternative is available, with the consent of the owner and operator and in accordance to this and other City ordinances. The owner
and operator of a storm drain may impose requirements, including the construction of control structures to ensure the pretreatment of such
discharges prior to entry into the storm drain. All water from direct stormwater sources that enter uncovered parking garages is to go to a stormwater
disposal system in accordance with section 10-6-3 of this chapter.
2. For projects governed by other jurisdictions, e.g., the Ada County Highway District (ACHD) or a drainage district, the applicant must comply with their
standards and requirements and receive approval from those entities. (1952 Code § 8-15-02.03)
10-6-2-4: OUTDOOR STORAGE AREAS; COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL FACILITIES:
A. Storage Of Hazardous Substances: In outdoor areas, no person shall store grease, oil or other hazardous substances in a manner that will or may
result in such substances entering a storm drain system. In outdoor areas, no person shall store motor vehicles, machine parts or other objects in a
manner that may leak grease, oil or other hazardous substances to a storm drain.
B. Spill Containment System: To prevent the discharge of hazardous substances to the MS4, the City may require the installation of a spill containment
system. Spill containment systems may consist of a system of dikes, walls, barriers, berms or other devices as required. No person shall operate a spill
containment system such that it allows incompatible liquids to mix and thereby create a hazardous condition. (1952 Code § 8-15-02.04)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 498/503
10-6-2-5: CONSTRUCTION SITES:
Any person performing construction work in the City shall comply with the provisions of this chapter and title 9, chapter 14, "Construction Site Erosion
Control", of this Code. (1952 Code § 8-15-02.05)
10-6-2-6: NONSTORMWATER USE OF STORM DRAINS:
The City nonstormwater disposal Best Management Practices establishes minimum requirement for nonstormwater storm drain uses within the City and is
incorporated by reference and made part of this chapter. Discharges from the following activities will be allowed, subject to application of the City
nonstormwater disposal Best Management Practices: water line flushing and other discharges from potable water sources; landscape irrigation and lawn
watering; irrigation water; diverted stream flows; rising groundwaters; uncontaminated groundwater infiltration to storm drains; uncontaminated pumped
groundwater; foundation and footing drains; roof drains; water from crawl space pumps; residential air conditioning condensation; springs; individual
residential car washes; flows from riparian habitats and wetlands; dechlorinated swimming pool discharges; or flows from firefighting activities and training.
(1952 Code § 8-15-02.06)
10-6-2-7: DISCHARGE PURSUANT TO NPDES PERMIT:
The prohibition of discharges shall not apply to any discharge regulated under an NPDES permit issued and administered by the EPA; provided, that the
discharger is in full compliance with all requirements of the permit and other applicable laws or regulations. Compliance with an applicable NPDES permit
governing discharges into the MS4 shall be considered compliance with this chapter. (1952 Code § 8-15-02.07)
10-6-2-8: COMPLIANCE WITH NPDES PERMIT:
A. Any discharge that would cause a violation of a Municipal NPDES permit, and any amendments, revisions or reissuance thereof, either separately
considered or when combined with other discharges, is prohibited. Liability for any such discharge shall be the responsibility of the person causing or
responsible for the discharge, and the City shall seek to have such persons defend, indemnify and hold harmless the City in any administrative or
judicial enforcement action against the permit holder relating to such discharge as provided by applicable rules of law.
B. All persons in charge of a facility are to comply with applicable Federal and State laws, including facility personnel, training, training record
maintenance, training records, maintenance of notification procedures, and implementation of notification requirements for spill response to assure
containment, clean up and immediate notification to the owner and operator of the MS4.
C. Individuals responsible for spills are to comply with applicable State and Federal notification requirements to assure containment, clean up and
immediate notification to the owner and operator of the MS4. (1952 Code § 8-15-02.08)
10-6-3: STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLANS AND COMPREHENSIVE DRAINAGE PLANS:
10-6-3-1: REQUIREMENTS:
To minimize the discharge and transport of pollutants to storm drains and prevent the deterioration of water quality, certain new developments and
redevelopment projects will be required to submit for approval a stormwater management plan or a comprehensive drainage plan to control the quality,
volume and rate of stormwater runoff. The City Stormwater Management Design Manual establishes standards and guidelines for implementing BMPs and
stormwater management plans and is incorporated by reference and made part of this chapter.
A. Plans Required: Stormwater management plans or comprehensive drainage plans are required for industrial, commercial and institutional developments
which require a building permit and multi-family residential developments that are not part of a larger subdivision project, as well as subdivision projects
that have private access, which also require a building permit.
B. Redevelopment Projects: Redevelopment projects may be required to submit complete stormwater management plans or operation and maintenance
plans if they meet the criteria found in the City Stormwater Design Manual.
C. Included Provisions Of Plans: Stormwater management plans and comprehensive drainage plans shall provide for the following:
1. Prevention of any direct discharge of untreated stormwater and nonstormwater, either on or off site.
2. Prevention of increased post development discharge rates.
3. Removal of a minimum amount, determined by the percentage of impervious parcel area, of annual total suspended solids generated from
development or redevelopment runoff prior to any off site discharge.
4. Continuation of BMPs for appropriate periods of time.
5. Protection of groundwater from instances of development runoff infiltration.
D. Plan Development: Stormwater management plans and comprehensive drainage plans shall be developed in accordance with the City Stormwater
Management Design Manual or equivalent, and shall include:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 499/503
1. Site evaluation.
2. Drainage system report.
3. Peak flow rates and runoff volume calculations.
4. Safety requirements.
5. Grading plans.
6. Operation and maintenance plan.
7. All other necessary BMPs not covered in the areas listed above.
E. Certification Required: All drainage system reports, peak flow rates and runoff volume calculations, safety requirements and grading plans shall be
certified by a licensed professional authorized by the State to perform such functions.
F. Conceptual Plans Not Considered: Drainage plans that are conceptual only, without engineering specifications, shall not be considered as
comprehensive drainage plans.
G. Minimum Requirements For Drainage Systems: Drainage systems shall have the following minimum requirements:
1. Designed to provide primary conveyance for runoff from a 50-year frequency storm on sites with less than fifteen percent (15%) slope or a 100-year
frequency storm on sites with greater than fifteen percent (15%) slope.
2. Designed to provide secondary conveyance for runoff for all flows up to the 100-year frequency storm, within defined rights-of-way or drainage
easements.
3. Designed to prevent an increase of peak flows at any location for the 2-year, 10-year, 25-year and 100-year frequency storm which could cause
increased inundation of any building or roadway surface.
4. Achievement of peak flow regulation by on site discharge, off site discharge with permission or participation in an approved regional stormwater
management facility.
H. Amendments, Modifications: The City Council reserves the right to amend, modify and/or add requirements to the City Stormwater Management Design
Manual. The design manual references in this chapter shall be to the most currently adopted version. (1952 Code § 8-15-03.01)
10-6-3-2: SUBMISSION AND REVIEW PROCESS:
A. Plans Submitted: Stormwater management plans and comprehensive drainage plans shall be submitted at the time building plans are submitted. The
plans shall be submitted to the Building Department with a permit fee in an amount provided for in a fee schedule adopted by the City Council. The
plans shall be reviewed by the Public Works Department for their compliance with the City Stormwater Management Design Manual and other
applicable rules and standards. Plans developed to meet Federal or State requirements may be submitted, and will be approved if they substantially
conform to the requirements of this chapter. Where physical submission of plans would be too cumbersome, the Public Works Department may waive
the requirement for physical submission when granted full access to review the on site plans.
1. No plan shall be approved that increases the peak level of stormwater runoff from impervious areas, unless the plan identifies measures to control
and limit runoff to peak levels no greater than would occur from the site if left in its natural, undeveloped condition.
2. No development or use of land which requires a grading permit, involves more than one thousand (1,000) square feet or ten percent (10%) of the
existing impervious surface, or would create more than five hundred (500) square feet of new impervious surface shall be permitted without an
approved stormwater management plan or comprehensive drainage plan.
3. No building permit or certificate of occupancy shall be issued without an approved stormwater management plan if required under this section.
B. Engineering Certification: The City shall be notified of the commencement of any development covered by a comprehensive drainage plan and the
owner or responsible person shall be required to provide engineering certification that the development is in conformity with the previously approved
comprehensive drainage plan.
C. Modifications To Plan: Any modifications to comprehensive drainage plans shall be submitted to the Public Works Department for approval; provided,
however, for comprehensive drainage plans approved pursuant to this chapter, as amended, only major modifications must be submitted for approval.
All modifications to singular stormwater management plans must be submitted to the Public Works Department with a request for approval and a new
stormwater management plan shall be submitted upon request of the Public Works Department.
D. Responsibility For System Function: Approval of the stormwater management plan or comprehensive drainage plan does not relieve the owner or
responsible party from the duty to ensure the systems and their safety measures function as designed.
E. Suspension, Revocation Of Approval: Approval may be suspended or revoked at any time if conditions are not as stated or shown in the approved
application or implementation of the plan is not proceeding in the approved manner.
F. Completion Time Limit; Extension: Approval of a stormwater management plan or a comprehensive drainage plan may be suspended if the project is
not completed within a two (2) year period or development has ceased for a period of more than two (2) years; however, a one year extension may be
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 500/503
granted upon a written request which provides the reason for the delay or cessation of development and specifies a time frame for completion or
commencement of development.
G. Notice Of Suspension, Revocation; Appeal: If suspension or revocation of approval is necessary, the owner will receive notice of this decision and may
appeal to the City Public Works Commission. A written request for appeal and hearing must be made within ten (10) days from the notice of
suspension or revocation.
H. New Plan Required After Suspension Or Revocation: If approval is suspended or revoked, the owner shall be required to submit a new plan for
approval, with the requisite fee, prior to starting or continuing the planned project or development.
I. Variance: If undue hardship would result from strict application of the requirements of this chapter, a person may request a variance.
1. Request Submitted In Writing: The variance request must be submitted in writing to the Public Works Department with a fee in an amount provided
for in a fee schedule adopted by the City Council.
2. Reason For Request: The person requesting a variance shall state in detail the reason for the request and provide supporting documentation.
3. Denial; Appeal: If a request for variance is denied by the Public Works Department, the denial may be appealed to the Public Works Commission
within ten (10) days of notice of denial. The Public Works Commission shall provide the aggrieved party with a hearing date and an opportunity to
present argument in favor of the variance request. The Public Works Commission will not accept additional supporting documentation if the
information was reasonably available at the time the request for variance was made and could have been submitted to the Public Works Department.
4. Not Considered Right Or Privilege: A variance shall not be considered a right or special privilege.
J. Nonliability: Approval of any plans by the Public Works Department shall not create a liability on the part of or cause of action against the City or any
officer or employee thereof regarding the plan or its operation. (1952 Code § 8-15-03.02)
10-6-3-3: MAINTENANCE OF STORMWATER FACILITIES:
A. Required: Stormwater facilities shall be maintained by the owner or other responsible party and, when there is a potential to discharge stormwater, shall
be repaired and/or replaced by such person when such facilities are no longer functioning as designed.
B. Waste Disposal: Disposal of waste from maintenance of facilities shall be conducted in accordance with applicable Federal, State and local laws and
regulations.
C. Records Maintained: Records of installation and maintenance and repair shall be retained by the owner or other responsible party for a period of five (5)
years and shall be made available to the Public Works Department upon request.
D. Failure To Comply: Any failure to maintain facilities or correct problems with facilities after receiving due notice from the City may result in criminal or
civil penalties and the City may perform corrective or maintenance work which shall be at the owner's expense. (1952 Code § 8-15-03.03)
10-6-4: INSPECTION AND ENFORCEMENT:
10-6-4-1: INSPECTIONS:
A. Required: Stormwater systems shall be inspected by the Public Works Department during and after construction to assure consistency with the
approved stormwater management plan.
B. On Site Detention Inspection Program: All stormwater systems shall be subject to the authority of the on site detention inspection program of the Public
Works Department to ensure compliance with this chapter and may be inspected when deemed necessary.
C. Annual Inspections; Records Maintained: The owner or other responsible party shall make annual inspections of the facilities and maintain records of
such inspections for a period of five (5) years.
D. Entrance For Inspection: Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce any of the provisions of this chapter, or whenever an authorized
enforcement agent has reasonable cause to believe that there exists in any building or upon any premises any condition which may constitute a
violation of the provisions of this chapter, the agent may enter such building or premises at all reasonable times to inspect the same or perform any
duty imposed upon the agent by this chapter; provided, that: 1) if such building or premises is occupied, he or she first shall present proper credentials
and request entry; and 2) if such building or premises is unoccupied, he or she first shall make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other persons
having charge or control of the building or premises and request entry.
E. Refusal To Permit Entry: The property owner or occupant has the right to refuse entry but, in the event such entry is refused, the agent is hereby
empowered to seek assistance from any court of competent jurisdiction in obtaining such entry and performing such inspection.
F. Routine, Area Inspections: Routine or area inspections shall be based upon such reasonable selection processes as may be deemed necessary to carry
out the objectives of this chapter, including, but not limited to, random sampling and/or sampling in areas with evidence of stormwater pollution, illicit
discharges or similar factors. (1952 Code § 8-15-04.01)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 501/503
10-6-4-2: SAMPLING:
With the consent of the owner or occupant or with court consent, any authorized enforcement agent may establish on any property such devices as are
necessary to conduct sampling or metering operations. During all inspections, as provided herein, the agent may take any samples deemed necessary to
aid in the pursuit of the inquiry or to record the on site activities; provided, that owners or occupants shall be entitled to split samples. (1952 Code § 8-15-
04.02)
10-6-4-3: TESTING AND MONITORING:
A. Order For Monitoring Activities: Whenever the Director of Public Works or designee determines that any person engaged in any activity and/or owning
or operating any facility may cause or contribute to an illicit discharge to the stormwater system, the Director of Public Works or designee may, by
written notice, order that such person undertake such monitoring activities and/or analyses and furnish such reports as the Director of Public Works or
designee may recommend. The written notice shall be served either in person or by certified or registered mail, return receipt requested, and shall set
forth the basis for such order and shall particularly describe the monitoring activities and/or analyses and reports required. The burden to be borne by
the owner or operator, including costs of these activities, analyses and reports, shall bear a reasonable relationship to the need for the monitoring,
analyses and reports and the benefits to be obtained. The recipient of such order shall undertake and provide the monitoring, analyses and reports
within the time frames set forth in the order.
B. Response To Order; Appeal: Within twenty (20) days of the date of receipt of the order notice, the recipient shall respond personally or in writing,
advising the City of the recipient's position with respect to the order's requirements. Thereafter, the recipient shall be given the opportunity to meet with
the Director of Public Works or designee to review the order's requirements and revise the order as the Director of Public Works or designee deem
necessary. Within ten (10) days of such meeting, the Director of Public Works or designee shall issue a final written order. Final orders of the Director
of Public Works or designee may be appealed to the Public Works Commission by the filing of a written appeal with the Public Works Department
within ten (10) days of receipt of the final order. The appeal notice shall set forth the particular order requirements or issues being appealed. The Public
Works Commission shall hear the appeal at its earliest practical date and may either affirm, revoke or modify the order. The decision of the Public
Works Commission shall be final.
C. Failure To Comply; Enforcement Of Order: In the event the owner or operator of a facility fails to conduct the monitoring and/or analyses and furnish the
reports required by the order in the time frames set forth therein, the City may cause such monitoring and/or analyses to occur and assess all costs
incurred, including reasonable administrative costs and attorney fees, to the facility owner or operator. The City may pursue judicial action to enforce
the order and recover all costs incurred. (1952 Code § 8-15-04.03)
10-6-4-4: VIOLATIONS CONSTITUTING MISDEMEANORS:
The knowing violation of any provision of this chapter, or knowing failure to comply with any of the mandatory requirements of this chapter, shall constitute
a misdemeanor, subject to penalty as provided in section 1-4-1 of this Code. (1952 Code § 8-15-04.04; amd. 2019 Code)
10-6-4-5: CONTINUING VIOLATION:
Unless otherwise provided, a person, firm, corporation or organization shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during any
portion of which a violation of this chapter is committed, continued or permitted by the person, firm, corporation or organization and shall be punishable
accordingly, as herein provided. (1952 Code § 8-15-04.05)
10-6-4-6: CONCEALMENT:
Causing, permitting, aiding, abetting or concealing a violation of any provision of this chapter shall constitute a violation of such provision. (1952 Code § 8-
15-04.06)
10-6-4-7: ACTS RESULTING IN VIOLATION OF FEDERAL CLEAN WATER ACT:
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter, any provision of any permit issued pursuant to this chapter, or who discharges pollutants, waste or
wastewater so as to cause an illicit discharge into the MS4, or who violates any cease and desist order, prohibition or effluent limitation, also may be in
violation of the Federal Clean Water Act and may be subject to the sanctions of that Act, including civil and criminal penalties. (1952 Code § 8-15-04.07)
10-6-4-8: VIOLATIONS DEEMED PUBLIC NUISANCE:
A. Abatement: In addition to the penalties hereinbefore provided, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this
chapter shall be considered a threat to the public health, safety, welfare and the environment, may be declared and deemed a nuisance by the Director
of Public Works or designee, and may be summarily abated and/or restored by the City and/or civil action taken to abate, enjoin or otherwise compel
the cessation of such nuisance.
B. Lien For Cost Of Abatement By City: The cost of such abatement and restoration shall be borne by the owner of the property and the cost thereof shall
be a lien upon and against the property and such lien shall continue in existence until the same shall be paid.
C. Seasonal, Recurrent Nuisances: If any violation of this chapter constitutes a seasonal and recurrent nuisance, the Director of Public Works or designee
shall so declare. Thereafter such seasonal and recurrent nuisance shall be abated every year without the necessity of any further declaration.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 502/503
D. Award Of Fees And Expenses: In any administrative or civil proceeding under this chapter in which the City prevails, the City may be awarded all costs
of investigation, administrative overhead, out of pocket expenses, costs of administrative hearings, costs of suit and reasonable attorney fees. (1952
Code § 8-15-04.08)
10-6-4-9: CIVIL ACTIONS:
In addition to any other remedies provided in this section, any violation of this section may be enforced by civil action brought by the City. In any such
action, the City may seek, and the court shall grant, as appropriate, any or all of the following remedies:
A. Injunction: A temporary and/or permanent injunction.
B. Assessments: Assessment of the violator for the costs of any investigation, inspection or monitoring survey which led to the establishment of the
violation, and for the reasonable costs of preparing and bringing legal action under this section.
C. Costs: Costs incurred in removing, correcting or terminating the adverse effects resulting from the violation.
D. Compensatory Damages: Compensatory damages for loss or destruction to water quality, wildlife, fish and aquatic life. Assessments under this
subsection shall be paid to the City to be used exclusively for costs associated with monitoring and establishing stormwater discharge control systems
and/or implementing or enforcing the provisions of this chapter. (1952 Code § 8-15-04.09)
10-6-4-10: ADMINISTRATIVE ENFORCEMENT POWERS:
In addition to the other enforcement powers and remedies established by this chapter, any authorized enforcement agent has the authority to utilize the
following administrative remedies:
A. Cease And Desist Orders: When an authorized enforcement agent finds that a discharge has taken place or is likely to take place in violation of this
chapter, the agent may issue an order to cease and desist such discharge, or practice, or operation likely to cause such discharge and direct that those
persons not complying shall: 1) comply with the requirement; 2) comply with a time schedule for compliance; and/or 3) take appropriate remedial or
preventive action to prevent the violation from recurring.
B. Notice To Clean:
1. Whenever an authorized enforcement agent finds any oil, earth dirt, grass, weeds, dead trees, tin cans, rubbish, refuse, waste or any other material
of any kind, in or upon the sidewalk abutting or adjoining any parcel of land, or upon any parcel of land or grounds or in close proximity to any open
drain or ditch channel, which may result in an increase in pollutants entering the storm drain or a nonstormwater discharge to the storm drain, he or
she may give notice to remove and lawfully dispose of such material in any manner that he or she reasonably may provide. The recipient of such
notice shall undertake the activities as described in the notice within the time frames set forth therein.
2. In the event the owner or operator of a facility fails to conduct the activities as described in the notice, the Director of Public Works or designee may
cause such required activities as described in the notice to be performed, and the cost thereof shall be assessed and invoiced to the owner of the
property. If the invoice is not paid within sixty (60) days, a lien shall be placed upon and against the property. (1952 Code § 8-15-04.10)
10-6-4-11: NONEXCLUSIVITY OF REMEDIES:
Remedies under this chapter are in addition to and do not supersede or limit any and all other remedies, civil or criminal. The remedies provided for herein
shall be cumulative and not exclusive. (1952 Code § 8-15-04.11)
10-6-4-12: APPEAL:
Any person, firm, corporation or organization notified of noncompliance with this chapter or required to perform monitoring, analyses, reporting and/or
corrective activities who is aggrieved by the decision of the authorized enforcement agent may appeal such decision in writing to the Public Works
Commission within ten (10) days following the effective date of the decision. Upon receipt of such request, the Public Works Commission shall request a
report and recommendation from the authorized enforcement agent and shall set the matter for administrative hearing at the earliest practical date. At said
hearing, the Public Works Commission may hear additional evidence, and may revoke, affirm or modify the authorized enforcement agent's decision. Such
decision shall be final. (1952 Code § 8-15-04.12)
10-6-4-13: DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY:
The degree of protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific, engineering and other
relevant technical considerations. The standards set forth herein are minimum standards and this chapter does not imply that compliance will ensure that
there will be no unauthorized discharge of pollutants into the waters of the United States. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the City, any
agent or employee thereof, for any damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder. (1952 Code
§ 8-15-04.13)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1079 503/503
Title 11
DEVELOPMENT CODE

SUPPLEMENT NO. 58, Ord 45-15, ORD 9, 11, 14 &15 2013(ORD 42-13 1029-13)
March 2013 Boise Development Code
Page i
Table of Contents
CHAPTER 11-01: GENERAL PROVISIONS .................................................. 1
11-01-01. TITLE AND AUTHORITY ......................................................................................................... 1
1. Title ............................................................................................................................................... 1
2. Authority for Code ..................................................................................................................... 1
11-01-02. PRIOR RIGHTS AND PERMITS ................................................................................................. 1
11-01-03. PURPOSE ........................................................................................................................... 1
11-01-04. APPLICABILITY .................................................................................................................... 1
1. Uniform Applicability ................................................................................................................ 1
2. Public Services Excepted .......................................................................................................... 1
11-01-05. RELATIONSHIP TO OTHER LAWS ............................................................................................. 2
1. Other Laws .................................................................................................................................. 2
2. Private Restrictions ..................................................................................................................... 2
3. Most Restrictive Regulations Govern ...................................................................................... 2
11-01-06. SEVERABILITY ...................................................................................................................... 2
11-01-07. AREA OF CITY IMPACT ......................................................................................................... 3
1. Annexation Area ........................................................................................................................ 3
2. Area of City Impact Boundary Map ...................................................................................... 3
3. Applicable Plan Policies and Ordinances ............................................................................. 3
4. Coordination of Plan Amendments, Ordinance Amendments, and Zoning Applications ................................................................................................................... 3
5. Renegotiation .............................................................................................................................. 4
11-01-08. ENFORCEMENT .................................................................................................................... 4
1. Violation ....................................................................................................................................... 4
2. Permits Shall Conform ............................................................................................................... 4
3. Minimal Property Maintenance ............................................................................................... 5
4. Inspection and Enforcement ...................................................................................................... 6
5. Remedies and Penalties ............................................................................................................ 6
CHAPTER 11-02: REVIEW AND DECISION BODIES ..................................... 9
11-02-01. PURPOSE ........................................................................................................................... 9
11-02-02. CITY COUNCIL .................................................................................................................... 9
1. Duties, Jurisdiction, and Authority ........................................................................................... 9
2. Membership ................................................................................................................................ 9
3. Procedures ................................................................................................................................... 9
11-02-03. PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION ................................................................................. 10
1. Duties, Jurisdiction, and Authority ........................................................................................ 10
2. Membership ............................................................................................................................. 10
Supplement No 58 Ord-45-1, Ord-23-15, Amended; Ord-4-15, Amended)
March 2013 Boise Development Code
Page ii
3. Procedures ................................................................................................................................ 11
11-02-04. DESIGN REVIEW COMMITTEE ................................................................................................ 12
1. Duties, Jurisdiction, and Authority ........................................................................................ 12
2. Limitations ................................................................................................................................. 12
3. Membership ............................................................................................................................. 12
4. Procedures ................................................................................................................................ 13
11-02-05. HISTORIC PRESERVATION COMMISSION ................................................................................. 13
1. Duties, Jurisdiction, and Authority ........................................................................................ 13
2. Membership ............................................................................................................................. 14
3. Procedures ................................................................................................................................ 14
11-02-06. HEARING EXAMINER .......................................................................................................... 15
1. Duties, Jurisdiction, and Authority ........................................................................................ 15
2. Qualifications ........................................................................................................................... 15
3. Procedures ................................................................................................................................ 15
11-02-07. PLANNING DIRECTOR ......................................................................................................... 15
1. Duties of the Director, Generally ......................................................................................... 15
2. Specific Duties and Responsibilities ..................................................................................... 15
CHAPTER 11-03: REVIEW AND DECISION PROCEDURES ......................... 17
11-03-01. PURPOSE ......................................................................................................................... 17
11-03-02. SUMMARY TABLE............................................................................................................... 17
11-03-03. PROCEDURES .................................................................................................................... 18
1. STEP 1: Pre-application Meeting ......................................................................................... 18
2. STEP 2: Neighborhood Meeting ........................................................................................... 18
3. STEP 3: Application Submittal ............................................................................................... 19
4. STEP 4: Notice.......................................................................................................................... 19
5. STEP 5: Application Processing ............................................................................................. 20
6. STEP 6: Public Hearing ........................................................................................................... 21
7. STEP 7: Decision....................................................................................................................... 21
8. STEP 8: Modification............................................................................................................... 23
9. STEP 9: Appeal........................................................................................................................ 23
10. STEP 10: Term of Approval .................................................................................................. 26
11. Mediation ................................................................................................................................. 26
12. Taking Analysis ........................................................................................................................ 27
13. Conduct of Hearings Before Review Bodies ...................................................................... 28
11-03-04. SPECIFIC PROCEDURES ....................................................................................................... 34
1. Code Text Amendment .......................................................................................................... 34
2. Development Agreement ....................................................................................................... 35
3. Rezone....................................................................................................................................... 37
4. Subdivision Plat ....................................................................................................................... 38
5. Record of Survey .................................................................................................................... 42
6. Conditional Use Permit ........................................................................................................... 43
7. Planned Unit Development .................................................................................................... 46
8. Nonconforming Use ................................................................................................................. 49
Supplement No 58 Ord-45-1, Ord-23-15, Amended; Ord-4-15, Amended)
March 2013 Boise Development Code
Page iii
9. Sign Permit ............................................................................................................................... 51
10. Temporary Use Permit ........................................................................................................... 52
11. Zoning Certificate ................................................................................................................... 53
12. Design Review ......................................................................................................................... 54
13. Exception .................................................................................................................................. 58
14. Variance ................................................................................................................................... 61
15. Annexation ............................................................................................................................... 63
16. Comprehensive Plan Amendment ......................................................................................... 69
17. Hillside Development Permits ................................................................................................ 71
18. Floodplain Permits .................................................................................................................. 73
19. River System Permits ............................................................................................................... 74
20. Certificate of Appropriateness ............................................................................................ 76
CHAPTER 11-04: ZONING DISTRICTS ...................................................... 76
11-04-01. GENERAL PROVISIONS ....................................................................................................... 86
1. Zoning Districts Established .................................................................................................... 86
2. Zoning Map .............................................................................................................................. 86
3. General Standards ................................................................................................................. 87
4. Permitted Uses in Any Yard .................................................................................................. 88
11-04-02. OPEN LAND DISTRICTS ....................................................................................................... 88
1. General Purpose of All Open Land Districts ...................................................................... 88
2. Open Land Very Low Density (A-1) District ....................................................................... 88
3. Open Land Reserve (A-2) District ........................................................................................ 88
4. Dimensional Standards for Open Land Districts ................................................................ 89
11-04-03. RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS ....................................................................................................... 89
1. General Purposes of Residential Districts ........................................................................... 89
2. Dimensional Standards for Residential Districts ................................................................ 90
3. Exceptions to Setback Standards ........................................................................................ 90
4. Dimensional Standards for Parking in R-1M District ........................................................ 91
5. Findings for Conditional Uses in the A-1 and A-2 Districts ............................................. 91
6. R-1M District Parking Standards .......................................................................................... 92
11-04-04. OFFICE DISTRICTS .............................................................................................................. 92
1. General Purpose of Office Districts .................................................................................... 92
2. Dimensional Standards for Office Districts ........................................................................ 94
3. Dimensional Standards for Parking in Office Districts ..................................................... 94
4. R-O Zoning District Parking Standards ............................................................................... 95
11-04-05. COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS ..................................................................................................... 95
1. General Purpose of Commercial Districts ........................................................................... 95
2. Dimensional Standards for Commercial Districts ............................................................... 97
3. Dimensional Standards for Parking in Commercial Districts............................................ 98
11-04-06. INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS ........................................................................................................ 98
1. General Purpose of All Industrial Districts .......................................................................... 98
2. Dimensional Standards for Industrial Districts ....................Error! Bookmark not defined.
3. Dimensional Standards for Parking in Industrial Districts .............................................. 101
Supplement No 58 Ord-45-1, Ord-23-15, Amended; Ord-4-15, Amended)
March 2013 Boise Development Code
Page iv
11-04-07. SPECIAL PURPOSE DISTRICTS ............................................................................................. 101
1. Health Services (HS) District ................................................................................................ 101
2. Pedestrian Commercial (PC) District .................................................................................. 101
3. University (U) District ............................................................................................................ 101
4. Dimensional Standards for Special Purpose Districts ..................................................... 103
5. Dimensional Standards for Parking in Special Purpose Districts .................................. 104
CHAPTER 11-05: OVERLAY AND SPECIFIC PLAN DISTRICTS ................. 105
11-05-01. GENERAL PROVISIONS ..................................................................................................... 105
1. Overlay and Specific Plan Districts ................................................................................... 105
11-05-02. CONSERVATION OVERLAY DISTRICTS .................................................................................. 105
1. Generally ............................................................................................................................... 105
2. Hyde Park Conservation District ........................................................................................ 106
3. Near North End Conservation District ............................................................................... 110
11-05-03. DESIGN OVERLAY DISTRICTS ............................................................................................. 112
1. Capitol Boulevard Special Design (C) District ................................................................. 112
2. East Fairview Interim Overlay District ............................................................................... 118
11-05-04. NEIGHBORHOOD OVERLAY DISTRICTS ................................................................................. 119
1. Big Sky Neighborhood (BSN) Overlay District ................................................................ 119
2. Sycamore Neighborhood (S) Overlay District ................................................................. 123
11-05-05. PARKING REDUCTION OVERLAY DISTRICTS .......................................................................... 127
1. General Purpose of Parking Reduction Overlay Districts ............................................. 127
2. Map and Boundaries ............................................................................................................ 127
3. P-1 Parking District Standards ........................................................................................... 128
4. P-2 Parking District Standards ........................................................................................... 128
5. P-3 Parking District Standards ........................................................................................... 128
11-05-06. WATERWAYS OVERLAY DISTRICTS ...................................................................................... 128
1. Boise River System Overlay Districts ................................................................................. 128
11-05-07. SPECIAL PURPOSE OVERLAY DISTRICTS ............................................................................... 139
1. Airport Overlay Zone District ............................................................................................. 139
11-05-08. SPECIFIC PLAN DISTRICTS .................................................................................................. 139
1. Purpose ................................................................................................................................... 139
2. Scope....................................................................................................................................... 139
3. Land Use Controls ................................................................................................................. 139
4. Initiation .................................................................................................................................. 139
5. Minimum Area Standards .................................................................................................... 140
6. Required and Optional Elements ....................................................................................... 140
7. Procedures .............................................................................................................................. 140
8. Adopted Specific Plans ........................................................................................................ 141
11-05-09. HISTORIC PRESERVATION DISTRICTS.................................................................................... 141
1. Purpose ................................................................................................................................... 141
Supplement No 58 Ord-45-1, Ord-23-15, Amended; Ord-4-15, Amended)
March 2013 Boise Development Code
Page v
2. Historic Preservation Commission ....................................................................................... 141
3. Organization, Officers, Rules, Meetings ........................................................................... 142
4. Powers and Duties of Commission ...................................................................................... 142
5. Funding .................................................................................................................................... 142
6. Designation of Historical Districts, Including Historical Districts - Residential ............. 143
7. Procedure For Reclassification of Buildings, Sites, Structures or Objects Located Within Designated Historic Districts and Historic Districts -Residential ....................... 145
8. Designation of Historic Landmarks ..................................................................................... 145
9. Procedure for Removal of Historic Designation .............................................................. 147
10. Procedure for Demolition or Change In Use of Historic Landmark .............................. 148
11. Ordinary Repairs; Public Safety ........................................................................................ 149
12. Acquisition of Property ........................................................................................................ 149
13. Acquisition of Historic Easements ........................................................................................ 149
14. Maintenance and Repair Required; Demolition by Neglect ......................................... 149
15. Exemption from Fire or Building Codes ............................................................................ 150
16. Notice of City Departments and Other Agencies; Register of Historic Districts and Landmarks ...................................................................................................................... 150
17. Signs ........................................................................................................................................ 151
18. Penalties .................................................................................................................................. 151
CHAPTER 11-06: USE REGULATIONS ..................................................... 152
11-06-01. TABLE OF ALLOWED USES ................................................................................................. 152
1. Table Organization .............................................................................................................. 152
2. Explanation of Table Abbreviations ................................................................................. 152
3. Use for Other Purposes Prohibited .................................................................................... 152
4. Classification of New and Unlisted Uses .......................................................................... 153
5. Table of Allowed Uses ......................................................................................................... 154
11-06-02. USE STANDARDS, GENERALLY ........................................................................................... 165
11-06-03. RESIDENTIAL USE STANDARDS ........................................................................................... 165
1. Single and Two-family Living Uses .................................................................................... 165
2. Multi-family Living Uses ....................................................................................................... 172
3. Substandard Original Lots of Record ............................................................................... 172
11-06-04. PUBLIC/INSTITUTIONAL USE STANDARDS ............................................................................. 187
1. Child and Adult Care Uses .................................................................................................. 187
2. Communication Uses.............................................................................................................. 189
3. Education Uses ....................................................................................................................... 193
4. Parks and Recreation Uses .................................................................................................. 193
5. Utility Uses .............................................................................................................................. 193
11-06-05. COMMERCIAL USE STANDARDS .......................................................................................... 194
1. Adult Uses ............................................................................................................................... 194
2. Office Uses ............................................................................................................................. 197
3. Retail Uses .............................................................................................................................. 198
11-06-06. INDUSTRIAL USE STANDARDS ............................................................................................ 200
1. Storage Uses .......................................................................................................................... 200
2. Waste and Salvage Uses .................................................................................................... 200
Supplement No 58 Ord-45-1, Ord-23-15, Amended; Ord-4-15, Amended)
March 2013 Boise Development Code
Page vi
11-06-07. ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES ................................................................................... 202
1. Purpose ................................................................................................................................... 202
2. Approval of Accessory Uses and Structures ..................................................................... 202
3. General Standards for Accessory Uses ............................................................................ 202
4. Additional Standards for Specific Accessory Uses ......................................................... 203
11-06-08. TEMPORARY USES ........................................................................................................... 209
1. Purpose ................................................................................................................................... 209
2. Applicability ........................................................................................................................... 209
3. General Standards for Temporary Uses .......................................................................... 210
CHAPTER 11-07: DEVELOPMENT AND DESIGN STANDARDS ................ 211
11-07-01. PURPOSE ....................................................................................................................... 211
11-07-02. LOTS ............................................................................................................................. 211
1. Lot Layout ............................................................................................................................... 211
2. Construction Over Platted Lot Lines ................................................................................... 212
11-07-03. OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING STANDARDS ................................................................ 212
1. General parking standards ................................................................................................ 212
2. Table of Off-street Parking Requirements ....................................................................... 214
3. Additional Parking Standards ............................................................................................ 221
4. General Design Standards ................................................................................................. 223
5. Accessible Parking Spaces .................................................................................................. 227
6. Temporary Parking Lots ....................................................................................................... 228
11-07-04. CONNECTIVITY ................................................................................................................ 229
1. Public Roads ........................................................................................................................... 229
2. Private Roads ........................................................................................................................ 229
3. Internal Site Circulation ........................................................................................................ 229
4. Pedestrian Access .................................................................................................................. 232
5. Micro-paths ............................................................................................................................ 232
11-07-05. LANDSCAPING, FENCES, WALLS, AND SCREENING ................................................................. 234
1. Purpose and Intent ................................................................................................................ 234
2. Landscaping ........................................................................................................................... 235
3. Fences ...................................................................................................................................... 247
4. Retaining Walls ..................................................................................................................... 248
5. Screening ................................................................................................................................ 248
11-07-06. DISTRICT-SPECIFIC DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS ..................................................................... 249
1. Residential-Office (R-O) Zoning District ........................................................................... 249
2. Pedestrian Commercial (PC) Zoning District ..................................................................... 250
3. Central Business (C-5) Zoning District ................................................................................ 255
4. Residential Modular (R-1M) Zoning District Design Standards .................................... 258
5. Planned Unit Development Standards .............................................................................. 258
11-07-07. HISTORIC STREET LIGHT DISTRICTS ...................................................................................... 260
1. District Locations .................................................................................................................... 260
2. Maps ........................................................................................................................................ 261
Supplement No 58 Ord-45-1, Ord-23-15, Amended; Ord-4-15, Amended)
March 2013 Boise Development Code
Page vii
3. Requesting a New or Expanded District ........................................................................... 263
4. Decision Criteria .................................................................................................................... 263
5. Installation and Maintenance .............................................................................................. 263
6. Established Lighting Districts ................................................................................................ 264
7. Spacing Requirements .......................................................................................................... 264
11-07-08. HILLSIDE AND FOOTHILLS DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS ............................................................ 267
1. Purpose and Intent ................................................................................................................ 267
2. Applicability ........................................................................................................................... 267
3. Categories of Hillside Development permits ................................................................... 267
4. Hillside Development Restrictions ....................................................................................... 268
5. Hillside Development Standards ........................................................................................ 268
6. Application Procedure ......................................................................................................... 273
7. Term of Permits ...................................................................................................................... 273
8. Modification and Revocation .............................................................................................. 275
9. Application Requirements .................................................................................................... 276
11-07-09. FOOTHILLS PLANNED DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS ................................................................. 276
1. Purpose and Intent ................................................................................................................ 276
2. Applicability ........................................................................................................................... 276
3. General Application and Development Requirements ................................................... 276
4. Density Bonus ......................................................................................................................... 276
CHAPTER 11-08: FLOOD HAZARD REGULATIONS ................................ 285
11-08-01. GENERAL PROVISIONS ..................................................................................................... 285
1. Chapter Purpose ................................................................................................................... 285
2. Methods of Reducing Flood Losses .................................................................................... 285
3. Applicability ........................................................................................................................... 286
4. Creation of Zones ................................................................................................................. 286
5. Exclusions ................................................................................................................................ 286
6. Compliance............................................................................................................................. 286
7. Abrogation & Greater Restrictions .................................................................................... 286
8. Interpretation ......................................................................................................................... 287
9. Warning and Disclaimer ...................................................................................................... 287
11-08-02. FLOODWAY ZONE ........................................................................................................... 287
1. Permitted Uses ....................................................................................................................... 287
2. Standards ............................................................................................................................... 287
3. Prohibited Uses ...................................................................................................................... 288
4. Relocating the Floodway (Line) .......................................................................................... 288
11-08-03. FLOODWAY FRINGE (FF) ZONE AND AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING (ASF) ZONE ..................... 288
1. Permitted Uses ....................................................................................................................... 288
2. Standards ............................................................................................................................... 289
11-08-04. UNNUMBERED "A ZONES" ............................................................................................... 292
1. Permitted Uses ....................................................................................................................... 292
2. Standards ............................................................................................................................... 292
11-08-05. CRITICAL FACILITIES ......................................................................................................... 293
Supplement No 58 Ord-45-1, Ord-23-15, Amended; Ord-4-15, Amended)
March 2013 Boise Development Code
Page viii
11-08-06. ADMINISTRATION ............................................................................................................ 293
1. Duties of the Floodplain Adminstrator (Boise Planning Director) ................................. 293
2. Duties of the Boise City Engineer ....................................................................................... 295
11-08-07. VARIANCES AND APPEALS ................................................................................................ 295
1. General Provisions ................................................................................................................ 295
2. Conditions for Variances ..................................................................................................... 296
3. Appeals ................................................................................................................................... 297
11-08-08. DEFINITIONS ................................................................................................................... 297
CHAPTER 11-09: SUBDIVISION STANDARDS ......................................... 302
11-09-01. PURPOSE AND APPLICABILITY ............................................................................................ 302
1. Purpose ................................................................................................................................... 302
2. Applicability ........................................................................................................................... 302
11-09-02. RECORDS OF SURVEY ....................................................................................................... 302
1. Standards ............................................................................................................................... 302
11-09-03. SUBDIVISION DESIGN STANDARDS ...................................................................................... 308
1. General ................................................................................................................................... 308
2. Block Numbers ....................................................................................................................... 308
3. Lot Layout ............................................................................................................................... 308
4. Public Streets.......................................................................................................................... 309
5. Private Streets ....................................................................................................................... 310
6. Easements ............................................................................................................................... 312
7. Arterial and Collector Street Buffering ............................................................................ 313
8. Alley (Public or Private) ....................................................................................................... 314
11-09-04. REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS ................................................................................................ 314
1. General ................................................................................................................................... 314
2. Filing of Plans and Bonding Surety .................................................................................... 314
3. Water...................................................................................................................................... 315
4. Sanitary Sewer ...................................................................................................................... 315
5. Drainage ................................................................................................................................. 315
6. Irrigation ................................................................................................................................. 316
7. Park or School Dedication ................................................................................................... 317
8. Pedestrian Access .................................................................................................................. 317
9. Street Lighting ........................................................................................................................ 317
10. Landscaping ........................................................................................................................... 317
11. Pressure Irrigation Facilities ................................................................................................ 318
12. Utility Location ....................................................................................................................... 320
11-09-05. MODIFICATIONS AND WAIVERS ......................................................................................... 320
CHAPTER 11-010: SIGN STANDARDS .................................................... 321
11-010-01. PURPOSE ....................................................................................................................... 321
11-010-02. SIGN DEFINITIONS ........................................................................................................... 321
Supplement No 58 Ord-45-1, Ord-23-15, Amended; Ord-4-15, Amended)
March 2013 Boise Development Code
Page ix
1. Types of Signs ....................................................................................................................... 321
11-010-03. GENERAL SIGN REGULATIONS ........................................................................................... 323
1. Permit Required ..................................................................................................................... 323
2. Signs Not Regulated ............................................................................................................. 323
3. Abandoned Sign ................................................................................................................... 323
4. Maintenance and Repair ..................................................................................................... 323
5. Blanketing of Signs ............................................................................................................... 323
6. Traffic Visibility ..................................................................................................................... 323
7. Gateway Streets ................................................................................................................... 323
8. Design Guidelines for all Signs .......................................................................................... 324
9. Legal Nonconforming ........................................................................................................... 324
10. Sign Variance ........................................................................................................................ 324
11. Adjacent to Residential Zones ............................................................................................ 324
12. Street Trees ............................................................................................................................ 324
13. Signs for Which a Permit is Not Required ........................................................................ 324
14. Prohibited Signs..................................................................................................................... 325
11-010-04. ON-PREMISE SIGNS ......................................................................................................... 326
1. Accessory On-Premise Signs ............................................................................................... 326
2. Temporary Signs ................................................................................................................... 328
11-010-05. REGULATIONS BY SIGN TYPE ............................................................................................. 329
1. Canopy and Marquee Signs ............................................................................................... 329
2. Awning .................................................................................................................................... 329
3. Projecting ................................................................................................................................ 329
4. Under Canopy/Marquee (Hanging) ................................................................................. 330
5. Window .................................................................................................................................. 330
6. Electronic Message Displays (EMD) ................................................................................... 330
7. Wall Signs Oriented to Interstate Highways ................................................................... 331
8. Portable Signs in the C-5 District ....................................................................................... 331
11-010-06. OFF-PREMISE SIGNS ........................................................................................................ 332
1. Off-Site Identification .......................................................................................................... 332
2. Poster Panel and Bulletin Panel Off-Premise Signs (Billboards) .................................. 332
11-010-07. SPECIAL SIGN DISTRICTS ................................................................................................... 333
1. Capitol Boulevard Sign Standards .................................................................................... 333
11-010-08. ENFORCEMENT ................................................................................................................ 334
CHAPTER 11-011: NONCONFORMANCE .............................................. 335
11-011-01. NONCONFORMING USES, PARCELS AND STRUCTURES ............................................................ 335
11-011-02. NONCONFORMING PARCELS ............................................................................................. 335
11-011-03. NONCONFORMING STRUCTURES ........................................................................................ 335
11-011-04. NONCONFORMING USES .................................................................................................. 335
11-011-05. DESTRUCTION BY CALAMITY .............................................................................................. 336
11-011-06. DETERMINATION OF NONCONFORMING STATUS ................................................................... 336
Supplement No 58 Ord-45-1, Ord-23-15, Amended; Ord-4-15, Amended)
March 2013 Boise Development Code
Page x
CHAPTER 11-012: DEFINITIONS ............................................................. 337
11-012-01. MEANINGS OF WORDS GENERALLY .................................................................................... 337
1. General Rules ........................................................................................................................ 337
2. Interpretations ........................................................................................................................ 338
11-012-02. DEFINITIONS OF USE CATEGORIES AND USE TYPES ................................................................ 338
1. Residential Uses ..................................................................................................................... 338
2. Public/Institutional Uses ........................................................................................................ 340
3. Commercial Uses ................................................................................................................... 345
4. Industrial Uses ........................................................................................................................ 352
5. Accessory Uses ....................................................................................................................... 354
6. Temporary Uses .................................................................................................................... 355
11-012-03. MEASUREMENT-RELATED DEFINITIONS ................................................................................. 356
11-012-04. HISTORIC PRESERVATION DEFINITIONS ................................................................................ 359
11-012-05. OTHER TERMS DEFINED .................................................................................................... 363
CHAPTER 11-013: ADOPTED SPECIFIC PLANS ....................................... 390
11-013-01. HARRIS RANCH ............................................................................................................... 390
1. Interpretation of District ....................................................................................................... 390
2. Purpose ................................................................................................................................... 390
3. Conformity Required ............................................................................................................ 390
4. Administration ........................................................................................................................ 391
5. Administrative Review - Use ............................................................................................... 392
6. Administrative Review - Design .......................................................................................... 395
7. Hearing Process ..................................................................................................................... 397
8. General and Specific Use Standards ............................................................................... 397
9. Parking Standards - General ............................................................................................. 412
10. Sign Standards ...................................................................................................................... 426
11-013-02. BARBER VALLEY .............................................................................................................. 435
1. Applicability of Ordinance ................................................................................................. 435
2. Interpretation of Districts ..................................................................................................... 435
3. Conformity Required ............................................................................................................ 436
4. Off-Street Parking and Loading Requirements ............................................................... 442
5. Administrative Provisions ..................................................................................................... 443
6. Definitions ............................................................................................................................... 444
SUPPLEMENT NO. 58, Ord 45-15, ORD 9, 11, 14 &15 2013(ORD 42-13 1029-13)
March 2013 Boise Development Code
Page 1
CHAPTER 11-01: GENERAL PROVISIONS GENERAL PROVISIONS 11-01-01. TITLE AND AUTHORITY
1. TITLE
This Code shall be known as the "Boise Development Code" and is referred to in this document as “this Code.”
2. AUTHORITY FOR CODE
This Code is adopted under the authority for Local Land Use Planning established in Title 67, Chapter 65, of the Idaho State Statutes; Plats and Vacations established in Title 50, Chapter 13 and Preservation of Historic Sites established in Title 67, Chapter 46. 11-01-02. PRIOR RIGHTS AND PERMITS
1. The enactment of this Code shall not terminate or otherwise affect rights, variances, and permits acquired or authorized under prior Code.
2. Where a building permit and a zoning certificate have been issued for the construction of a building or structure, and for an authorized use and occupancy thereof, in accordance with the law prior to [the effective date of this Code], the building or structure may be completed in conformance with the approved plans and on the basis for which the building permit and zoning certificate had been issued, provided construction of the building or structure is commenced within 60 days of the effective date of the building permit and diligently pursued to completion.
3. Detailed conditional use applications based upon concept plans approved prior to the effective date of this revised Code shall be subject to the terms and conditions of this revised Code. Upon showing an undue hardship, an applicant may be allowed by the Planning and Zoning Commission to process such detailed conditional use applications under the terms and conditions of the previous Code. 11-01-03. PURPOSE
To promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of present and future residents, and to bring about coordinated and efficient development that encourages affordable and fair housing stimulates economic opportunity, and promotes diverse, inclusive communities with a variety of housing choices for residents. 11-01-04. APPLICABILITY
1. UNIFORM APPLICABILITY
A. Except as otherwise provided in this Code, land, buildings, and premises in any district shall be used only in accordance with the regulations established for the base zoning district.
B. No property shall be allowed to maintain an attractive or public nuisance as defined by this Code at any time.
2. PUBLIC SERVICES EXCEPTED
This Code shall not limit or interfere with the temporary use of any property as a public voting place, or with the construction, installation, or operation of the following by any public agency or private corporation, when such construction is otherwise in conformity with all federal, state, county, and city regulations:
CHAPTER 11-01: General Provisions
Section 11-01-05: Relationship to Other Laws
Subsection 1: Other Laws
Supplement No 58 Ord-45-1, Ord-23-15, Amended; Ord-4-15, Amended)
March 2013 Boise Development Code
Page 2
A. Public street or highway.
B. Poles, towers, wires, cables, conduits, vaults, laterals, pipes, mains, wells, valves, or any other similar distributing and transmitting equipment for telephone or other communications; electric power, gas, water, and sewer lines, provided that the installation shall conform when applicable with the rules and regulations of any federal or state commissions and agencies, or any other authorities having jurisdiction and subject to other city ordinance provisions, rules, and regulations; except that poles, towers, or similar installations of a height of 70 feet or greater are subject to the standards in Section 11-06-04.5, Utility Uses. Electrical substations are considered a major utility facility and are subject to the requirements of this Code.
C. Railroad right-of-way, excluding yards and stations.
D. Incidental appurtenances to any of the above. 11-01-05. RELATIONSHIP TO OTHER LAWS
1. OTHER LAWS
A. All of the provisions of this Code shall be liberally construed in favor of the governing body and shall not be deemed to limit or repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. Where this Code imposes greater restrictions than that imposed by other law or by private restrictions, this Code shall prevail.
B. The stricter provisions of the Boise Air Terminal regulations, Central District Health, and other regulating ordinances or codes shall apply in the enforcement of this Code.
2. PRIVATE RESTRICTIONS
This Code is not intended to impair or interfere with other regulations of private restrictions on the use of land improvements and structures. The provisions of this Code shall be in addition to, and shall not be deemed to repeal, abrogate, or impair any other ordinance, regulation, easement, covenant, or deed restriction. Where this Code imposes greater restrictions than that imposed by private restrictions, this Code shall prevail.
3. MOST RESTRICTIVE REGULATIONS GOVERN
Wherever the regulations made under the authority of this Code require a greater width or size of yards or courts, are more restrictive as to height of building or permit of a less number of stories, or require a greater percentage of lot to be left unoccupied, or impose standards which are more restrictive than are required by any other City ordinance or regulation, the provisions of this Code shall govern. Wherever the provisions of any other City ordinance or regulation require a greater width or size of yards or courts, or are more restrictive as to the height of buildings or permit of a less number of stories, or require a greater percentage of lot to be left unoccupied, or impose other standards which are more restrictive than are required by the regulations contained herein, the provisions of such ordinance or regulation shall govern. 11-01-06. SEVERABILITY
Each section, clause, and provision of this Code is declared severable. If a court of competent jurisdiction declares that any section, clause, or provision of this Code is invalid, the same shall not affect the validity of the remainder of this Code as a whole, or any other part of this Code, or the application of the provisions to other persons or circumstances, and the remainder shall continue in full force and effect.
CHAPTER 11-01: General Provisions
Section 11-01-07: Area of City Impact
Subsection 1: Annexation Area
Supplement No 58 Ord-45-1, Ord-23-15, Amended; Ord-4-15, Amended)
March 2013 Boise Development Code
Page 3
11-01-07. AREA OF CITY IMPACT
1. ANNEXATION AREA
Boise City shall limit its annexation to those lands within its Area of City Impact. If Boise City wishes to annex lands outside of its Area of City Impact, it shall renegotiate its Area of City Impact Boundary with Ada County in accord with Idaho Code 67-6526(d) unless renegotiation is not required pursuant to Idaho Code 50-222, Annexation by Cities, Category A.
2. AREA OF CITY IMPACT BOUNDARY MAP
The Area of City Impact is the area designated on the Boise City Area of City Impact Boundary Map as amended, incorporated in this Code by reference. Copies are available for inspection at the Boise City Planning and Development Services Department.
3. APPLICABLE PLAN POLICIES AND ORDINANCES
A. The adopted Comprehensive Plan, including the Comprehensive Park and Recreation System Plan, shall apply within the unincorporated part of the Boise Area of City Impact.
B. The Ada County Code, Title 8, The Zoning Ordinance, shall be used to implement the Boise City Comprehensive Plan within the Area of City Impact. All land use applications shall also comply with the provisions of this chapter.
C. The Boise City Uniform Street and Address Number Ordinance shall apply to all property within the Area of Impact. Street names and addresses shall be assigned by Boise City. Existing street names and addresses in the Area of Impact, not in compliance with the Boise City Uniform Street and Address Number Ordinance at the time this section goes into effect, shall not be changed until address changes are necessary for address continuity.
D. The Title 4, Chapter 12, Boise City Code, known also as the Boise City Impact Fee Ordinance as amended by Boise City Ordinance No. 6144, adopted December 11, 2001, shall be applicable within the Area of City Impact in accordance with the AGREEMENT FOR THE COLLECTION OF BOISE CITY PARK IMPACT FEES FOR DEVELOPMENT IN THE BOISE CITY AREA OF CITY IMPACT. Development of parks by Boise City within the Area of Impact shall be subject to the provisions of the agreement, adopted by Boise City and Ada County and made a part of this Code by this reference.
4. COORDINATION OF PLAN AMENDMENTS, ORDINANCE AMENDMENTS, AND ZONING APPLICATIONS
A. At least 30 days prior to a planning and zoning commission hearing all County and City amendments to their respective Comprehensive Plans and zoning ordinances which apply within the Boise City Area of City Impact shall be sent by the entity considering such amendment to the other entity. The City shall send all zoning ordinance amendments to the county.
B. At least 30 days prior to any public hearing, all County applications for subdivisions, rezones, and conditional use permits within the Boise City Area of City Impact shall be sent to Boise City. Written comments and
CHAPTER 11-01: General Provisions
Section 11-01-08: Enforcement
Subsection 5: Renegotiation
Supplement No 58 Ord-45-1, Ord-23-15, Amended; Ord-4-15, Amended)
March 2013 Boise Development Code
Page 4
recommendations shall be sent to Ada County no later than 24 days after the referral is received. The City Council may direct that the Boise City Planning Commission or staff review and comment on such applications.
C. Applications for subdivisions and rezones within the Boise Area of Impact shall occur as a result of a request for annexation to Boise City; however, Ada County may consider such applications in those exceptions where annexation is not approved by Boise City or where the parcel on which such application is filed is not contiguous to Boise City and therefore cannot be annexed.
D. The Title 4, Chapter 12, Boise City Code known also as the Boise City Impact Fee Ordinance as amended by Boise City Ordinance No. 6144, adopted December 11, 2001, shall be applicable within the Boise City Area of City Impact in accordance with the AGREEMENT FOR THE COLLECTION OF BOISE CITY PARK IMPACT FEES FOR DEVELOPMENT IN THE BOISE CITY AREA OF CITY IMPACT.
E. Development of parks by Boise City within the Boise City Area of City Impact shall be subject to the provisions of the AGREEMENT FOR THE COLLECTION OF BOISE CITY PARK IMPACT FEES FOR DEVELOPMENT IN THE BOISE CITY AREA OF CITY IMPACT which is hereby adopted by Boise City and Ada County and made a part hereof by this reference.
5. RENEGOTIATION
A. In accordance with Idaho Code 67-6526(d), the Boise City Council or the Board of Ada County Commissioners may request to renegotiate any provision of this section. Within 30 days of receipt of such written requests by each part, a meeting between the two jurisdictions shall occur.
B. While renegotiation is occurring, the provisions of this section shall remain in effect until this chapter is amended or a substitute ordinance is adopted by Boise City and Ada County, in accordance with the notice and hearing procedures provided in Ada County and Idaho Codes, or until a declaratory judgment from the District Court is final. However, this section or stipulated portions thereof shall be of no further force and effect if both jurisdictions so agree by mutually adopted resolution. 11-01-08. ENFORCEMENT
1. VIOLATION
Any violation of the provisions of this Code or any conditions of approval required under an issued permit or certificate, or any work in excess of the authority granted by the issuance of a permit, shall constitute a misdemeanor. A separate offense occurs for each day during which a violation is committed, continued, or permitted.
2. PERMITS SHALL CONFORM
A permit or business license issued in conflict with the provisions of this Code shall be null and void.
CHAPTER 11-01: General Provisions
Section 11-01-08: Enforcement
Subsection 3: Minimal Property Maintenance
Supplement No 58 Ord-45-1, Ord-23-15, Amended; Ord-4-15, Amended)
March 2013 Boise Development Code
Page 5
3. MINIMAL PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
A. Purpose
To help prevent urban blight by establishing minimal property maintenance standards.
B. General
Damaged, dilapidated, or unfinished buildings shall be restored or finished to eliminate detrimental visual impacts. A property owner shall take steps to restore or finish the building per approved plans. No building or premise shall detrimentally impact the surrounding neighborhood due to dilapidation, deterioration, decay, abandonment, or unfinished construction.
C. Restoration of a Damaged or Dilapidated Building or Completion of an Unfinished Building
Restoration of a damaged or dilapidated building or work toward completion of an unfinished building shall begin within six months of the building becoming damaged or dilapidated or being deemed unfinished. The city may require that such buildings that are also unoccupied be secured (fenced or boarded up) during the six-month period. This deadline may be extended by the Director upon submission of documentation of insurance settlement delays or similar complications beyond the owner’s control. Restoration of a damaged or dilapidated building or work on an unfinished building shall be completed within one year from commencement.
D. Due Process Hearing
The City shall advertise and conduct a public hearing as to why the building has not been restored or completed when:
(1) It has not been maintained at a minimal property maintenance standard for six months; or
(2) Efforts to restore or finish the building have not been completed within one year after restoration or construction work has begun.
E. Notice
At least 15 days prior to the date of the public hearing, notice shall be sent via certified mail to the property owner and by first class mail to residents and property owners within 300 feet of the property, and a public notice of the hearing shall be advertised in the official newspaper of the City.
F. Required Findings
(1) Removal or restoration of the building shall be ordered if the following findings are made:
(a) The building meets the definition of a damaged or dilapidated building, or of an unfinished building;
(b) The building has existed in a damaged or dilapidated or unfinished state for a period of at least six months or has not been maintained at the minimal property standards for a period of six months; and
(c) The property owner has previously received written notice as required in E, above.
(2) If removal or restoration is ordered, the City shall obtain bids to restore the building or clear the site of the offending building.
(3) The fact that a building is not a danger or attractive visual nuisance shall not be a defense for failing to restore or finish it.
CHAPTER 11-01: General Provisions
Section 11-01-08: Enforcement
Subsection 4: Inspection and Enforcement
Supplement No 58 Ord-45-1, Ord-23-15, Amended; Ord-4-15, Amended)
March 2013 Boise Development Code
Page 6
G. Restoration and Demolition
(1) Fund
The City shall establish a revolving fund to be designated for building restoration and demolition pursuant to this Code. Payments shall be made out of this fund upon the demand of the Director to defray the costs and expenses associated with restoration or demolition.
(2) Recovery of Cost of Restoration or Demolition:
The property owner shall be billed for the costs of restoration or demolition. If the property owner does not respond within 60 days, then the city may recover costs of the abatement in a civil action or by filing an assessment with the Ada County Recorder on or before the first day of August of the year. Assessments remaining unpaid after 30 days from the date of recording on the assessment roll shall become delinquent and shall bear interest at the rate of ten percent per annum, or the current interest rate if higher, from and after said date. All money recovered from the sale of the property at a foreclosure sale shall be returned to the restoration and demolition fund.
4. INSPECTION AND ENFORCEMENT
A. The Director shall maintain an enforcement program to abate nuisances as defined in this Code and to provide assistance in the prosecution of violations.
B. The Director of Building Division shall enforce the provisions of this Code pertaining to the erection, construction, reconstruction, moving, conversion, alteration, addition, location, or razing of a building or structure.
5. REMEDIES AND PENALTIES
Any violation or noncompliance with the provisions of this Code shall be subject to all of the remedies, penalties, and enforcement available under Title II, Chapter 1, of the Boise City Code and Title 67, Chapter 65, of the Idaho Code, including but not limited to criminal misdemeanor and civil injunction action.
A. Revocation of Permits and Certificates
The Director or a review body shall have the authority to revoke any permit or zoning certificate that has been granted under this Code when it has been determined that the structure or use authorized by the permit has been constructed or is being maintained in violation of this Code or of the conditions and limitations of an issued permit or zoning certificate. In order to revoke the permit or certificate, the Director shall follow the following procedures:
(1) A notice of intent to revoke a permit shall be sent to the holder of the permit, or to one of his representatives; or, if this is not possible, the notice shall be posted in a conspicuous position at the entrance to the premises and by the certified mailing of another copy of the notice to the last known address of the permit holder.
(2) The permit shall be revoked within 15 days of the posting of the notice of intent to revoke unless the cause of the violation has been removed and evidence of the same has been present to the Director within that period.
(3) Any action of permit revocation may be appealed to the Planning and Zoning Commission by filing a written notice of such appeal with the Director within ten days after the revocation of the permit.
CHAPTER 11-01: General Provisions
Section 11-01-08: Enforcement
Subsection 5: Remedies and Penalties
Supplement No 58 Ord-45-1, Ord-23-15, Amended; Ord-4-15, Amended)
March 2013 Boise Development Code
Page 7
B. Abatement
The city may abate any nuisance in violation of the Boise City Code.
(1) Following a determination by the Director that a nuisance as defined in this Code is being maintained, notice shall be given to the owner or owner’s representative either in person or by certified mail to abate the nuisance or violation within a time specified in the notice.
(2) If the owner or owner’s representative fails to comply with the requirements of the notice within the period specified, the Director may take action including abatement or cleanup.
(3) The city may recover the cost of abatement or cleanup as allowed under Idaho State Code 50-1008 as a lien upon the property or as a city tax for costs incurred in the abatement or cleanup.
(4) Proceeding under this Code will not preclude the city from proceeding under other sections of the Boise City Code or under any other applicable provisions of state or federal statutes.
CHAPTER 11-01: General Provisions
Section 11-01-08: Enforcement
Subsection 5: Remedies and Penalties
Supplement No 58 Ord-45-1, Ord-23-15, Amended; Ord-4-15, Amended)
March 2013 Boise Development Code
Page 8
C. Assurance of Discontinuance
As an additional means of enforcing this Code, the Director may accept an "Assurance of Discontinuance" of an act or practice deemed in violation of this Code or any rule or regulation adopted pursuant to this Code from a person engaging in, or who has engaged in such act or practice. The assurance shall specify a time limit during which such discontinuance is to be accomplished. Failure to perform the terms of the assurance shall constitute prima facie proof of a violation for the purpose of securing injunctive relief from a court of competent jurisdiction.
SUPPLEMENT NO. 58, Ord 45-15, ORD 9, 11, 14 &15 2013(ORD 42-13 1029-13)
March 2013 Boise Development Code
Page 9
CHAPTER 11-02: REVIEW AND DECISION REVIEW AND DECISION BODIESBODIES 11-02-01. PURPOSE
To identify the roles and responsibilities of appointed and elected boards, as well as the duties of the city staff, in the administration of this Code. 11-02-02. CITY COUNCIL
1. DUTIES, JURISDICTION, AND AUTHORITY
The Boise City Council (“the Council”) is the final legislative authority on zoning and land use decisions. The Director and all commissions and committees indicated in this Code function at the direction of the Council. Duties and authority of the Council are as follows:
A. Confirm the Mayor's appointments to the memberships of the Planning and Zoning Commission, the Design Review Committee, the Historic Preservation Commission, and the position of Hearing Examiner;
B. Hear and decide applications as indicated in Table 11-03.1and in Chapter11-03, Review and Decision Procedures;
C. Hear and decide appeals of decisions of the Planning and Zoning Commission, and the Historic Preservation Commission; and
D. After receiving a recommendation from the Planning and Zoning Commission or Historic Preservation Commission, hear and decide all legislative matters including but not limited to adoption of and amendments to the comprehensive plan, amendments to the Land Use Map, amendments to this Code, annexations, re-zones, Area of Impact provisions, emergency ordinances and moratoriums.
2. MEMBERSHIP
The membership of the Council shall be as set forth in Title 1, Chapter 1-07, Election of Council Members by Designated Seat, of the Boise Municipal Code.
3. PROCEDURES
A. General
Rules of procedure for the Council are set forth in Title 1, Chapter 1-02, Council, of the Boise Municipal Code.
B. Emergency Ordinances
(1) If the Council finds that an imminent peril to the public health, safety, or welfare requires adoption of ordinances, or adoption of a moratorium upon the issuance of certain permits, or both, it shall issue a written statement containing the reasons therefore. The Council may then proceed to a hearing, without recommendation of a commission and upon any abbreviated notice of hearing that it finds practical to adopt the ordinance or moratorium.
(2) An emergency ordinance or moratorium may remain in effect for no more than 182 days. Restrictions established by an emergency ordinance may not be imposed for consecutive periods. Further, an intervening period of not less than one year shall exist between an emergency ordinance and passage of another emergency ordinance. To sustain restrictions established by an emergency ordinance beyond the 182 day period, the Council must adopt an interim or
CHAPTER 11-02: Review and Decision Bodies
Section 11-02-03: Planning and Zoning Commission
Subsection 1: Duties, Jurisdiction, and Authority
Supplement No 58 Ord-45-1, Ord-23-15, Amended; Ord-4-15, Amended)
March 2013 Boise Development Code
Page 10
regular ordinance, following the notice and hearing procedures in Section 11-03-03, Procedures.
C. Interim Ordinances
(1) If the Council finds that a plan, plan component, or amendment to a city plan is being prepared, it may adopt interim ordinances as required or authorized under this chapter following the notice and hearing procedures provided in Section 11-03-03, Common Procedures. The Council may also adopt an interim moratorium upon the issuance of certain permits if, in addition to the foregoing, the Council finds that an imminent peril to the public health, safety, or welfare requires the adoption of an interim moratorium.
(2) An interim ordinance shall state a definite period of time, not to exceed one calendar year, during which it shall be in effect. To sustain restrictions established by an interim ordinance, the Council must adopt a regular ordinance, following the notice and hearing procedures provided in Section 11-03-03, Common Procedures. 11-02-03. PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION
1. DUTIES, JURISDICTION, AND AUTHORITY
For enabling legislation for the Planning and Zoning Commission (PZC) generally, see Title 2 of the Boise Municipal Code. Duties, jurisdiction, and authority of the PZC are as follows:
A. Prepare and recommend a Comprehensive and at least annually review the provisions of said plan and report its findings and recommendations to the Council;
B. Review and decide applications as indicated in Table 11-03.1 and in Chapter 11-03, Review and Decision Procedures;
C. As indicated in Table 11-03.1 and Chapter 11-03, Review and Decision Procedures, submit to the Council, following a public hearing, a report of findings and a recommendation to approve, approve with modifications, or deny each application;
D. Initiate, from time to time, a review of the provisions of this Code, report its findings and recommendations to the Council; and
E. Petition the Council requesting an amendment of this Code or the Boise City Comprehensive Plan; provided that it shall first have held public hearings thereon in the manner prescribed in Chapter 11-03, Review and Decision Procedures.
2. MEMBERSHIP
A. Composition
The PZC shall consist of the Mayor and one person who is, at the time of appointment, under 18 years of age, as a non-voting ex-officio member; and in addition, not less than three nor more than 12 voting members, to be appointed by the Mayor and confirmed by the Council. Persons living within the Area of City Impact shall be entitled to representation on the PZC. Such representation shall as nearly as possible reflect the proportion of population living within the area of impact.
CHAPTER 11-02: Review and Decision Bodies
Section 11-02-03: Planning and Zoning Commission
Subsection 3: Procedures
Supplement No 58 Ord-45-1, Ord-23-15, Amended; Ord-4-15, Amended)
March 2013 Boise Development Code
Page 11
B. Term of Office
Appointment to such office shall be for the period of four years. No person shall serve more than two full consecutive terms without specific concurrence by two-thirds of the Boise City Council adopted by motion and recorded in minutes. If a vacancy shall occur during any unexpired term, the Mayor, with the confirmation of the Council, shall appoint a member for the balance of the term.
(ord. 42-13, 10/29/13)
C. Chairman
The PZC shall appoint one of its members as Chairman of the PZC, who shall hold office as Chairman for such term as the PZC shall so designate, and the PZC may elect a Vice-Chairman who shall act as Chairman in the absence of the Chairman of the PZC.
3. PROCEDURES
A. The rules of procedure for the PZC are as set forth in Title 2, Chapter 2-07, Planning-Zoning Commission, of the Boise Municipal Code and the by-laws adopted by the PZC.
B. Compensation
The members of the PZC shall serve and act without compensation, except that their actual and necessary expenses shall be allowed by the Council and the city shall provide the necessary and suitable equipment and supplies to enable the PZC to properly transact and perform its business.
C. Quorum
A majority of the appointed members of the PZC shall be necessary to constitute a quorum for the transaction of business.
D. Meetings and Attendance
(1) The PZC shall meet in regular hearing once per 30 days on the first Monday of the month for at least nine months of the year. The PZC may hold additional hearings following the regular monthly hearing if required by the volume of applications received during the previous cut-off period, and at such other times as may be called by the Chairman or by the Mayor.
(2) The members of the PZC are expected to attend scheduled meetings. Members may be excused from attendance due to personal illness, family emergency, or out of town business trips. PZC members whose attendance at scheduled meetings falls below 60 percent without cause within any given year may be removed from the PZC by the Mayor with the approval of Council.
E. Conflict of Interest Prohibited
Members of the PZC shall honor the Code of Ethics within Chapter 1-21 of the Code and shall not participate in any proceeding or action when the member or his employer, business partner, business associate, or any person related to him by affinity or consanguinity within the second degree has an economic interest in the procedure or action. Any actual or potential interest in any proceeding shall be disclosed at or before any meeting at which the action is being heard or considered.
CHAPTER 11-02: Review and Decision Bodies
Section 11-02-04: Design Review Committee
Subsection 1: Duties, Jurisdiction, and Authority
Supplement No 58 Ord-45-1, Ord-23-15, Amended; Ord-4-15, Amended)
March 2013 Boise Development Code
Page 12
11-02-04. DESIGN REVIEW COMMITTEE
1. DUTIES, JURISDICTION, AND AUTHORITY
The Design Review Committee (DRC) is a standing committee of the PZC. The duties, jurisdiction, and authority of the DRC are as indicated in Table 11-03.1 and Chapter 11-03, Review and Decision Procedures and as follows:
A. Protect property rights and values, enhance important environmental features of the city, and to ensure that the general appearance of buildings and structures along with development of the land does not impair or preclude the orderly and harmonious development of the community;
B. Review all development proposals within the design overlay zoning districts established by this Code. Within these districts the DRC, with input from other jurisdictions, shall regulate landscaping, review building design, site planning, signs, grading, development and beautification, including but not limited to the regulation and restriction of the type, number of stories, size, construction, reconstruction, alteration, repair, or use of buildings and structures to ensure compliance with the requirements of the respective overlay district; and
C. Develop and recommend to the PZC for Council adoption, special design criteria districts that describe additional requirements relating to bulk and design regulations to be imposed or that establish design standards for specific uses, types of uses, parking standards, streetscapes, or other similar items. Where a special district has been adopted, it shall be designated on the zoning maps.
2. LIMITATIONS
A. The DRC is specifically prohibited from requiring reduction in density, reduction in floor area ratio, or other general bulk regulations that cannot specifically be shown to be required by reason of public safety, health, or destruction or diminution of property values. Unless the proposed structure is determined to be detrimental to health, safety, or adjoining property values, the DRC shall not require reduction in building height or floor area ratio to less than that allowed in the respective use district, except as allowed per Section 11-09-02.1.B(2) for development on substandard original lots of record.
B. Denial of a design review permit or approval of a design review permit with conditions unacceptable to the landowner may be appealed to the PZC.
3. MEMBERSHIP
A. Composition
The DRC shall be composed of up to eight members. Members of the DRC shall be appointed with due regard to the proper representation of such fields as architecture, landscape architecture, engineering, planning (environmental, urban, and town), and the visual arts. Only one member may reside outside of the city limits and within the Area of Impact. One member may be, at the time of appointment, under 21 years of age. The student member shall be appointed to a term of up to
CHAPTER 11-02: Review and Decision Bodies
Section 11-02-05: Historic Preservation Commission
Subsection 4: Procedures
Supplement No 58 Ord-45-1, Ord-23-15, Amended; Ord-4-15, Amended)
March 2013 Boise Development Code
Page 13
one year and may be reappointed up to two successive terms. The Mayor, in the same manner, shall appoint a member to fill an unexpired term in case of a vacancy.
B. Term of Office
Members shall be appointed by the Mayor and confirmed by the Council for a four-year term, with the exception of the PZC representative who shall serve a term of one year or less as defined by the PZC.
C. Chairman
The DRC shall appoint one of its members as chairman who shall hold office for such term as designated. The DRC shall elect a co-chairman to act as the chairman in the absence of the chairman.
(ord. 42-13, 10/29/13)
4. PROCEDURES
A. Quorum
Four of the eight appointed members of the DRC shall be necessary to constitute a quorum for the transaction of business.
B. Meetings
The DRC shall meet in regular hearing once per 30 days on the second Wednesday of each month. The DRC may hold additional hearings following the regular monthly hearing if required by the volume of applications received during the previous cut-off period, and at such other times as may be called by the Chairman or by the Mayor.
C. Rules
The DRC shall adopt rules of procedure as necessary to conduct its duties. The PZC must approve all rules of procedure that are adopted by the DRC. 11-02-05. HISTORIC PRESERVATION COMMISSION
1. DUTIES, JURISDICTION, AND AUTHORITY
The duties, jurisdiction, and authority of the Historic Preservation Commission (HPC) are as indicated in Section 11-05-09; Table 11-03.1, and Chapter 11-03, Review and Decision Procedures, and as follows:
A. Conduct a survey of local historic properties and landmarks;
B. Recommend acquisition of fee and lesser interest in historic properties and landmarks, including adjacent or associated properties and lands, by purchase, bequest, or donation;
C. Preserve, restore, maintain, and operate historic properties under the ownership or control of the city;
D. Recommend the lease, sale, transfer, or disposition of public historic property subject to the rights of public access and upon such terms and conditions that will ensure the preservation of the property;
E. Recommend contracting with the state or federal governments in the pursuit of the objectives of historic preservation;
F. Cooperate with the federal, state, and local governments in the pursuit of the objectives of historic preservation;
CHAPTER 11-02: Review and Decision Bodies
Section 11-02-05: Historic Preservation Commission
Subsection 2: Membership
Supplement No 58 Ord-45-1, Ord-23-15, Amended; Ord-4-15, Amended)
March 2013 Boise Development Code
Page 14
G. Participate in the conduct of land use, urban renewal, and other planning processes undertaken by the city, the county, or any other governmental entity;
H. Recommend ordinances and otherwise provide information for the purposes of historic preservation within the city;
I. Promote and conduct an educational and interpretative program on historic properties within the jurisdiction of the city;
J. After having received prior consent of the owner, occupant, or person in charge, and solely in performance of official duties and only at reasonable times, enter upon private lands for the examination or survey such lands; and
K. Review all development proposals within the HD overlay district and decide applications for a certificate of appropriateness.
2. MEMBERSHIP
A. Composition
The HPC shall consist of up to nine members who shall be appointed by the Mayor with the advice and consent of the Council. Members of the HPC shall be appointed with due regard to the proper representation of such fields as history, architecture, urban planning, archeology and law. In addition, one member may be, at the time of appointment, under 21 years of age. One member may reside outside of the city limits and must reside within the Area of City Impact.
B. Term of Office
All appointments shall be made for a term of three years, provided that the student member shall be appointed to a term of up to one year. If a vacancy occurs, the Mayor with the consent of the Council shall appoint a member to fill an unexpired term or may be appointed for a full term.
C. Chairman
The HPC shall appoint one of its members as chairman of the HPC who shall hold office as chairman for a consecutive period not to exceed two years. The HPC may also appoint a co-chairman who shall act as the chairman in the absence of the HPC chairman.
(ord. 42-13, 10/29/13)
3. PROCEDURES
A. Compensation
The members of the HPC shall serve without pay but shall be reimbursed by the city for necessary expenses incurred in connection with their duties.
B. Quorum
A quorum shall consist of five or more members.
C. Meetings
The HPC shall meet monthly to review development proposals. A quorum is required for the conduct of HPC business.
D. Staff
The Director shall designate a staff member from the Planning Division to serve as the technical staff for the HPC.
CHAPTER 11-02: Review and Decision Bodies
Section 11-02-06: Hearing Examiner
Subsection 1: Duties, Jurisdiction, and Authority
Supplement No 58 Ord-45-1, Ord-23-15, Amended; Ord-4-15, Amended)
March 2013 Boise Development Code
Page 15
11-02-06. HEARING EXAMINER
This Section authorizes the PZC to use the services of a Hearing Examiner pursuant to the authority granted in Idaho Code §67-6520 (“the Local Planning Act”).
1. DUTIES, JURISDICTION, AND AUTHORITY
The Hearing Examiner may conduct hearings on behalf of the PZC on matters as indicated in Table 11-03.1. The Director will assign applications to the Hearing Examiner or to the PZC for review, recommendation, and decision.
2. QUALIFICATIONS
A person filling the position of Hearing Examiner shall be experienced in the field of planning and zoning, and shall have legal training and/or experience. The hearing examiner shall serve at the pleasure of the Council and shall not be a city staff member.
3. PROCEDURES
A. The Hearing Examiner shall review all information supplied by the department prior to the hearing.
B. The hearing shall be conducted in accordance with Boise City Code §11-3-6.4 and applicable state law.
C. At the completion of each hearing, the Hearing Examiner shall produce a report that includes a summary of testimony, findings of fact, conclusions of law, and a final order. Such report shall be filed at the Planning and Development Services Department. It shall be available to the applicant and the public no later than ten working days after the close of each hearing. 11-02-07. PLANNING DIRECTOR
The Director refers to the Planning Director or his/her designee throughout this Code.
1. DUTIES OF THE DIRECTOR, GENERALLY
It shall be the duty of the Director to provide for the administration of this Code and the Boise City Comprehensive Plan. The Director and his designees shall serve as the technical staff on planning and zoning issues
2. SPECIFIC DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES
The specific duties and responsibilities of the Director shall be as indicated in Table 11-03.1, Chapter 11-03, Review and Decision Procedures, and elsewhere in this Code, and as follows:
A. Provide and maintain a continuing program of public information on zoning matters and provide planning and zoning assistance to the public as requested;
B. Submit a written report evaluating applications, to the appropriate bodies;
C. Review building permit applications for zoning compliance;
D. Provide public notice of hearings;
E. Maintain records and files of all zoning applications;
F. Maintain a zoning enforcement program;
CHAPTER 11-02: Review and Decision Bodies
Section 11-02-07: Planning Director
Subsection 2: Specific Duties and Responsibilities
Supplement No 58 Ord-45-1, Ord-23-15, Amended; Ord-4-15, Amended)
March 2013 Boise Development Code
Page 16
G. Prepare an annual annexation program;
H. Initiate revisions and amendments of this Code and the Comprehensive Plan;
I. Prepare special studies and plans;
J. Make interpretations of the provisions of this Code and the Comprehensive Plan;
K. Coordinate applications with the appropriate city departments and agencies;
L. Determine the classification of uses not specifically identified in this Code;
M. Serve as Flood Plain Administrator.
SUPPLEMENT NO. 58, Ord 45-15, ORD 9, 11, 14 &15 2013(ORD 42-13 1029-13)
March 2013 Boise Development Code
Page 17
CHAPTER 11-03: REVIEW AND DECISION REVIEW AND DECISION PROCEDURESPROCEDURES 11-03-01. PURPOSE
This chapter describes procedures for review of applications for development. 11-03-02. SUMMARY TABLE
Table 11-03.1: Summary Table of Decision Responsibilities R=Recommendation, D=Decision, A=Appeal NOTE: Exceptions to these general rules apply. Subsequent sections of this chapter contain details on each procedure. Procedure Description Director HE* DRC HPC PZC Council CODE AMENDMENT, DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENT & REZONE
Code Text Amendment
Generally, except as indicated below
R
D
To establish a design district
R
R
D
Development Agreement
R
D
Rezone
Generally, except as indicated below
R
If in “H” or “HD” overlay
R
D
Split-zoned substandard parcel of record
To allow less restrictive zone to apply to entire parcel if more than 50%
D
A
A SUBDIVISION
Major Subdivision Plat
R
R
D
Minor Land Division
D
A
A DEVELOPMENT PERMITS & ZONING CERTIFICATE
Conditional Use
Permit
Generally, except as indicated below
D
A
Child care, drive-through, and parking reduction
D
D
A
Expansion < 20%
D
A
A
Exception, General (including height)
D
A
Exception, Special
R
R
D
Planned Unit Development Two or fewer acres
D
D
A
Planned Unit Development More than two acres
D
A
Nonconforming
Use
Initial approval
D
A
A
Expansion < 20%
D
A
A
Expansion > 20%
D
A
Sign Permit or Sign Program
D
A
A
Temporary Use Permit
D
A
A
Zoning Certificate and Administrative Review
D
A
A
Boise River System Permit
D
D
A
Floodplain Development Permit
D
A
A
Hillside Category 1
D
A
A
Category 2
D
A
A
Category 3
D
A
CHAPTER 11-03: Review and Decision Procedures
Section 11-03-03: Procedures
Subsection 1: STEP 1: Pre-application Meeting
Supplement No 58 Ord-45-1, Ord-23-15, Amended; Ord-4-15, Amended)
March 2013 Boise Development Code
Page 18
Table 11-03.1: Summary Table of Decision Responsibilities R=Recommendation, D=Decision, A=Appeal NOTE: Exceptions to these general rules apply. Subsequent sections of this chapter contain details on each procedure. Procedure Description Director HE* DRC HPC PZC Council
Certificate of Appropriateness
D
A
A DESIGN REVIEW
Design Review
Major Projects
D
A
A
Minor Projects
D
A
A
A MODIFICATION
Modification (not including HPC)
Minor
D
A
A
Minor, Design Review
D
A
A
A
Major, Generally
D
A
Major, Design Review
D
A
A OTHER PROCEDURES
Annexation
R
D
Comprehensive Plan Amendment
R
D
Variance
Minor
D
A
A
Major
D
A NOTES
Director = Planning Director, HE = Hearing Examiner, DRC = Design Review Committee, HPC = Historic Preservation Commission, PZC = Planning and Zoning Commission, Council = City Council 11-03-03. PROCEDURES
This section describes procedures for processing and reviewing applications for development.
1. STEP 1: PRE-APPLICATION MEETING
A pre-application meeting with Director is required for subdivisions over 40 lots, conditional use permits, annexations, variances, special exceptions, rezones, and land use map amendments.
A. Timing
Must be held not more than six months nor less than one day prior to the submission of an application.
B. Verification
A pre-application meeting verification form submitted with the application.
C. Waiver
The Director may waive this step for projects that are not complex and have little potential to substantially impact neighboring properties.
2. STEP 2: NEIGHBORHOOD MEETING
The applicant shall hold a meeting allowing the public to review the proposed project.
A. Timing and Location
Must be held not more than six months nor less than five days prior to submission of the application and within two miles of the project site, Monday through Thursday, excluding holidays; and start between 6:00 P.M. and 8:00 P.M.
CHAPTER 11-03: Review and Decision Procedures
Section 11-03-03: Procedures
Subsection 3: STEP 3: Application Submittal
Supplement No 58 Ord-45-1, Ord-23-15, Amended; Ord-4-15, Amended)
March 2013 Boise Development Code
Page 19
B. Notification
Notice shall be sent or delivered to residents and property owners within 300 feet of the site and to the registered neighborhood association. For variances only adjacent (including across streets and alleys) residents and property owners need be notified. Mailed notices shall be postmarked at least seven days prior to the meeting. Hand-deliveries must occur at least five days prior to the meeting.
C. Waiver
The Director may waive this step for projects that are not complex and have little potential to substantially impact neighborhood properties.
(ord. 42-13, 10-29-13)
3. STEP 3: APPLICATION SUBMITTAL
Applications shall be submitted on a prescribed form, accompanied by the appropriate filing.
A. Application Requirements
Application requirements shall be indicated on forms available in the Planning Division. Additional submittal requirements necessary to evaluate the application may be required, as determined by the Director.
B. Application Fees
The Director shall maintain a list of fees as established by the Council.
C. Conceptual Approval
Conceptual approval may be requested for planned development conditional use permits. A concept approval signifies that a general development plan including the general arrangement of uses, density, location of major streets, open spaces, utilities, etc. is acceptable. The effect is support for a general development plan without preparation building plans. It provides the developer and the city with guidelines for the design of each phase of a project.
(1) When indicated in Section 11-03-04, Specific Procedures, an application may be submitted and processed as a conceptual approval.
(2) Submittal requirements are the same, except that detailed building plans are not required. Supporting information may be required for concept applications as determined by the Director.
(3) After concept approval, detailed approval is required through a new application, fee, and public hearing except concept approval specifically authorized by the PZC may proceed to design review without a detailed approval. Otherwise development or building permits may not be issued on the basis of a conceptual approval without a detailed approval.
D. Application Resubmittal
Except as indicated in Section 11-03-04, no application that has been denied shall be resubmitted in substantially the same form – as determined by the Director - in less than one year unless approved to do so by the reviewing body.
4. STEP 4: NOTICE
A. Application Referrals
Applications requiring public hearings shall be referred to all political subdivisions providing services to the site, including school districts, and registered neighborhood associations for review and comment. Application referrals to the registered neighborhood association shall be in addition to, and not in lieu of, mailed public hearing notice.
CHAPTER 11-03: Review and Decision Procedures
Section 11-03-03: Procedures
Subsection 5: STEP 5: Application Processing
Supplement No 58 Ord-45-1, Ord-23-15, Amended; Ord-4-15, Amended)
March 2013 Boise Development Code
Page 20
B. Published Notice
At least 15 days prior to the hearing, notice of the time and place and a description of the proposal shall be published in the official newspaper of Boise City. A notice shall also be made available to other newspapers, radio, and television stations servicing the city for use as a public service announcement.
C. Mailed Notice
Notice shall be mailed to the applicant and to property owners, purchasers of record, and residents:
(1) Within the subject property;
(2) Within 300 feet of the external boundaries of the subject property; for variances, adjacent; for Boise River System permits both sides of the river or channel 500 feet upstream and 1,000 feet downstream from project site;
(3) For a height exception exceeding 100 feet, within a distance that is three times the proposed height;
(4) Any additional area that may be impacted by the proposed change as determined by the Director when:
(a) The application could result in significant adverse traffic, environmental, aesthetic, noise, pollution, or population density impacts occurring outside the minimum 300-foot notice area.
(b) The public interest would be better served by expanding the notification area.
D. Posted Notice
Notice shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the premises not less than fifteen days prior to the hearing. The Director shall be responsible for the timely posting of all sites and for the documentation of such postings.
E. Alternate Forms of Notice
When mailed notice is required to 200 or more property owners, purchaser of record, or residents, an alternative form of notice may be provided as follows:
(1) In lieu of mailed notices, two additional newspaper notices as described in subsection B, Published Notice, above; and
(2) The general area may be posted with notice in lieu of posted notice on each premise.
F. Notice of Material Change
Following the hearing, if the PZC recommends a material change to the proposal, it shall give notice and conduct another public hearing before sending a recommendation to Council.
G. Notice of Continued Hearing
At any public hearing, the review body may order the hearing to be continued by publicly announcing the time and place of continuance. No further notice thereof shall be required.
5. STEP 5: APPLICATION PROCESSING
The Director shall review the application materials and prepare a report of findings, including a recommendation to the review body to approve, approve with modifications, or deny the application, based on the applicable criteria in this Code.
CHAPTER 11-03: Review and Decision Procedures
Section 11-03-03: Procedures
Subsection 6: STEP 6: Public Hearing
Supplement No 58 Ord-45-1, Ord-23-15, Amended; Ord-4-15, Amended)
March 2013 Boise Development Code
Page 21
6. STEP 6: PUBLIC HEARING
A. Types of Public Hearings
(1) Legislative
Legislative hearings include hearings on amendments to, or enactments of, any ordinance or enactment. They also include revisions or amendments to the Boise City Comprehensive Plan, or applications to establish a new zoning or overlay district. In legislative hearings, the record is not limited to the record developed by the review body. Any and all new evidence may be received by Council during a legislative hearing regardless of whether the evidence was introduced in prior procedural steps.
(2) Quasi-judicial
Quasi-judicial hearings are hearings in which the review bodies are making decisions on the development of a specific property.
B. Timing of Public Hearings
The date for hearings shall be established by the Director based upon published cut-off and hearing dates, and as follows:
(1) The application shall be scheduled at the next available hearing.
(2) The Director may extend the review time for applications that are unusually large or complicated.
(3) Deferrals due to lack of quorum, lateness of the hour or a request by the applicant shall extend the time during which the hearing must be held.
C. Public Hearings by the City Council
Council hearing dates shall be established at a Council meeting.
7. STEP 7: DECISION
The decision body shall approve, approve with modifications, or deny an application based upon the applicable standards and criteria in this Code and the Boise City Comprehensive Plan. The decision shall be deemed to have been made on the date that the review body adopts a reasoned statement. A decision is final unless appealed.
A. Timing of Decision
(1) Administrative Approval
Within 15 calendar days after receipt of a complete application the Director shall approve, approve with modifications, or deny the application and shall notify the applicant, in writing, of the decision and the reasons for modification or denial.
(2) Review Body or City Council Approval
A review body shall take action within 60 days from the date of the initial hearing unless the applicant agrees to a deferral for a longer period of time, or unless otherwise provided in this Code.
(3) Extended Review
The Director may extend the review/processing period for large planned development applications up to 66 days from date prior the application was submitted. This extended review period is to allow for adequate staff research and analysis, agency review and comment, coordination with other city departments, and coordination with the applicant.
CHAPTER 11-03: Review and Decision Procedures
Section 11-03-03: Procedures
Subsection 7: STEP 7: Decision
Supplement No 58 Ord-45-1, Ord-23-15, Amended; Ord-4-15, Amended)
March 2013 Boise Development Code
Page 22
B. Reason Statement
The approval or denial of an application shall be in writing and accompanied by a statement that explains the applicable criteria and standards, states the relevant facts relied upon, and explains the rationale for the decision based on the applicable provisions of the Boise City Comprehensive Plan, relevant and statutory provisions, pertinent constitutional principles, and factual information contained in the record.
C. Criteria
A decision body authorized to act under this Code shall base a decision on the following criteria and any additional criteria indicated in Section 11-03-04, Specific Procedures:
(1) The approval is consistent with the policies of the adopted Boise City Comprehensive Plan;
(2) The approval is consistent with the general purpose of this Code stated in Section 11-01-03; and
(3) The approval shall not confer a special privilege on the property owner.
D. Conditions
A decision body authorized to act under this Code may impose conditions as needed to ensure that the approval is consistent with the purposes of the Boise City Comprehensive Plan and the general purpose of this Code stated in Section 11-01-03.
E. Effective Date of Approval
An approval shall become final upon the issuance of a written decision and after ten days have elapsed from the date following the decision, provided however, that such effective date shall be stayed by the filing of an appeal. ORDINANCES SHALL BE EFFECTIVE UPON PUBLICATION.
F. Notice of Public Review Body Decisions
The Director shall mail notice of each decision and of the appeal deadline to the applicant, appellant, and registered neighborhood association within three business days. The notice shall indicate that a reason statement can be reviewed in the Planning and Development Services Department and that the landowner can request a taking analysis.
G. Reconsiderations of Review Body Decisions
(1) Purpose
To minimize the number of appeals, prevent new information from being presented on appeals, and resolve disputes at the lowest possible level.
(2) Applicability
Upon request the review body may reconsider a decision for good cause. Good cause includes:
(a) The party requesting reconsideration has relevant information;
(b) The relevant information was not brought up at the previous hearing; and
(c) The information was not previously available.
(3) Procedure
(a) A request for reconsideration shall include supporting information and shall be made prior to the deadline for filing an appeal.
(b) A decision on a reconsideration is not appealable.
CHAPTER 11-03: Review and Decision Procedures
Section 11-03-03: Procedures
Subsection 8: STEP 8: Modification
Supplement No 58 Ord-45-1, Ord-23-15, Amended; Ord-4-15, Amended)
March 2013 Boise Development Code
Page 23
(c) If reconsideration is granted, the time to appeal and any pending appeal shall be stayed. If reconsideration is granted and the appeal is withdrawn, the appeal fee shall be refunded in its entirety.
(d) If the applicant has modified the application, the review body shall determine if the revised application shall be reconsidered or if a new application is required.
8. STEP 8: MODIFICATION
For some procedures, as indicated in Section 11-03-04, the holder of an approval may request modification.
A. Notice of Approval
A letter stating the nature of a conditional use modification approval and findings of fact on which the approval was based shall be provided by mail to the applicant. A notice, stating the nature of the modification shall be provided by mail to the property owners, purchasers of record, and residents within a 300-foot radius of the external boundaries of the subject property.
9. STEP 9: APPEAL
A. Appeals, Generally
A decision of the Director or a review body may be appealed.
(1) Appeals to the City Council can only be made by a party of record. Administrative appeals can be made by anyone.
(2) Appeals must be in writing, accompanied by the appropriate fee, and prior to the established deadlines or the next working day thereafter if the appeal deadline falls on a weekend or holiday.
(3) Appeals must specify the issues, items, or conditions that are being appealed.
B. Appeal of Administrative Decisions
(1) Types of Appeals of Administrative Decisions
(a) Interpretation of Code and Administrative Design Review Decisions
A person aggrieved by the Director’s interpretation of this Code or by an Administrative Design Review decision may file an appeal with the Director. The appeal shall be submitted within ten days of the decision. Upon receipt, the Director shall schedule the hearing before the appropriate review body at the next available public hearing.
(b) Other Administrative Level Decisions
A person aggrieved by a decision on administrative level applications other than design review, or by a decision of the DRC, may appeal to the PZC, or in cases involving historic review to the HPC, within ten days of the decision. Upon receipt of the appeal, the Director shall establish a hearing and shall notify the appellant, applicant, registered neighborhood association, and property owners and residents within 300 feet of the property. The review body, may sustain, deny, or modify the decision and conditions.
(2) Acceptance of Filed Appeal
The Director shall transmit to the appeal body the record of the subject hearing. The filing of an appeal stays further action (subdivision, design review, conditional use, etc.) unless the Director determines that a stay would cause imminent peril to life or property.
CHAPTER 11-03: Review and Decision Procedures
Section 11-03-03: Procedures
Subsection 9: STEP 9: Appeal
Supplement No 58 Ord-45-1, Ord-23-15, Amended; Ord-4-15, Amended)
March 2013 Boise Development Code
Page 24
(3) Timing
The appeal shall be heard at the next available public hearing. Notice for the public hearing shall be as in Step 5, Notice.
(4) Open Record on Appeal of Administrative Decisions
A review may consider any evidence, regardless of whether it was presented previously. The decision is accorded weight to the extent it is the result of the application of special administrative and technical expertise. The record shall be fully developed at the commission level.
(5) Waiver of Appeal Period
The Director may waive the appeal period upon receipt of a written request accompanied by the signatures of adjacent property owners indicating no objection to the approval.
C. Appeals of Review Body Decisions (Quasi-Judicial)
Review body decisions may be appealed to the Council in accordance with following:
(1) Appeal Procedures
(a) Standing to Appeal
A final decision of a review body may be appealed by the applicant, the owner, those who have testified orally or in writing at the hearing, and those who sign up to testify. Such persons shall be deemed parties of record, as shall any person who had a right to notice, but did not receive it. The City Clerk’s and Director's proof of publication, mailing, and posting shall constitute proof of notice.
(b) Timing of Appeal
The appealing party shall file a signed appeal form and fee within ten days of the review body decision and adoption of a reason statement.
(c) Notice of Filed Appeal(s)
The Director shall mail notice that an appeal has been received to the parties of record and the registered neighborhood association. Failure of delivery or delay of receipt of the notice shall not extend the appeal period or be grounds for appeal. The mailed notice shall include instructions on submitted and reviewing memoranda.
(d) Scheduling of Appeal to City Council
The application for appeal shall be forwarded to the City Clerk and Council shall set a date for a public hearing. The hearing date shall not be sooner than 28 days after the appeal is filed to allow for submission of memoranda. Notice shall be in accordance with the requirements of this Code.
(e) Supplemental Documents
For the purposes of this section, staff reports to the City Council are not considered memoranda. The parties to the appeal and the Director may file written arguments (memoranda) within 14 days after the appeal deadline. Replies to memoranda must be filed within 21 days of the appeal deadline.
CHAPTER 11-03: Review and Decision Procedures
Section 11-03-03: Procedures
Subsection 9: STEP 9: Appeal
Supplement No 58 Ord-45-1, Ord-23-15, Amended; Ord-4-15, Amended)
March 2013 Boise Development Code
Page 25
Memoranda and responses may not contain new facts or evidence or discuss matters outside the record but rather are limited to why the record does or does not support the decision. The Council may modify the schedule if the hearing date on the appeal is deferred.
(2) Standards of Review for Appeals
(a) Because the review bodies are recognized as having expertise in their substantive areas, the Council shall give due consideration to their decisions. The Council may find error on the following grounds: The decision is in violation of constitutional, state, or city law. An example would be that the review body's decision would be a taking. The review body's decision exceeds its statutory authority The decision is made upon unlawful procedure. An example would be if notice of a required public hearing was inadequate. In such cases, the matter may be remanded to correct the error. The decision is arbitrary, capricious or an abuse of discretion in that it was made without rational basis, or in disregard of the facts and circumstances presented. Where there is room for two opinions, action is not arbitrary and capricious when exercised honestly and upon due consideration. The decision is not supported by substantial evidence.
(b) If error is found, the review body decision may be reversed or modified.
(c) If no error is found the appeal shall be denied and the decision upheld.
(3) Administrative Record Review and Correction
(a) The Director and City Clerk shall make the full administrative record available to the public.
(b) If a party believes that information has been omitted from the administrative record, it shall bring it to the attention of the Director no later than ten days prior to the date for the appeal hearing. If information has been omitted from the record, the Director shall determine if the information was presented to the review body and, if so, shall include it in the record provided to the Council.
(4) City Council Deliberation on Appeal; Contents of Decision
(a) Following the close of the appeal hearing, the Council shall deliberate in public to a decision. The decision shall be based on the standards of review set forth in subsection (4), above.
(b) The Council shall adopt a written reason statement in support of its decision and shall identify: The ordinance, standards, and criteria set forth in the Comprehensive Plan and this Code used in evaluating the application; The reasons for approval or denial; and The actions, if any, that the applicant could take to obtain a permit.
CHAPTER 11-03: Review and Decision Procedures
Section 11-03-03: Procedures
Subsection 10: STEP 10: Term of Approval
Supplement No 58 Ord-45-1, Ord-23-15, Amended; Ord-4-15, Amended)
March 2013 Boise Development Code
Page 26
(5) Notice of Decision on Appeal
The Director shall mail to the applicant, the appellant), and the registered neighborhood association notice of the decision together with the reason statement and a notification of the right to seek judicial review.
10. STEP 10: TERM OF APPROVAL
A. Term of Approval
(1) Unless otherwise indicated in Section 11-03-04, Specific Procedures, the term of an approval shall not exceed 2 years. The approval shall lapse if the holder of the permit has not completed one or more of the following actions:
(a) Acquired construction permits and commenced placement of permanent footings and structures. (structures include sewer lines, water lines, streets, and building foundations); or
(b) Commenced the use; or
(c) For conceptual conditional use permits, submitted an application for a detailed conditional use permit; or
(d) For projects that require platting, recorded a subdivision plat.
(2) The Commission may set a term within which the project must be completed. That term shall not be less than 6 years.
B. Extension of Approval Term
(1) The Commission may, grant up to 2 two-year time extension to an unexpired conditional use permit. Extensions to conditional use permits shall also extend any associated zoning approvals such as variances and design review approvals. The Commission shall hold a public hearing to decide the extension request if:
(a) There have been significant amendments to the Comprehensive Plan or Zoning Ordinance which will affect the conditional use permit; or
(b) There have been significant land use changes in the vicinity which would adversely impact the project or the adversely impacted by the project; or
(c) There are hazardous situations which have developed or have been discovered in the area;
(2) If a hearing is required, notice shall be provided as per Section 11-03-03.4. A new application and fee are required and shall be reviewed for compliance with current plans and ordinance.
11. MEDIATION
A mediation option is available, in accordance with Section 67-6510 of the Idaho Code.
A. Timing of Mediation Request
Mediation may occur at any point during the decision making process or after a final decision has been made. If a mediated resolution is agreed to by the participating parties after a final decision has been made, the revisions resulting from such resolution shall be the subject of a new public hearing before the decision-making body. However, the mediation record shall not be part of the official record for the application.
CHAPTER 11-03: Review and Decision Procedures
Section 11-03-03: Procedures
Subsection 12: Taking Analysis
Supplement No 58 Ord-45-1, Ord-23-15, Amended; Ord-4-15, Amended)
March 2013 Boise Development Code
Page 27
B. Written Request Required
Mediation may be requested by the PZC, the Council, the applicant, or any Affected Person by submission of a written request to the Director. An affected person is one having an interest in real property which may be adversely affected by the issuance or denial of a permit. The request shall include a statement of concerns and issues and the desired outcome of the mediation.
C. Notification of Willingness to Participate
The Director shall forward the request to the applicant or Affected Persons on the other side of the issue. These parties shall be notified that they have seven days to notify the city as to whether or not they will participate in mediation. The Director shall determine the appropriate parties to notify.
D. Participation
The parties shall participate in at least one mediation session if requested by the PZC or Council. If the applicant or Affected Person declines to participate in mediation and the Council declines to direct mediation, the mediation process and the tolling of time limits are ended.
E. Expenses of Mediation
The Council shall select and pay the expenses of the Mediator for the first session Any additional sessions shall be paid for by participating parties.
F. Tolling of Time Limits
Once mediation is agreed to, all time limits related to hearings, and appeals are tolled (i.e., delayed). Such tolling of time shall cease when:
(1) All parties on one side of an issue decline further participation in the mediation process; or
(2) No mediation session is scheduled for a period of 28 days from the date the request for mediation is received.
G. Mediation Not Part of the Application Record
The mediation process shall not be part of the official application or project record, and shall not be disclosed or used in any subsequent city hearings on the application or appeal of a decision on such application, except that any resolution resulting from mediation shall be subject to a new public hearing.
12. TAKING ANALYSIS
Notice to an applicant of a final decision rendered by City Council concerning a site-specific land use request shall include notice of the right to request a regulatory taking analysis.
A. Procedure
A request for a regulatory taking analysis must be submitted to the Director within 28 days from the date of the final decision.
(1) Upon request, the city shall prepare a written taking analysis of any decision or condition(s) of approval on any site specific zoning or development application. The regulatory taking analysis shall comply with the process set forth in this Code including use of the most current guidelines developed by the Idaho Attorney General and be provided to the real property owner within 42 days of the request. The request for a taking analysis and the analysis shall be part of the application record. During the preparation of a taking analysis, any time limitations related to the application or action shall be tolled (i.e., delayed).
CHAPTER 11-03: Review and Decision Procedures
Section 11-03-03: Procedures
Subsection 13: Conduct of Hearings Before Review Bodies
Supplement No 58 Ord-45-1, Ord-23-15, Amended; Ord-4-15, Amended)
March 2013 Boise Development Code
Page 28
(2) If the taking analysis concludes that a taking occurred, Council shall take corrective action.
(3) The decision being challenged is voidable if a written taking analysis is not prepared after a request has been made pursuant to this Section. Where the city fails to prepare a required requested taking analysis pursuant to this Section, a private real property owner whose land is the subject of city action and is affected by the city’s action may seek judicial determination of the validity of the governmental action by initiating a declaratory judgment action or other appropriate legal procedure. A suit seeking to invalidate a city action for noncompliance with paragraph (2) of this section must be filed in a district court in the county in which the private property owner’s affect real property is located.
B. Guidelines
The city shall use the most current regulatory taking guidelines of the Idaho Attorney General to prepare the takings analysis. The following guidelines are current as of the adoption date of this Code:
(1) Does the regulation or action result in a permanent or temporary physical occupation of private property?
(2) Does the regulation or action require a property owner to dedicate a portion of property or to grant an easement?
(3) Does the regulation deprive the owner of all economically viable uses of the property?
(4) Does the regulation have a significant impact on the landowner’s economic interest?
(5) Does the regulation deny a fundamental attribute of ownership?
(6) Does the regulation serve the same purpose that would be served by directly prohibiting the use or action; and does the condition imposed substantially advance that purpose?
13. CONDUCT OF HEARINGS BEFORE REVIEW BODIES
The following provisions govern the conduct of hearings before a review body. Except where limited to a specific review body, this section applies to the following review bodies: Hearing Examiner; the Planning and Zoning Commission; the Design Review Committee and the Historic Preservation Commission.
A. Requirements
(1) Sign-in Roster
A sign-in roster shall be kept at the entrance to the hearing room for all persons who wish to testify at the hearing on a particular application or issue.
(2) Allotted Time
In order to accommodate all participants, the Chair may determine the time allotted to each speaker within the parameters set forth in this section.
(3) Recordation
All proceedings shall be recorded and all material presented shall be maintained by the City. The record shall be made and maintained in a manner such that the hearing record may be transcribed.
CHAPTER 11-03: Review and Decision Procedures
Section 11-03-03: Procedures
Subsection 13: Conduct of Hearings Before Review Bodies
Supplement No 58 Ord-45-1, Ord-23-15, Amended; Ord-4-15, Amended)
March 2013 Boise Development Code
Page 29
(4) Disclosure and Inquiry
Review body members shall disclose any comments received or observations they have made, or discussions they have had regarding the application. Disclosure shall be on the record prior to the time for testimony to allow parties of record to address them. Disclosure shall include from whom the comments were received, with whom the person making the comments is affiliated and the nature of the comments, as well as any documents related thereto.
(5) Order of Presentation
(a) In the case of an appeal, the order of presentation before the review body shall be staff, appellant, applicant (unless the appellant is the applicant) and then the other parties to the appeal and the general public. Questions by the review body shall be held until after the staff report and the presentations by the appellant(s) and/or applicant. The appellant, the applicant and the registered neighborhood association representative may each be given up to 30 minutes for their presentation. The other parties to the appeal and the general public shall be given 3 minutes to testify. Following the close of public testimony the applicant and appellant shall be allowed up to 5 minutes each for rebuttal, with the appellant providing the last rebuttal.
(b) In the case of an initial review body hearing, the order of presentation shall be staff, applicant, the designated neighborhood association if it chooses to testify, and then the general public. The applicant may be given up to 30 minutes for her/his presentation. The designated neighborhood association shall have an equal amount of time as the applicant to testify if requested. The general public may be limited to 3 minutes each. The applicant shall be allowed up to 5 minutes for rebuttal following public testimony.
(c) Only the representative of such registered neighborhood association who has been authorized by the association in accordance with such association's established procedures to represent the association in the matter before the review body shall be allowed the amount of time identified above. Any other member of such association shall be limited to 3 minutes.
(6) Submission of Written Documents and Evidence to a Review Body
(a) Every document referred to by any person during testimony (including charts, maps, photographic evidence or any other evidence) shall be identified and entered into the record of the proceeding. Such exhibits shall be maintained in the Planning and Development Services Department. In most cases, a decision will be made at the end of the hearing; therefore it is strongly encouraged that documents be given to the Planning and Development Services Staff as early as possible before the hearing so that all evidence will be adequately reviewed by staff and the decision maker.
(b) A review body cannot review substantial written documents handed to them during the hearing while listening to verbal testimony. Further, the submission of such documents does not allow other parties time to address the material. Therefore, the submission of substantial written information to a review body is restricted as set forth below. Written testimony may be accepted to the extent that it is a copy of the testifying party’s oral testimony presented to the review body. All other written testimony and documents must be submitted to the Planning Director by 5:00 P.M. on the Thursday preceding the review
CHAPTER 11-03: Review and Decision Procedures
Section 11-03-03: Procedures
Subsection 13: Conduct of Hearings Before Review Bodies
Supplement No 58 Ord-45-1, Ord-23-15, Amended; Ord-4-15, Amended)
March 2013 Boise Development Code
Page 30
body hearing in order to be printed and included in the printed record presented to the review body. Written testimony submitted to the review body during the hearing shall be accompanied by a one-page summary of the document, a statement of why the testimony or document could not be submitted by the Thursday deadline, and a request that such testimony or document be accepted for the record. The review body shall have the options of rejecting the information, reviewing the information during the hearing, taking a recess to review the information, or deferring the hearing and/or action until the testimony or document can be reviewed. The action to be taken on such request shall be by a majority vote of the review body membership. In deciding whether or not to accept the information the review body shall consider prejudice to other parties if the information is accepted. The information submitted, and the review body’s decision on whether to accept or reject it, shall be forwarded with an appeal. The appeal review body may add the document or testimony at issue to the record if it determines the initial review body erred in rejecting it. Nothing in this ordinance shall prevent a citizen from presenting a verbal summary of substantial documents, in accordance with the hearing procedures and time limits for oral testimony.
(7) Public Testimony
(a) Following the staff report and the presentations by the applicant and/or appellant, the review body may ask questions of the staff, applicant or appellant. Following any such questions and responses, the Chair shall open the hearing for public testimony and shall invite the public to address the review body in the order of names found on the sign-in roster. A roster shall be maintained at the podium or similar suitable place for anyone who was not included on the sign-in roster, but who wishes to become a party of record, to provide in writing her or his name and address.
(b) The Chair may limit public testimony to three minutes for each member of the public. The applicant, (including an applicant's representative(s), appellant, and representatives of the registered neighborhood association within which the applicant's project is located, may not be allowed more than 30 minutes each for their presentations. Neighborhood associations who demonstrate a substantial impact from an application, even though their association is outside the application boundaries, shall be given equivalent time as those associations within the boundaries, but such associations together shall be limited to no more than the amount of time allowed for the applicant. Only the representative of such registered neighborhood association who has been authorized by the association in accordance with such association’s established procedures to represent the association in the matter before the review body shall be allowed the amount of time identified above. Any other member of such association shall be limited to 3 minutes.
(c) Each person testifying before the review body shall state, for the record, her or his full name and address.
(d) Before the close of the public testimony, in a hearing before the initial decision maker, the Chair shall ask if any persons attending the hearing who did not sign the roster wish to be heard and any such person shall be given the opportunity to testify.
CHAPTER 11-03: Review and Decision Procedures
Section 11-03-03: Procedures
Subsection 13: Conduct of Hearings Before Review Bodies
Supplement No 58 Ord-45-1, Ord-23-15, Amended; Ord-4-15, Amended)
March 2013 Boise Development Code
Page 31
(e) Members of the review body may question any person who has finished testifying or may, upon unanimous consent of the members present, recall a person for further testimony.
(8) Final Comments
(a) If the review body is conducting a hearing where it will make the initial decision, at the close of public testimony, the Chair may solicit comments from staff for additional facts or clarifications. After comments from staff, any member of the public who wishes to do so may address those additional facts and comments. The applicant shall be given an opportunity to address any additional facts or comments during rebuttal.
(b) If the review body is hearing an appeal, the appellant shall be given an opportunity to make final statements to the review body. The Chair shall re-open testimony to allow the applicant, neighborhood association, or public participants to address any additional matters raised by the review body's questions. The applicant and appellant shall address such additional matters during rebuttal.
(9) Closing of Public Hearing
After all testimony, the Chair shall declare the public hearing closed and shall bring the matter before the review body for discussion and action.
B. Review Body Consent Agenda
(1) Criteria for Consent Agenda
Routine, uncontested applications may be placed on a consent agenda in accordance with the procedures set forth herein. Based upon a recommendation from the Planning Staff, the Chair, at the beginning of the public hearing, shall identify all items proposed for the consent agenda. Only applications that meet the following criteria shall be considered for the consent agenda:
(a) There has not been any written or oral opposition to the application.
(b) The Planning Staff and the applicant are in agreement on the findings and conclusions and recommended conditions of approval.
(c) The application complies with the City Comprehensive Plan and Zoning Ordinance as proposed or as it will be modified by conditions of approval.
(d) The review body has no concerns with the application.
(2) Questions to Consider for Consent Agenda
To make a determination on whether or not the application should be placed on the consent agenda, the Chair shall ask the following questions:
(a) Does the review body have any questions on the application (provide agenda number and applicant's name)?
(b) Is there anyone present who has adverse testimony related to the application (provide agenda number, applicant's name, and location of site)?
(c) Is the applicant or a representative of the applicant present?
(d) Is the applicant in agreement with the Staff recommendation, findings and conclusions, and conditions of approval?
CHAPTER 11-03: Review and Decision Procedures
Section 11-03-03: Procedures
Subsection 13: Conduct of Hearings Before Review Bodies
Supplement No 58 Ord-45-1, Ord-23-15, Amended; Ord-4-15, Amended)
March 2013 Boise Development Code
Page 32
(3) Opposition to Consent Agenda
If there is any opposition from any party or member of the public, regarding an application, or if no-one is present to testify, but written testimony was provided, that item shall not be placed on the consent agenda. Once the consent agenda is established, the review body may approve all items on the consent agenda with one motion.
C. Review Body Deferral Procedure
(1) Deferral Allowed
Applications that have been placed on the review body public hearing agenda may be deferred for a no more than 60 days unless the applicant agrees to a longer period.
(2) Lack of Quorum or Lateness of Hour
If the review body makes a specific finding at the public hearing that a limited delay is necessary due to the lack of a quorum or the lateness of the hour, then a delay can be granted to the next scheduled meeting of the review body. A request for deferral may be initiated by a member of the review body, the applicant, the Planning Staff or the public. Scheduled agenda items shall only be deferred by the review body and only during the public hearing.
(3) Guidelines
Pursuant to the following guidelines, requests for deferral submitted prior to or at the start of the public hearing must be ruled upon by the review body:
(a) If the applicant and the Planning Staff are in agreement on the deferral, including the requested length of deferral, and there is no public opposition, the review body may consider the request to be routine. Such requests should be deferred to a date specific when possible to avoid the requirement for re-advertising.
(b) The review body shall act on requests for deferral only after soliciting input from the applicant, staff and any concerned public. If a deferral is granted, any member of the public who cannot or will not return for a deferral hearing shall be provided an opportunity to testify.
(4) Considerations
In addition to the testimony on the issue the review body shall consider the following:
(c) Have there been previous deferrals?
(d) Are additional studies, redesign or other development alternatives being considered for which the time to complete cannot be accurately estimated?
(e) The number of citizens present to testify and their input on a date specific deferral.
(f) Does the review body have before it a written deferral request from the applicant?
(5) Deferral Process
(g) Indefinite Deferral Process
When action on an application has been deferred indefinitely at the applicant's request, the applicant shall pay an additional fee to cover the cost of re-advertising before the application is scheduled for a public hearing. Such fee shall be determined by the Planning Director.
CHAPTER 11-03: Review and Decision Procedures
Section 11-03-03: Procedures
Subsection 13: Conduct of Hearings Before Review Bodies
Supplement No 58 Ord-45-1, Ord-23-15, Amended; Ord-4-15, Amended)
March 2013 Boise Development Code
Page 33
(h) Deferrals for Sexually Oriented Business Applications
Unless the applicant agrees to a deferral, applications for Sexually Oriented Businesses and Bikini Bars must be decided within 45 days following the public hearing. Failure of the Commission to decide such application within 45 days following the hearing shall result in its approval.
D. Inclusion on Agenda
An application shall be considered as being on the agenda upon the mailing of radius notices to impacted property owners and residents. Prior to the placement of an application on the public hearing agenda, the applicant may submit a request for rescheduling to the Planning Staff. The Planning Director may reschedule the hearing to an appropriate date if the applicant has requested rescheduling or if there are procedural or logistical reasons that justify rescheduling.
CHAPTER 11-03: Review and Decision Procedures
Section 11-03-04: Specific Procedures
Subsection 1: Code Text Amendment
Supplement No 58 Ord-45-1, Ord-23-15, Amended; Ord-4-15, Amended)
March 2013 Boise Development Code
Page 34
11-03-04. SPECIFIC PROCEDURES
This Section sets out the purpose, applicability, and steps for specific procedures.
1. CODE TEXT AMENDMENT
A. Purpose
This Code may be amended whenever Council deems it is required for public convenience or necessity, or for general welfare.
B. Procedures
Figure 11-03.1 shows the procedural steps in the review of applications for a code text amendment. The common procedures of Section 11-03-03 shall apply, with modifications as indicated below.
(1) Step 1: Pre-Application Conference
Not required.
(2) Step 2: Neighborhood Meeting
Not required.
(3) Step 3: Application Submittal
The applicant shall submit an application pursuant to Section 11-03-03.4 and the specific procedures of this section.
(4) Step 4: Notice
The Director shall provide notice for hearings pursuant to Section 11-03-03.4.
(5) Step 5: Application Processing
The Director shall prepare a report of findings and recommendations pursuant to Section 11-03-03.4.
(6) Step 6: Public Hearing(s)
Hearings shall be held pursuant to Section 11-03-03.4 and this Section.
(a) Planning and Zoning Commission Hearing The PZC shall hear each application and prepare a recommendation to the Council. In the case of a code text amendment to establish a conservation district, the City may require the HPC, DRC, or other board or commission, review the application and make a recommendation. The PZC hearing shall be within 60 days after the transmittal date of the required report in Step 3, Application Submittal.
Figure 11
Figure 11--0033..11
Code Text Amendment
Code Text Amendment Procedure Procedure
KEY
KEY
Figure illustrates typical
Figure illustrates typical procedure. Exceptions may procedure. Exceptions may apply as noted in the text.apply as noted in the text.
Hearing
Hearing
1. Pre
1. Pre--Application ConferenceApplication Conference
2. Neighborhood Meeting
2. Neighborhood Meeting
9
9. Appeal . Appeal
3. Application Submittal
3. Application Submittal
4.
4. NoticeNotice
5.
5. Application ProcessingApplication Processing
7. Decision
7. Decision
Council
Council
8
8.. ModificationModification
6
6. Public Hearing. Public Hearing
PZC
PZC
6
6. Public Hearing. Public Hearing
Council
Council
10
10. . Term of ApprovalTerm of Approval
6. Public Hearing
6. Public Hearing
DRC or HPC
DRC or HPC
CHAPTER 11-03: Review and Decision Procedures
Section 11-03-04: Specific Procedures
Subsection 2: Development Agreement
Supplement No 58 Ord-45-1, Ord-23-15, Amended; Ord-4-15, Amended)
March 2013 Boise Development Code
Page 35
(b) City Council Hearing
The Council shall hear each application pursuant to Section 11-03-03.4.
(7) Step 7: Decision
(a) The Council shall approve, approve with modifications, or deny pursuant to Section 11-03-03.4 and this Section. To approve it must be found that the amendment:
(b) Complies with and conforms to the Comprehensive Plan.
(c) Is required for public convenience or general welfare.
(8) Step 8: Modification
Not applicable.
(9) Step 9: Appeal
A decision of the Council is final.
(10) Step 10: Term of Approval
A code text amendment approval does not lapse.
2. DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENT
A. Purpose
To provide a vehicle for development that will assure compliance with rezone findings where, in the opinion of the Council or the PZC, approval of a rezone by itself does not meet those findings.
B. Applicability
Development agreements can be used after a determination has been made that a rezone does not meet required findings without additional restrictions to those imposed by the proposed zoning district. Nothing in this section shall be construed as relieving the property that is subject to development agreement restrictions from further compliance with all other permit and code requirements applicable because of the zoning designation of the property. A development agreement cannot convey a use or right. Restrictions are in addition to all other requirements of this Code.
C. Procedures
Figure 11-03.2 shows the review procedure. The common procedures of Section 11-03-03 shall apply, with modifications as indicated below.
(1) Step 1: Pre-Application Conference
Required.
(2) Step 2: Neighborhood Meeting
Required.
1. Pre
1. Pre--Application ConferenceApplication Conference
2. Neighborhood Meeting
2. Neighborhood Meeting
9. Appeal
9. Appeal
3. Application Submittal
3. Application Submittal
4.
4. NoticeNotice
5.
5. Application ProcessApplication Process
7. Decision
7. Decision
Council
Council
8. Modification
8. Modification
6. Public Hearing
6. Public Hearing
PZC
PZC
6. Public Hearing
6. Public Hearing
Council
Council
10.
10. Term of ApprovalTerm of Approval
Figure 11
Figure 11--0033..22
Development
Development Agreement ProcedureAgreement Procedure
KEY
KEY
Figure illustrates typical
Figure illustrates typical procedure. Exceptions procedure. Exceptions may may apply as noted in the text.apply as noted in the text.
Hearing
Hearing
CHAPTER 11-03: Review and Decision Procedures
Section 11-03-04: Specific Procedures
Subsection 2: Development Agreement
Supplement No 58 Ord-45-1, Ord-23-15, Amended; Ord-4-15, Amended)
March 2013 Boise Development Code
Page 36
(3) Step 3: Application Submittal
Required.
(a) Initiation of Application A request to enter into a development agreement may be:
A. Submitted by the rezone applicant;
B. Required by Council at Council's rezone hearing, or
C. Required by Council upon recommendation from the PZC. If the PZC recommends a development agreement, action on the rezone should be deferred to advertise for a new hearing. But if the applicant chooses to proceed to Council without a development agreement, the PZC should recommend denial of the rezone. If the Council determines a development agreement is necessary the matter shall be remanded to PZC for a new application and hearing. When requested by an applicant, the PZC shall conduct a hearing and forward a recommendation to the Council. In the event of (ii) or (iii) above, time limits may be stayed if so directed by the Council or PZC.
(4) Step 4: Notice
The Director shall provide notice for advisory and decision hearings pursuant to Section 11-03-03.4.
(5) Step 5: Application Processing
The Director shall refer the application to other agencies and prepare a report of findings and recommendations pursuant to Section 11-03-03.4 and this Section.
(a) The development agreement may address: density, bulk, site design, mitigation of impacts on the surrounding neighborhood, appearance, provision of utilities or public facilities, and restrictions on use.
(b) The draft development agreement shall be reviewed by the City Attorney as to form prior to being sent to the PZC.
(6) Step 6: Public Hearing(s)
Following a hearing the PZC shall forward a recommendation to the Council pursuant to Section 11-03-03.4 for a decision.
(7) Step 7: Decision
The Council shall make a decision pursuant to Section 11-03-03.4 and this Section.
(8) Step 8: Modification
Development agreements may only be modified after public hearing by the City Council. Major modifications as determined by the Director require a hearing and recommendation from the PZC prior to a Council hearing.
(9) Step 9: Appeal
A decision of the Council is final.
(10) Step 10: Term of Approval
A development agreement approval shall lapse or may be terminated as follows:
CHAPTER 11-03: Review and Decision Procedures
Section 11-03-04: Specific Procedures
Subsection 3: Rezone
Supplement No 58 Ord-45-1, Ord-23-15, Amended; Ord-4-15, Amended)
March 2013 Boise Development Code
Page 37
(a) Lapse
The lapse period shall be as indicated in the development agreement or as provided for in this section. Within one year from the date of approval it shall be recorded. Failure to do so shall render the rezone null and void. Proof of recording must be submitted prior to the first reading of the rezone ordinance. The development agreement or any modification thereto, shall run with the land and shall be considered continuing obligations of the owner, co-owners, and anyone acquiring an interest in the property.
(b) Termination
A development agreement may be amended or terminated by the Council, after public hearing, for failure to comply. Upon termination, the Council shall rezone the property to the prior zone or in the case of an initial zone at annexation, to a zone deemed appropriate.
3. REZONE
A. Purpose
To establish procedures to change district boundaries, establish or disestablish districts, or to change the district designation of a parcel.
B. Procedures
Figure 11-03.3 shows the rezone review procedure.
(1) Step 1: Pre-Application Conference
Required.
(2) Step 2: Neighborhood Meeting
Required.
(3) Step 3: Application Submittal
Required.
(4) Step 4: Notice
The Director shall provide notice for hearings pursuant to Section 11-03-03.4.
(5) Step 5: Application Processing
The Director shall refer the application to other agencies and prepare a report of findings and recommendations pursuant to Section 11-03-03.4.
1. Pre
1. Pre--Application ConferenceApplication Conference
2. N
2. Neighborhood Meetingeighborhood Meeting
9. Appeal
9. Appeal
3. Application Submittal
3. Application Submittal
4. Application Processing
4. Application Processing
5. Notice
5. Notice
7. Decision
7. Decision
Director or
Director or CouncilCouncil
8. Modification
8. Modification
6. Public Hearing
6. Public Hearing
PZC
PZC
6. Public Hearing
6. Public Hearing
Council
Council
10. Term of Approval
10. Term of Approval
Figure 11
Figure 11--0033..33
Rezone Procedure
Rezone Procedure
KEY
KEY
Figure illustrates typical
Figure illustrates typical procedure. Exceptions may procedure. Exceptions may apply as noted in the text.apply as noted in the text.
Public
Public HearingHearing
CHAPTER 11-03: Review and Decision Procedures
Section 11-03-04: Specific Procedures
Subsection 4: Subdivision Plat
Supplement No 58 Ord-45-1, Ord-23-15, Amended; Ord-4-15, Amended)
March 2013 Boise Development Code
Page 38
(6) Step 6: Public Hearing(s)
(a) The PZC shall conduct a public hearing and prepare a recommendation to the Council to approve, approve with modifications, or deny pursuant to Section 11-03-03.4.
(b) The Council shall conduct a public hearing pursuant to Section 11-03-03.4.
(7) Step 7: Decision
Decision authority is as follows:
(a) City Council
The Council shall approve, approve with modifications, or deny the application pursuant to Section 11-03-03.4.
(b) City Council Approval Requires Ordinance
A rezone, including the establishment of a new overlay district, shall become effective when the Council adopts an ordinance amending the zoning classification.
(c) Any recommendation of the PZC shall be in writing and shall specify that the rezone meets the following criteria: Is in compliance with the Comprehensive Plan. Is in the best interests of the public convenience and general welfare. Maintains and preserves compatibility of surrounding zoning and development.
(8) Step 8: Modification
Not applicable.
(9) Step 9: Appeal
In cases where the action taken by the Council is protested by a petition signed by the owners of 50 percent or more of either the area to be rezoned or of those within a 300-foot radius of the exterior boundaries of the area to be rezoned, a decision to rezone requires a vote of two-thirds of the Council.
(10) Step 10: Term of Approval
A rezoning approval does not lapse.
4. SUBDIVISION PLAT
A. Purpose
To create and record legal divisions of land. A subdivision plat is intended to promote coordinated and efficient development.
B. Applicability
A plat shall be drawn for each subdivision as provided below. Plats shall be recorded in the office of the Recorder after certification of compliance with Idaho State Code and this Code.
CHAPTER 11-03: Review and Decision Procedures
Section 11-03-04: Specific Procedures
Subsection 4: Subdivision Plat
Supplement No 58 Ord-45-1, Ord-23-15, Amended; Ord-4-15, Amended)
March 2013 Boise Development Code
Page 39
(1) General
The regulations of this Section apply to all subdividing of all land except minor subdivisions as defined in Section 11-012-05, Other Terms Defined.
(2) Condominiums
(a) The provisions of the Condominium Property Act as provided in Chapter 15, Title 55, Idaho Code, as amended, and the provisions of Section 11-07-06.5 of the Boise City Code, as amended, for planned unit developments are adopted and incorporated by reference.
(b) Condominium and subdivision of land, including dedication of public right-of-way, may be recorded on the same plat.
(c) Condominium units shall be provided ingress and egress either over common area or by an easement which shall be delineated on the plat or defined in the recorded condominium declarations with a note on the plat stating that the condominium declarations provide ingress and egress easements for the units. The condominium declarations shall be reviewed and approved by the City Attorney and the ingress and egress provisions cannot be removed or modified without the written consent of the city.
C. Procedures
Figure 11-03.4 shows the subdivision platting procedure.
(1) Step 1: Pre-application Conference
Required for subdivisions of 40 or more lots or dwelling units.
(2) Step 2: Neighborhood Meeting
Required for subdivisions of 40 or more lots.
(3) Step 3: Application Submittal
The applicant shall submit an application pursuant to Section 11-03-03.4 and this Section.
(a) A preliminary plat application may be submitted with or without a final plat.
(b) A final plat shall be prepared in accordance with Title 50, Chapter 13 of the Idaho Code and with this Code and shall be submitted within two years of approval of a preliminary plat. The final plat must conform to preliminary plat approved by the Council.
1. Pre
1. Pre--Application ConferenceApplication Conference
2. Neighborhood Meeting
2. Neighborhood Meeting
9. Appeal
9. Appeal
3. Application Submittal
3. Application Submittal
4.
4. NoticeNotice
5. Application Processing
5. Application Processing
7. Decision
7. Decision
Council
Council
8. Modification
8. Modification
6. Public Hearing
6. Public Hearing
PZC
PZC or Hearing Examineror Hearing Examiner
10.
10. Term of ApprovalTerm of Approval
Figure 11
Figure 11--0033..44
Subdivision Plat
Subdivision Plat Procedure Procedure
KEY
KEY
Figure illustrates typical
Figure illustrates typical procedure. Exceptions may procedure. Exceptions may apply as noted in the text.apply as noted in the text.
Hearing
Hearing
6. Public Hearing
6. Public Hearing
Council
Council
CHAPTER 11-03: Review and Decision Procedures
Section 11-03-04: Specific Procedures
Subsection 4: Subdivision Plat
Supplement No 58 Ord-45-1, Ord-23-15, Amended; Ord-4-15, Amended)
March 2013 Boise Development Code
Page 40
(c) Complete Application
Incomplete applications will not be scheduled for review by PZC or Council.
(4) Step 4: Notice
Not applicable.
(5) Step 5: Application Processing
The Director shall refer the application to other agencies and prepare a report of findings and recommendations pursuant to Section 11-03-03.4 and this Section.
(6) Step 6: Hearing
(a) Recommendation
The Hearing Examiner or the PZC shall prepare a recommendation to the Council pursuant to Section 11-03-03.4 and this Section.
(b) Delays to Hearing Examiner or Planning and Zoning Commission Action
The 60-day limit applies unless the applicant agrees to a longer time period, or there are extenuating circumstances, other associated development applications that should be considered at the same time, such as, Annexation; Conditional Use; Change to the Area of City Impact; Developments under the Hillside Ordinance; and Highway District or other critical agency conditions have not yet been received.
(c) Decision
The Council shall consider the recommendation of the PZC.
(7) Step 7: Decision
Council makes the final decision.
(a) Certification
Within two years of approval, the applicant shall obtain the City Engineer’s signature on final plats was evidence of conformance with this Code and the Council’s conditions of approval.
(b) Recording
The applicant shall record the final plat with the Ada County Recorder within one year from date of the City Engineer’s signature.
(c) Other Concurrent Application Deadlines
Where a subdivision is approved subject to a conditional use permit and the CUP expires or lapses, the plat applications shall be void.
(8) Step 8: Modification
Amendments to approved preliminary plats must be reviewed by PZC and approved by City Council in accordance with procedures of this section.
(9) Step 9: Appeal
Not applicable.
CHAPTER 11-03: Review and Decision Procedures
Section 11-03-04: Specific Procedures
Subsection 4: Subdivision Plat
Supplement No 58 Ord-45-1, Ord-23-15, Amended; Ord-4-15, Amended)
March 2013 Boise Development Code
Page 41
(10) Step 10: Term of Approval
As follows:
(a) Lapse Period
Approval shall lapse for failure to comply with step 7 above and the plat shall be null and void. Extensions of time may be granted by the Council as in subsection (c), below.
(b) Phasing Preliminary plats may be phased and do not need time extensions as long as at least one phase of the plat is approved annually. For phased developments, Council may modify or add conditions for phases submitted after two years following preliminary plat approval.
(c) Extensions The Council may grant an extension of a preliminary or final plat for up to one year, provided an application for extension is filed at least 20 days prior to the expiration of either the first two year period or a previous extension. In granting a time extension, the Council may modify or add conditions to the final plat to conform with adopted policies or Code changes since initial approval.
CHAPTER 11-03: Review and Decision Procedures
Section 11-03-04: Specific Procedures
Subsection 5: Record of Survey
Supplement No 58 Ord-45-1, Ord-23-15, Amended; Ord-4-15, Amended)
March 2013 Boise Development Code
Page 42
5. RECORD OF SURVEY
A. Purpose and Applicability
To provide a review procedure for the following:
(1) A division of any original tract into up to four parcels that comply with Code requirements;
(2) A property line adjustment that establishes modifies the boundaries of buildable parcels with boundaries that differ from existing buildable parcel and/or buildable lot boundaries; or
(3) The consolidation of two or more existing, contiguous buildable parcels into one buildable parcel.
B. Procedures
See Figure 11-03.5.
(1) Administrative Review
A decision to approve or deny shall be rendered within 10 days. The Director shall sign notices of buildable parcels.
(2) Evidence required for Permit
Evidence of recordation of a notice of buildable parcel is required for a building permit to be issued.
(3) Appeal
Decisions may be appealed to the PZC, pursuant to Section 11-03-03.4.
C. Application Requirements
Along with items listed on the application form the following shall be included:
(1) A separate original notice of Buildable Parcel in recordable form for each buildable parcel created by the Record of Survey incorporating the following:
(a) The notarized signatures of all owners,
(b) A statement that the original lot or parcel is no longer a buildable parcel,
(c) A complete legal description of the buildable parcel established by the Record of Survey,
(d) A note regarding the requirement to vacate easement before building on the easement areas, if appropriate, and
(e) A certification for execution by the Planning Director evidencing the establishment of the new buildable parcel in accordance with this section.
1. Pre
1. Pre--Application ConferenceApplication Conference
2. Neighborhood Meeting
2. Neighborhood Meeting
9. Appeal
9. Appeal
3. Application Submittal
3. Application Submittal
4. Application Processing
4. Application Processing
5. Notice
5. Notice
7. Decision
7. Decision
Director
Director
8. Modification
8. Modification
6.
6. Public HearingPublic Hearing
10.
10. Term of ApprovalTerm of Approval
Figure 11
Figure 11--0033..55
Record of Survey
Record of Survey Procedure Procedure
KEY
KEY
Figure illustrates typical
Figure illustrates typical procedure. Exceptions may procedure. Exceptions may apply as noted in the text.apply as noted in the text.
Hearing
Hearing
CHAPTER 11-03: Review and Decision Procedures
Section 11-03-04: Specific Procedures
Subsection 6: Conditional Use Permit
Supplement No 58 Ord-45-1, Ord-23-15, Amended; Ord-4-15, Amended)
March 2013 Boise Development Code
Page 43
(f) Notification of the adjacent property owners and occupants, including properties across streets and alleys, must be submitted with the application stating the adjacent property owners and occupants have been notified of the applicant’s intent to divide the parcel. Certified Mail is an acceptable means of notifying adjacent owners and occupants. This notification is not required for Record of Surveys that do not create a new buildable parcel.
6. CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT
A. Purpose
To review conditionally allowed uses for compliance with the comprehensive plan, availability of services and possible adverse impacts.
B. Applicability
As per Table 11-06.1, Allowed Uses, in Chapter 11-06, Use Standards.
C. Procedures
See Figure 11-03.6. The common procedures of Section 11-03-03 shall apply, with modifications as indicated below.
(1) Step 1: Pre-Application Conference
Required.
(2) Step 2: Neighborhood Meeting
Required.
(3) Step 3: Application Submittal
(a) Required.
(b) May be submitted under the detailed plan or conceptual plan approval process.
(4) Step 4: Notice
Required.
(5) Step 5: Application Processing
The Director shall refer the application to other agencies and prepare a report pursuant to Section 11-03-03.4.
(6) Step 6: Public Hearing
Required, except for minor modifications.
(7) Step 7: Decision
Decision authority shall be as follows:
(a) The Hearing Examiner or the PZC shall review pursuant to Section 11-03-03.4 and according to the following criteria:
1. Pre
1. Pre--Application ConferenceApplication Conference
2. Neighborhood Meeting
2. Neighborhood Meeting
9. Appeal
9. Appeal
3. Application Submittal
3. Application Submittal
4.
4. NoticeNotice
5.
5. Application ProcessingApplication Processing
7. Decision
7. Decision
PZC, Hearing Examiner, or Director
PZC, Hearing Examiner, or Director
8. Modification
8. Modification
6. Public
6. Public HearingHearing
PZC
PZC or Hearing Examineror Hearing Examiner
10.
10. Term of ApprovalTerm of Approval
Figure 11
Figure 11--0033..66
Conditional Use Permit
Conditional Use Permit Procedure Procedure
KEY
KEY
Figure illustrates typical
Figure illustrates typical procedure. Exceptions may procedure. Exceptions may apply as noted in the text.apply as noted in the text.
Public
Public HearingHearing
CHAPTER 11-03: Review and Decision Procedures
Section 11-03-04: Specific Procedures
Subsection 6: Conditional Use Permit
Supplement No 58 Ord-45-1, Ord-23-15, Amended; Ord-4-15, Amended)
March 2013 Boise Development Code
Page 44
The location is compatible to other uses in the general neighborhood; The proposed use will not place an undue burden on transportation and other public facilities in the vicinity; The site is large enough to accommodate the proposed use and all yards, open spaces, pathways, walls, fences, parking, loading, landscaping, and such other features as are required by this Code; The proposed use, if it complies with all conditions imposed, will not adversely affect other property of the vicinity; The proposed use is in compliance the Comprehensive Plan; A multi-family building (any building containing more than two residential units) is designed to comply with the Citywide Design Standards and Guidelines: and A drive-up window in a C-5 District, if it complies with all conditions imposed, will not adversely affect pedestrian traffic or create an unsafe pedestrian environment and that the location and design of the drive-up window provides proper on-site vehicle stacking based on peak hours, and minimizes potential circulation issues or other negative impacts to pedestrians or traffic.
(ord. 42-13, 10/29/13)
(b) Conditions
It is not the intent of this Section to restrict or specify design proposed or to specify the exterior detail or design, color, or materials, except as such detail is of such magnitude as to affect the general appearance and compatibility of the development with its surroundings. The PZC may condition the approval of a conditional use permit on compliance, including but not limited to the following: Conformity to approved plans and specifications; Provision of open spaces, pathways, buffer strips, walls, fences, landscaping, and lighting; Volume of traffic generated, requirements for off-street parking, service drive design, and construction standards, vehicular movements within the site, and points of vehicular ingress and egress; Performance characteristics related to noise, vibration, and other potentially dangerous or objectionable elements; Limit hours of operation; The term of a permit, or the period of time for which a permit is issued; Guarantees as to compliance with the terms of the approval; Number, location, color, size, height, lighting, and landscaping of outdoor signs and structures; Public improvements, including the installation of street lights, in accordance with the requirements of the Public Works Department; Requiring irrigation or drainage facilities to be covered or fenced for safety’s sake.
CHAPTER 11-03: Review and Decision Procedures
Section 11-03-04: Specific Procedures
Subsection 6: Conditional Use Permit
Supplement No 58 Ord-45-1, Ord-23-15, Amended; Ord-4-15, Amended)
March 2013 Boise Development Code
Page 45
(c) Variance to Development Standards Included in Permit
As part of a conditional use, the PZC may approve, in accordance with notice and approval criteria in Section 11-03-03.4, a change from required setbacks, off-street parking, fence heights, and other standards. The application must specify the changes being requested.
(8) Step 8: Modification (Administrative)
Applicable.
(a) Minor Modification A reduction in density that does not exceed 25 percent of the total units. A relocation of dwelling units or building pads for some practical reason such as road alignment, topography, access, solar access, or stability in hillside areas. A change in the phasing plan. A modification to the recreation area or open space design, but not including elimination or significant reduction. An increase or decrease in the proposed setback as long as Code requirements are met. A change in building elevations. Similar changes as determined by the Director. The requested modification was not the subject of an appeal during the public hearing process.
(b) Major Modification (Commission) Any increase in density. A density decrease exceeding 25 percent of the total approved by the conditional use. Any change that will impact the neighborhood such as a change in traffic generation or flow, impacts to river or foothills areas, or increases in soil erosion. A change that was the subject of an appeal during the public hearing. A change that would affect some other condition such as a condition regarding greenbelt, streets, schools, floodplain, foothills, etc. A request for greater than 20 percent increase in building square footage. A request to change the nature of the approved use. A request to change or delete a condition of approval. A request that would increase or cause impacts to a foothill or river area. Similar changes as determined by the Director.
(ord. 42-13, 10/29/13)
(9) Step 9: Appeal
Appealed to the Council, pursuant to Section 11-03-03.4.
CHAPTER 11-03: Review and Decision Procedures
Section 11-03-04: Specific Procedures
Subsection 7: Planned Unit Development
Supplement No 58 Ord-45-1, Ord-23-15, Amended; Ord-4-15, Amended)
March 2013 Boise Development Code
Page 46
(10) Step 10: Term of Approval
As follows:
(a) Lapse Period
Pursuant to Section 11-03-03.4.
(b) Extension
Pursuant to Section 11-03-03.4.
7. PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT
A. Purpose
To provide an opportunity for land development that preserves natural features, allows efficient provision of services, and provides common open spaces or other amenities not found in traditional lot-by-lot development. Planned developments are intended to provide certain benefits to the public and to the developer.
B. Applicability
(1) Benefits and Incentives
Planned developments are intended to provide certain benefits to the public and to the developer through allowance of creative designs. To provide the developer with an incentive to utilize the planned unit development process, the following allowances may be:
(a) A variety of housing types may be used including attached units, detached units, single family units, and multi-family units.
(b) The minimum lot size of the zoning district may be reduced within the density limits of the district.
(c) Planned developments may use private streets and service drives that are designed and constructed to the standards of this Code, however, no such roadway shall be permitted unless it is found to be in compliance with Sections 11-03-03.4, Private Streets, and 11-07-04.3.B, Service Drives, of this Code.
(d) Modified building setbacks may be allowed.
(e) The conditions of approval applied to a large planned unit development concept plan shall be applied consistently to each subsequent phase unless otherwise agreed to by both the applicant and the PZC.
(f) Uses that are not allowed within the zoning district may be allowed subject to the 20 percent exception requirements of Section11-03-04.7.B(2)(d).
(g) Buildings may be clustered to preserve foothills, river areas, and other environmentally sensitive areas as open space.
CHAPTER 11-03: Review and Decision Procedures
Section 11-03-04: Specific Procedures
Subsection 7: Planned Unit Development
Supplement No 58 Ord-45-1, Ord-23-15, Amended; Ord-4-15, Amended)
March 2013 Boise Development Code
Page 47
(2) Use Exceptions within a Planned Development
In the case of planned developments greater than five acres in size, the PZC may authorize specified uses not permitted in the zoning district. The purpose is to promote a mix of uses that are functionally integrated with and provide services to the primary use. Criteria include:
(a) The uses permitted by exception should be strongly related to the primary use and are intended to provide services or facilities useful and convenient to the primary use.
(b) The uses permitted by the exception should be integrated into the project through the following: The use exception site shall be located within reasonable walking distance of all areas of the primary use. One or more of the vehicular accesses to the primary site shall serve as access for the use exception site. Pedestrian and/or bicycle pathway connections shall be provided from the primary use. Buildings on the use exception site shall be oriented to facilitate access from the primary use. Architecture and building bulk shall reflect or compliment the primary use. Landscaping concepts from the primary use shall be continued onto the site of the use exception. Signage shall be low profile and consistent with any sign package submitted for the primary use.
(c) The uses permitted by the exception are neighborhood or community-serving in scale and do not constitute a regional use.
(d) No more than 20 percent of the total area of the planned unit development shall be devoted to the exception.
1. Pre
1. Pre--Application ConferenceApplication Conference
2. Neighborhood Meeting
2. Neighborhood Meeting
9. Appeal
9. Appeal
3. Application Submittal
3. Application Submittal
4.
4. NoticeNotice
5.
5. ApplicationApplication ProcessingProcessing
7. Decision
7. Decision
Council
Council
8. Modification
8. Modification
6. Public Hearing
6. Public Hearing
PZC
PZC
6. Public Hearing
6. Public Hearing
Council
Council
10.
10. Term of ApprovalTerm of Approval
Figure 11
Figure 11--0033..77
Planned Unit
Planned Unit Development Procedure Development Procedure
KEY
KEY
Figure illustrates typical
Figure illustrates typical procedure. Exceptions may procedure. Exceptions may apply as noted in the text.apply as noted in the text.
Public
Public HearingHearing
CHAPTER 11-03: Review and Decision Procedures
Section 11-03-04: Specific Procedures
Subsection 7: Planned Unit Development
Supplement No 58 Ord-45-1, Ord-23-15, Amended; Ord-4-15, Amended)
March 2013 Boise Development Code
Page 48
(e) The development is phased so that the construction of the excepted use or uses will be justified by the construction of all or a proportionate phase of the permitted use.
(f) That the conceptually approved excepted uses shall be subject to design review approval prior to issuance of a building permit.
C. Procedures
Every planned unit development shall be processed as a conditional use application.
(1) Step 1: Pre-Application Conference
The applicant shall request and attend a pre-application conference pursuant to Section 11-03-03.4.
(2) Step 2: Neighborhood Meeting
The applicant shall request and attend a neighborhood meeting pursuant to Section 11-03-03.4.
(3) Step 3: Application Submittal
(a) The applicant shall submit an application pursuant to Section 11-03-03.4.
(b) A planned unit development conditional use application may be submitted under either the detailed plan approval or conceptual plan approval process.
(c) Concurrent review of related applications may be required. In cases where subdivision platting is being proposed or would be required, concurrent review of the conditional use and subdivision plat is required when the Director determines that subdivision regulations, including but not limited to private streets standards, apply to the design of the proposed development.
(4) Step 4: Notice
The Director shall refer the application to other agencies and prepare a report of findings and recommendations pursuant to Section 11-03-03.4.
(5) Step 5: Application Processing
The Director shall provide notice for advisory and decision hearings pursuant to Section 11-03-03.4.
(6) Step 6: Public Hearing
The PZC shall hear every application pursuant to Section 11-03-03.4.
(7) Step 7: Decision
The PZC shall approve, approve with modifications, or deny each application pursuant to Section 11-03-03.4 and the following criteria:
(a) The location is compatible to other uses in the general neighborhood;
(b) The proposed use will not place an undue burden on transportation and other public facilities in the vicinity;
(c) The site is large enough to accommodate the proposed use and all yards, open spaces, pathways, walls, fences, parking, loading, landscaping, and such other features as are required by this Code;
(d) The proposed use, if it complies with all conditions imposed, will not adversely affect other property of the vicinity;
(e) The proposed use is in compliance the Comprehensive Plan;
CHAPTER 11-03: Review and Decision Procedures
Section 11-03-04: Specific Procedures
Subsection 8: Nonconforming Use
Supplement No 58 Ord-45-1, Ord-23-15, Amended; Ord-4-15, Amended)
March 2013 Boise Development Code
Page 49
(f) A multi-family building (any building containing more than two residential units) is designed to comply with the Citywide Design Standards and Guidelines;
(g) A drive-up window in a C-5 District, if it complies with all conditions imposed, will not adversely affect pedestrian traffic or create an unsafe pedestrian environment and that the location and design of the drive-up window provides proper on-site vehicle stacking based on peak hours, and minimizes potential circulation issues or other negative impacts to pedestrians or traffic. Recommended conditions of approval submitted to a review body and made available to the public shall not be altered by city staff or any other party prior to the public hearing. The decision body may alter or modify conditions of approval.
(8) Step 8: Modification
Not applicable.
(9) Step 9: Appeal
The applicant or an aggrieved party may appeal a decision of the PZC to the Council, pursuant to Section 11-03-03.4.
(10) Step 10: Term of Approval
A planned unit development permit approval shall lapse after 24 months pursuant to Section 11-03-03.4.
8. NONCONFORMING USE
A. Purpose and Applicability
To provide clear and consistent regulations for the establishment, maintenance, expansion and conversion of uses and structures that were legally established but that no longer conform to this Code due to a subsequent ordinance amendment, annexation, change of zoning or similar action.
B. Procedures
Figure 11-03.8 shows the procedural steps in the review of applications for a nonconforming use certificate. The common procedures of Section 11-03-03.4 shall apply, with modifications as indicated below.
1. Pre
1. Pre--Application ConferenceApplication Conference
2. Neighborhood Meeting
2. Neighborhood Meeting
9. Appeal
9. Appeal
3.
3. Application SubmittalApplication Submittal
4.
4. NoticeNotice
5.
5. Application ProcessingApplication Processing
7. Decision
7. Decision
PZC, Hearing Examiner, or Director
PZC, Hearing Examiner, or Director
8. Modification
8. Modification
6. Public Hearing
6. Public Hearing
PZC
PZC or Hearing Examineror Hearing Examiner
10. Term of Approval
10. Term of Approval
Figure 11
Figure 11--0033..88
Nonconforming Use
Nonconforming Use Procedure Procedure
KEY
KEY
Figure illustrates typical
Figure illustrates typical procedure. Exceptions may procedure. Exceptions may apply as noted in the text.apply as noted in the text.
Public
Public HearingHearing
Council
Council
CHAPTER 11-03: Review and Decision Procedures
Section 11-03-04: Specific Procedures
Subsection 8: Nonconforming Use
Supplement No 58 Ord-45-1, Ord-23-15, Amended; Ord-4-15, Amended)
March 2013 Boise Development Code
Page 50
(1) Step 1: Pre-Application Conference
Required for greater than 20% expansion.
(2) Step 2: Neighborhood Meeting
Required for greater than 20 percent expansion.
(3) Step 3: Application Submittal
Required. CUP application for greater than 20 percent expansion.
(4) Step 4: Notice
Required for greater than 20 percent expansion.
(5) Step 5: Application Processing
The Director shall prepare a statement of findings.
(6) Step 6: Public Hearing
Required for greater than 20 percent expansion.
(7) Step 7: Decision
Required.
(a) The Director shall approve, approve with modifications, or deny an application for a non-conforming use permit requesting establishment or expansion of the use by not more than 20 percent pursuant to Section 11-03-03.4.
(b) The Hearing Examiner or the PZC shall approve, approve with modifications, or deny an application for a non-conforming use expansion of greater than 20 percent pursuant to Section 11-03-03.4.
(c) See Chapter 11-011, Nonconformance for criteria.
(8) Step 8: Modification
Not applicable.
(9) Step 9: Appeal
The applicant or an aggrieved party may appeal a decision of the Director to the PZC, or a decision of the PZC to the Council, pursuant to Section 11-03-03.4.
(10) Step 10: Term of Approval
A non-conforming use status shall lapse as indicated in Section 11-01-08, Nonconformance.
CHAPTER 11-03: Review and Decision Procedures
Section 11-03-04: Specific Procedures
Subsection 9: Sign Permit
Supplement No 58 Ord-45-1, Ord-23-15, Amended; Ord-4-15, Amended)
March 2013 Boise Development Code
Page 51
9. SIGN PERMIT
A. Purpose
To allow review and approval of signs in conformance with the sign regulations of this Code.
B. Applicability
Except as otherwise provided in this Code, it shall be unlawful to erect, construct, enlarge, move, or convert any sign without first obtaining a sign permit. A permit shall not be required for a change of copy on a sign, nor for the repainting, cleaning, or other normal maintenance or repair for which a permit has previously been issued provided that the sign or sign structure is not altered in any way.
C. Procedures
Figure 11-03.9 shows the procedural steps in the review of applications for a sign permit. The common procedures of Section 11-03-03.4 shall apply, with modifications as indicated below.
(1) Step 1: Pre-Application Conference
Not required.
(2) Step 2: Neighborhood Meeting
Not required.
(3) Step 3: Application Submittal
The applicant shall submit an application pursuant to Section 11-03-03.4 and this Section.
(4) Step 4: Notice
Not required.
(5) Step 5: Application Processing
Required.
(6) Step 6: Public Hearing
Not required.
(7) Step 7: Decision
Required.
(a) Unless otherwise indicated in this Section, the Director shall approve or deny a sign permit application within five days.
(b) The Hearing Examiner or the PZC shall decide a sign permit application for an off-premise sign or a sign variance.
(c) See Chapter 11-010, Sign Standards.
(8) Step 8: Modification
Not applicable.
1. Pre
1. Pre--Application ConferenceApplication Conference
2. Neighborhood Meeting
2. Neighborhood Meeting
9. Appeal
9. Appeal
3. Application Submittal
3. Application Submittal
4.
4. NoticeNotice
5.
5. Application ProcessingApplication Processing
7. Decision
7. Decision
PZC, Hearing Examiner, or Director
PZC, Hearing Examiner, or Director
8. Modification
8. Modification
6. Public Hearing
6. Public Hearing
PZC or Hearing Examiner
PZC or Hearing Examiner
10.
10. Term of ApprovalTerm of Approval
Figure 11
Figure 11--0033..99
Sign Permit Procedure
Sign Permit Procedure
KEY
KEY
Figure illustrates typical
Figure illustrates typical procedure. procedure. Exceptions may Exceptions may apply as noted in the text.apply as noted in the text.
Public
Public HearingHearing
CHAPTER 11-03: Review and Decision Procedures
Section 11-03-04: Specific Procedures
Subsection 10: Temporary Use Permit
Supplement No 58 Ord-45-1, Ord-23-15, Amended; Ord-4-15, Amended)
March 2013 Boise Development Code
Page 52
(9) Step 9: Appeal
The applicant or an aggrieved party may appeal a decision of the Director to the PZC, or a decision of the PZC to the Council, pursuant to Section 11-03-03.4.
(10) Step 10: Term of Approval
Approval shall lapse after one year.
10. TEMPORARY USE PERMIT
A. Purpose
To allow, on a temporary basis, uses of a short term or seasonal nature that are compatible with surrounding uses.
B. Applicability
Any use with a planned duration of 180 days or less.
C. Procedures
Figure 11-03.10 shows the procedural steps in the review of applications for a temporary use permit. The common procedures of Section 11-03-03.4 shall apply, with modifications as indicated below.
(1) Step 1: Pre-Application Conference
Not required.
(2) Step 2: Neighborhood Meeting
Not required.
(3) Step 3: Application Submittal
Pursuant to Section 11-03-03.4.
(4) Step 4: Notice
Not required.
(5) Step 5: Application Processing
Required.
(6) Step 6: Public Hearing
Not required.
(7) Step 7: Decision
The Director shall require guarantees to assure timely removal of temporary uses and of any debris or refuse, so as to restore the premises to its prior condition.
(8) Step 8: Modification
Not applicable.
(9) Step 9: Appeal
The applicant or an aggrieved party may appeal the decision of the Director to the PZC pursuant to Section 11-03-03.4.
1. Pre
1. Pre--Application ConferenceApplication Conference
2. Neighborhood Meeting
2. Neighborhood Meeting
9. Appeal
9. Appeal
3. Application Submittal
3. Application Submittal
4. Notice
4. Notice
5. Application Processing
5. Application Processing
7. Decision
7. Decision
Director
Director
8. Modification
8. Modification
6. Public Hearing
6. Public Hearing
10. Term of Approval
10. Term of Approval
Figure 11
Figure 11--003.103.10
Temporary Use Permit
Temporary Use Permit Procedure Procedure
KEY
KEY
Figure illustrates typical
Figure illustrates typical procedure. Exceptions may procedure. Exceptions may apply as noted in the text.apply as noted in the text.
Public
Public HearingHearing
CHAPTER 11-03: Review and Decision Procedures
Section 11-03-04: Specific Procedures
Subsection 11: Zoning Certificate /APPROVAL CRITERIA FOR OTHER ADMINISTRATIVE APPLICATIONS
Supplement No 58 Ord-45-1, Ord-23-15, Amended; Ord-4-15, Amended)
March 2013 Boise Development Code
Page 53
(10) Step 10: Term of Approval
Shall lapse upon expiration of permit.
11. ZONING CERTIFICATE /APPROVAL CRITERIA FOR OTHER ADMINISTRATIVE APPLICATIONS
A. Purpose
To allow for review and approval of uses and to ensure compliance of each use with the applicable standards and regulations of this Code and for consistency with the intent and purpose of the Comprehensive Plan.
B. Applicability
(1) Required
A zoning certificate shall be required for every permit affecting the use of land or development of a structure, except for minor accessory uses not requiring any other permit or license.
(2) Prohibited
No zoning certificate shall be issued, granted or approved for multi-family residential use, child care facility, school, manufactured home community or mobile home park unless all irrigation ditches, laterals and canals crossing, intersecting and lying adjacent, or contiguous to, such uses are covered or fenced. Upon application, the Commission or Council may waive this restriction in whole or in part if it is found that covering or fencing will not serve the public purpose in an individual case.
C. Procedures
Figure 11-03.11 shows the procedural steps in the review of applications for a zoning certificate and administrative applications. The common procedures of Section 11-03-03.4 shall apply, with modifications as indicated below.
(1) Step 1: Pre-Application Conference
Not required.
(2) Step 2: Neighborhood Meeting
Not required.
(3) Step 3: Application Submittal
Required. Every application for a permit or license affecting the use of land or of a structure shall be deemed to be also an application for a zoning certificate. In the case of a new use where no other permit or license is required, an application for a zoning certificate shall be filed on a separate form.
(4) Step 4: Notice
Not required.
1. Pre
1. Pre--Application ConferenceApplication Conference
2. Neighborhood Meeting
2. Neighborhood Meeting
9. Appeal
9. Appeal
3. Application Submittal
3. Application Submittal
4. Notice
4. Notice
5. Application Processing
5. Application Processing
7.
7. DecisionDecision
Director
Director
8. Modification
8. Modification
6. Public Hearing
6. Public Hearing
10.
10. Term of ApprovalTerm of Approval
Figure 11
Figure 11--003.113.11
Zoning Certificate
Zoning Certificate Procedure Procedure
KEY
KEY
Figure illustrates typical
Figure illustrates typical procedure. Exceptions may procedure. Exceptions may apply as noted in the text.apply as noted in the text.
Public
Public HearingHearing
CHAPTER 11-03: Review and Decision Procedures
Section 11-03-04: Specific Procedures
Subsection 12: Design Review
Supplement No 58 Ord-45-1, Ord-23-15, Amended; Ord-4-15, Amended)
March 2013 Boise Development Code
Page 54
(5) Step 5: Application Processing
Required.
(6) Step 6: Public Hearing
Not required.
(7) Step 7: Decision
The Director shall approve, approve with conditions, or deny each application pursuant to Section 11-03-03.4 and this Section.
Uses classified as “A*” on the use table in Chapter 11-06-01 of this ordinance are allowed uses but require administrative review. The review of “A*” uses for which specific approval criteria are not provided shall be based on the general conditional use approval criteria set forth in Section 11-03-04.6(C)(7).
(8) Step 8: Modification
Not applicable.
(9) Step 9: Appeal
The applicant or an aggrieved party may appeal the decision of the Director to the PZC pursuant to Section 11-03-03.4.
(10) Step 10: Term of Approval
Applicable. A zoning certificate approval shall become void whenever the building permit or license either lapses or is revoked, or whenever the use of occupancy specified has ceased to exist, or has been suspended for 180 calendar days or longer. An administrative approval shall be valid for two years from the date of approval.
12. DESIGN REVIEW
A. Purpose
(1) Ensure the general appearance of development is in compliance with the Comprehensive Plan.
(2) Enhance important environmental features of the city and the physical characteristics of the land; and
(3) Ensure the orderly and harmonious development of the community.
B. Applicability
(1) D and DD Districts
Within the D and DD Districts, any visible exterior improvement to a site, building, or structure shall require design review. Accessory single family residential parking areas containing more than three parking spaces within D overlay districts shall be subject to administrative design review.
(2) Minor Design Review
The following design review applications are considered minor and may be reviewed by the Director.
(a) In D Districts A two story or less residential building containing two to six units.
CHAPTER 11-03: Review and Decision Procedures
Section 11-03-04: Specific Procedures
Subsection 12: Design Review
Supplement No 58 Ord-45-1, Ord-23-15, Amended; Ord-4-15, Amended)
March 2013 Boise Development Code
Page 55
A residential planned unit development of less than 50 dwelling units that has been approved by the PZC. An office or commercial building not exceeding 5,000 square feet gross floor area that is not adjacent to a residential district or use. An industrial building not exceeding 10,000 square feet gross floor area that is not adjacent to a residential district or use. A non-residential planned unit development less than two acres in size that has been approved by the PZC. Signs. Modification to an existing building. Parking lots. Modifications to approved plans as per Step 8, Modification.
(b) In all DD Districts All minor alterations to existing buildings. Signs designed in conformance with the provisions of the sign regulations. Parking lots. Any canopies and awnings.
C. Procedures
Figure 11-03.12 shows the procedural steps in the review of applications for design review. The common procedures of Section 11-03-03.4 shall apply, with modifications as indicated below.
(1) Step 1: Pre-Application Conference
Not required.
(2) Step 2: Neighborhood Meeting
Not required except for substandard lot applications.
(3) Step 3: Application Submittal
Applicable.
(4) Step 4: Notice
Applicability shall be as follows:
1.
1. PrePre--Application ConferenceApplication Conference
2. Neighborhood Meeting
2. Neighborhood Meeting
9. Appeal
9. Appeal
3. Application Submittal
3. Application Submittal
4.
4. NoticeNotice
5.
5. Application ProcessingApplication Processing
7. Decision
7. Decision
DRC or HPC
DRC or HPC
8. Modification
8. Modification
6. Public Hearing
6. Public Hearing
DRC or HPC
DRC or HPC
10.
10. Term of ApprovalTerm of Approval
Figure 11
Figure 11--0033..1212
Design Review
Design Review Procedure Procedure
KEY
KEY
Figure illustrates typical
Figure illustrates typical procedure. Exceptions may procedure. Exceptions may apply as noted in the text.apply as noted in the text.
Public
Public HearingHearing
CHAPTER 11-03: Review and Decision Procedures
Section 11-03-04: Specific Procedures
Subsection 12: Design Review
Supplement No 58 Ord-45-1, Ord-23-15, Amended; Ord-4-15, Amended)
March 2013 Boise Development Code
Page 56
(a) Required when the DRC or HPC holds a public hearing for design review. The Director shall provide notice pursuant to Section 11-03-03.4 and this Section.
(b) When the Director has decision authority as indicated in Step 7, Decision, no hearing notice is required. However, if it is determined that there is a potential for adverse impact, the Director shall send a copy of the approval letter to adjacent property owners and residents (including those across a street or alley) informing them of the decision and of the right to appeal.
(5) Step 5: Application Processing
Pursuant to Section 11-03-03.4, the Director shall:
(a) Determine whether the application meets the criteria for administrative review or must be reviewed by the DRC or HPC;
(b) Refer the application to other agencies; and
(c) Prepare a report with findings and a decision.
(6) Step 6: Public Hearing
Required, except when the Director has decision authority as indicated in Step 7, Decision. The DRC and the HPC shall hold public hearings pursuant to Section 11-03-03.4.
(7) Step 7: Decision
Decision authority is as follows:
(a) D, C, or DC Designations
Except for minor design review applications, approvals shall be granted by the DRC.
(b) H Designations
Except for minor design review applications, approvals shall be granted by the HPC together with a Certificate of Appropriateness.
(c) Limitations of Design Review Authority
Except for development on substandard lots of record, the DRC and the HPC are prohibited from requiring reductions in height, density or floor area ratio, or other general bulk regulations unless for reasons public safety, health, or diminution of property values.
(d) Findings Site Design
A. Traffic Impact
That traffic impact is minimized and the pedestrians and cyclists have been provided for through the use of sidewalks, pathways, landscaping, and safe parking lot design.
B. Landscaping, Stabilization, and Screening
That landscaping screens buffer adjacent uses, and screen or conceal unsightly areas.
C. Grading and Drainage
That on-site grading and drainage have been designed so as to minimize off-site impact and provide for erosion control.
D. Signage
That signs provide for business identification, minimizes clutter comply with the sign regulations.
CHAPTER 11-03: Review and Decision Procedures
Section 11-03-04: Specific Procedures
Subsection 12: Design Review
Supplement No 58 Ord-45-1, Ord-23-15, Amended; Ord-4-15, Amended)
March 2013 Boise Development Code
Page 57
E. Utilities
That utility systems do not detract from building design and that their size and location are appropriate and maintainable. Structure Design
The design (architecture) of buildings in the D and DD districts shall be in accordance with the following:
A. Building Mass
The building mass should be consistent with development in the immediate area.
B. Building Facades
The height to width relationship should be compatible and consistent with the architecture in the area.
C. Openings in the Facades
Openings in the facade shall be consistent with the architecture in the area. (For example, balconies, bays, and porches are encouraged with a minimum of monotonous flat planes to provide shadow relief).
D. Exterior Materials
Exterior materials that complement surrounding development in terms of color and relief should be utilized.
E. Commercial/Industrial Buildings Adjacent to Residential
The design shall minimize impacts on adjoining (including across a street or alley) residential uses and districts. Adopted Plans and Design Guidelines
Adopted plans and design guidelines in the appendix, including the Citywide and Downtown Design Standards and Guidelines as adopted by the City Council, are to be used in reviewing applications.
(Ord 40-13 Amended 10/15/13; Ord. 13-13 amended)
(8) Step 8: Modification
Applicable.
(a) Minor Modification
The following minor modifications may be approved by the Director: Modifications to administrative design reviews. Relocation of building pads or dwelling units provided that the modification does not significantly alter the site in terms of parking layouts, vehicular circulation, landscaping, etc. Increase or decrease in a setback in compliance with Code. Change in materials, colors, window and door locations, and mechanical units, provided building design remains essentially the same. Modification to a recreation area or open space design, but not to include a significant reduction in area or elimination. A change in landscape design or plant types, minor parking lot revisions, or minor site revisions.
CHAPTER 11-03: Review and Decision Procedures
Section 11-03-04: Specific Procedures
Subsection 13: Exception
Supplement No 58 Ord-45-1, Ord-23-15, Amended; Ord-4-15, Amended)
March 2013 Boise Development Code
Page 58
(b) Major Modification
The following major modifications must be approved by the DRC or HPC: Those impacting an adjoining residential neighborhood. Any that was a subject of appeal. Those that would, in the opinion of the Director, significantly alter site or building design. Modification of a condition of approval.
(9) Step 9: Appeal
Applicable.
(a) Appeals of Director decisions are to the DRC or HPC; HPC appeals are to the Council; and DRC appeals are to the PZC pursuant to Section 11-03-03.4.
(b) Grounds for an appeal may include: Inconsistency with the purpose and objectives of this Code; Unreasonable economic hardship; Undue interference with the design integrity of the proposal; Discriminatory prevention of an allowed land use; and Prohibition or unwarranted restriction of building type, material, or method.
(c) A waiver of the appeal period may be required in accordance with Section 11-03-03.9.B(5).
(10) Step 10: Term of Approval
A design review permit shall lapse after 24 months pursuant to Section 11-03-03.4.
13. EXCEPTION
A. Purpose
To allow certain uses that are not permitted in a given district per the use table, but that with special consideration and under certain conditions, may be of equal or less impact than allowed uses and benefit the immediate community. Special exceptions are also intended to promote infill.
CHAPTER 11-03: Review and Decision Procedures
Section 11-03-04: Specific Procedures
Subsection 13: Exception
Supplement No 58 Ord-45-1, Ord-23-15, Amended; Ord-4-15, Amended)
March 2013 Boise Development Code
Page 59
B. Applicability
(1) General Exception
(a) A general exception is intended to allow cohesive development of a mixed zoned project by allowing the predominate zone to apply to the entire project.
(b) When a lot or parcel has one half or less of its area in a district more restrictive than the remainder, the Commission may permit the regulation of the less restrictive district to be applied to the entire lot or parcel. More than one property owner may combine lots or parcels as a planned development and receive consideration.
(c) Where a lot located in an R-1A, R-1B, R-1C or R-2 District has a lot line that abuts property zoned for multi-family, commercial or industrial uses, the Commission may permit up to 75-feet of adjoining portion of such lot to be used for any use permitted in the Multi-Family R-3 District.
(2) Special Exceptions
(a) A Special Exception is intended to allow uses of equal or lesser impact than those permitted in the district and shall not increase density in a residential district.
(b) A Special Exception shall be non-transferrable through assignment, sale or other means of conveyance without written acknowledgement by the assignee, purchaser or conveyee in writing of agreement to be bound by conditions which were set forth in the approval of the application pursuant to Section 11-03-04.13. Special Exceptions shall not be considered as establishing binding precedent upon the City. A Special Exception shall become void if not utilized within 18 months of issuance, or if the authorized use is abandoned for more than a period of 6 months.
(ord. 42-13, 10/29/13)
C. Procedures
Figure 11-03.13 shows the procedural steps in the review of applications for an exception. The common procedures of Section 11-03-03.4 shall apply, with modifications as indicated below.
(1) Step 1: Pre-Application Conference
Required.
(2) Step 2: Neighborhood Meeting
Required.
(3) Step 3: Application Submittal
Required.
1. Pre
1. Pre--Application ConferenceApplication Conference
2. Neighborhood Meeting
2. Neighborhood Meeting
9. Appeal
9. Appeal
3. Application Submittal
3. Application Submittal
4.
4. NoticeNotice
5.
5. Application ProcessingApplication Processing
7. Decision
7. Decision
PZC or Council
PZC or Council
8. Modification
8. Modification
6. Public Hearing
6. Public Hearing
PZC and/or Council
PZC and/or Council
10.
10. Term of ApprovalTerm of Approval
Figure
Figure 1111--0033..1313
Exception Procedure
Exception Procedure
KEY
KEY
Figure illustrates typical
Figure illustrates typical procedure. Exceptions may procedure. Exceptions may apply as noted in the text.apply as noted in the text.
Public
Public HearingHearing
CHAPTER 11-03: Review and Decision Procedures
Section 11-03-04: Specific Procedures
Subsection 13: Exception
Supplement No 58 Ord-45-1, Ord-23-15, Amended; Ord-4-15, Amended)
March 2013 Boise Development Code
Page 60
(4) Step 4: Notice
Required.
(5) Step 5: Application Processing
The Director shall refer the application to other agencies and prepare a report of findings and recommendations pursuant to Section 11-03-03.4.
(6) Step 6: Public Hearing(s)
Required.
(a) For special exceptions, the PZC shall hold a public hearing and make a recommendation to Council. For general exceptions, the PZC shall render the final decision.
(b) The Council shall hear the application pursuant to Section 11-03-03.4.
(7) Step 7: Decision
Decision authority shall be as follows:
(a) PZC Approval
The PZC may approve general exceptions based on the conditional use criteria in Section 11-03-03.4
(b) City Council Approval
Special exceptions shall be decided by the Council pursuant to Section 11-03-03.4 on recommendation from the PZC.
(c) Approval Criteria for Special Exceptions
The PZC must make the following findings to recommend approval of a special exception: The Code does not anticipate that the use could be in the zone under special circumstances (the "special circumstances" must be specified); The use will produce an equal or reduced impact upon the site or neighborhood than would an allowed use; The location of the proposed use is compatible to other land uses in the general neighborhood area and does not place an undue burden on existing transportation and service facilities in the vicinity; The site is of sufficient size to accommodate the proposed use and all yards, open spaces, walls, fences, parking, loading, landscaping, and such other features as are required by this Code; Proper zoning for the proposed use is not available in the general neighborhood; The proposed use is in compliance with and supports the goals and objectives of the Comprehensive Plan.
(d) Conditions
The PZC may make recommendations as to specific conditions that would allow establishment of the proposed use in manner so as to be compatible with the neighborhood.
CHAPTER 11-03: Review and Decision Procedures
Section 11-03-04: Specific Procedures
Subsection 14: Variance
Supplement No 58 Ord-45-1, Ord-23-15, Amended; Ord-4-15, Amended)
March 2013 Boise Development Code
Page 61
(8) Step 8: Modification
Applicable. Modifications for a general exception may be approved by the PZC in accordance with the procedures and findings for a CUP modification. Modifications for a special exception go directly to Council for approval.
(9) Step 9: Appeal
Not applicable, except for decisions of the PZC on general exceptions. The applicant or an aggrieved party may appeal a decision of the PZC to the Council pursuant to Section 11-03-03.4.
(10) Step 10: Term of Approval
An exception approval shall lapse if not utilized after 18 months of issuance, or, once utilized, if the authorized use is abandoned for more than a period of six months.
14. VARIANCE
A. Purpose and Applicability
A variance shall not be considered a right or special privilege but may be granted upon a showing of undue hardship because of characteristics of the site, unique circumstances relating to the intended use, and that the variance is not in conflict with the public interest. The PZC may grant a variance as part of a conditional use permit without requiring a separate application and hearing as long as notice and findings requirements in this Section are made. The Planning Director may grant variances where it can be shown that strict application of these standards may create an undue hardship or where there is an exceptional circumstance related to the intended use of the property and where there is no opposition. Conditions may be attached to the granting of a variance to prevent adverse impact to surrounding properties.
B. Administrative Variances
(1) Director Authority
The Director may grant variances to the standards of this title where it can be shown that strict application of this ordinance creates an undue hardship or where there is an exceptional circumstance related to the intended use of the property and where there is no opposition. Conditions may be attached to the granting of a variance to prevent adverse impact to surrounding properties.
(2) Scope of Administrative Variances
Requests for relief from the following may be considered under the administrative variance process:
(a) Fence and wall height.
(b) Sign variances as defined in Section11-03-04.14.C(7)(c).
(c) Any variance in a residential zone that is not associated with a project requiring conditional use approval.
(d) Dimensional standards in non-residential zones, including setbacks that vary no more than 35 percent from the zone standard.
(3) Application
Applications must include the following:
(a) A completed variance application form and supporting information.
(b) The appropriate fee.
CHAPTER 11-03: Review and Decision Procedures
Section 11-03-04: Specific Procedures
Subsection 14: Variance
Supplement No 58 Ord-45-1, Ord-23-15, Amended; Ord-4-15, Amended)
March 2013 Boise Development Code
Page 62
(c) A written document bearing the signatures and addresses of all owners and
residents of adjacent properties (including across streets or alleys) indicating no objections to the variance.
(4) Opportunity to be Heard
The Director shall cause a notice to be sent to adjacent owners and residents and the neighborhood association inviting comments on the request within ten calendar days. If adverse comments are received, the Planning Director may not consider the variance application. If no adverse comments are received, the Planning Director shall decide the issue within 21 days of acceptance of the application.
(5) Appeals
An appeal of an administrative decision by the Director shall follow the procedures as set forth in Section 11-03-03.4, Appeals.
C. Procedures
Figure 11-03.14 shows the procedural steps in the review of applications for non-administrative variances. The common procedures of Section 11-03-03.4 shall apply, with modifications as indicated below.
(1) Step 1: Pre-Application Conference
Required.
(2) Step 2: Neighborhood Meeting
Required. Only the residents immediately adjacent (including those across a roadway, street, or alley) project and the registered neighborhood association need be notified.
(3) Step 3: Application Submittal
Required.
(4) Step 4: Notice
Required. The Director shall provide notice for advisory and decision hearings pursuant to Section 11-03-03.4, except as indicated in this Section. Mailed notice for a variance is required only to the applicant and to each property owner, purchaser of record, or resident within the subject property and adjoining the subject property (including those properties across a street, alley, canal, or other right-of-way).
(5) Step 5: Application Processing
The Director shall refer the application to other agencies and prepare a report and recommendation pursuant to Section 11-03-03.4.
KEY
KEY
Figure illustrates typical
Figure illustrates typical procedure. Exceptions may procedure. Exceptions may apply as noted in the text.apply as noted in the text.
Hearing
Hearing
Council
Council
1. Pre
1. Pre--Application ConferenceApplication Conference
2.
2. Neighborhood MeetingNeighborhood Meeting
9. Appeal
9. Appeal
3. Application Submittal
3. Application Submittal
4.
4. NoticeNotice
5.
5. Application ProcessingApplication Processing
7. Decision
7. Decision
Hearing Examiner, PZC, or Council
Hearing Examiner, PZC, or Council
8. Modification
8. Modification
6. Public Hearing
6. Public Hearing
Hearing Examiner or PZC
Hearing Examiner or PZC
10. Term of Approval
10. Term of Approval
Figure 11
Figure 11--03.1403.14
Non
Non--AdministrativeAdministrative
Variance Procedure
Variance Procedure
6. Public Hearing
6. Public Hearing
Council (subdivision)
Council (subdivision)
CHAPTER 11-03: Review and Decision Procedures
Section 11-03-04: Specific Procedures
Subsection 15: Annexation
Supplement No 58 Ord-45-1, Ord-23-15, Amended; Ord-4-15, Amended)
March 2013 Boise Development Code
Page 63
(6) Step 6: Public Hearing
Applicable. The Hearing Examiner or the PZC shall hold a public hearing pursuant to Section 11-03-03.4 and this Section.
(7) Step 7: Decision
(a) The Hearing Examiner or the PZC shall render a final decision.
(b) Approval Criteria, All Variance Applications
A variance may be granted when it is found that: There is either a hardship associated with the property itself or an exceptional circumstance relating to the intended use of the property that is not generally applicable in the district; Granting of the variance will not be in conflict with the Comprehensive Plan and will not affect a change in zoning; and, Granting of the variance will not be materially detrimental to the public health, safety, or welfare, or injurious to the property or improvements of other property owners, or the quiet enjoyment thereof.
(c) Additional Approval Criteria, Sign Variance
A sign variance is a modification of the sign standards for background area, height, illumination, number, location, projection and clearance prescribed in the sign regulations. In addition to the approval criteria for variances in subsection (b), above, when granting a sign variance it shall be established that: A sign variance may not be applied to sign that is prohibited. Non-conforming signs in the vicinity surrounding the subject site may not be used as justification for a special circumstance.
(8) Step 8: Modification
Not applicable.
(9) Step 9: Appeal
(a) The applicant or an aggrieved party may appeal a decision of the Hearing Examiner or the PZC to the Council pursuant to Section 11-03-03.4.
(b) The ten-day appeal period may be waived pursuant to Section 11-03-03.4.
(10) Step 10: Term of Approval
A variance approval shall lapse after 24 months pursuant to Section 11-03-03.4.
15. ANNEXATION
A. Purpose
The corporate boundary of the city may be expanded whenever the Council deems it to be for the public convenience or necessity or for the general welfare.
B. Applicability
(1) Boise City shall limit its annexation to those lands within its Area of City Impact. If Boise City wishes to annex lands outside of its Area of City Impact, it shall first renegotiate its Area of City Impact Boundary with Ada County in accord with Idaho Code 67-6526(d) unless renegotiation is not required pursuant to Idaho Code 50-222, Annexation by Cities, Category A.
CHAPTER 11-03: Review and Decision Procedures
Section 11-03-04: Specific Procedures
Subsection 15: Annexation
Supplement No 58 Ord-45-1, Ord-23-15, Amended; Ord-4-15, Amended)
March 2013 Boise Development Code
Page 64
(2) There are three categories of annexations. The Director shall determine the category into which an application request falls.
(3) Category A
Annexations in which all private landowners raise no objection to annexations or residential enclaved lands of less than 100 privately owned parcels, irrespective of surface area, that are surrounded on all sides by land within Boise City or that are bounded on all sides by lands within the city’s limits and by lands for which owner approval must be given pursuant to 11-03-04.15.B(4)(b)iv of this Section, or that are bounded on all sides by lands within Boise City and by the boundary of the city’s Area of City Impact.
(a) Criteria
The City may initiate the planning and zoning procedures set forth in Chapter 65, Title 67, Idaho Code, to establish the comprehensive planning policies, where necessary, and zoning classification of the lands to be annexed.
(4) Category B
(a) Category B annexations are those in which: The subject lands contain less than 100 separate private ownerships and platted lots of record and where not all such landowners have consented to annexation; The subject lands contain more than 100 separate private ownerships and platted lots of record and where landowners owning more than 50 percent of the area have evidenced their consent to annexation at the outset of the annexation process; or The lands are the subject of a development moratorium or a water or sewer connection restriction imposed by state or local health or environmental agencies; provided such lands shall not be counted for purposes of determining the number of separate private ownerships and platted lots of record aggregated to determine the appropriate category.
(b) Criteria
Boise City may annex lands that would qualify under the requirements of Category ‘B’ annexation if the following requirements are met. The lands are contiguous or adjacent to the city limits and lie within the Area of City Impact. Land division of parcels to be annexed is as follows:
A. The land is laid off into lots or blocks containing not more than five acres of land each, whether the same shall have been or shall be laid off, subdivided, or platted in accordance with any statute of the State of Idaho or otherwise, or whenever the owner or proprietor or any such person by or with his authority has sold or begun to sell off such contiguous or adjacent lands by meets and bounds in tracts not exceeding five acres, or whenever the land is surrounded by the city.
B. Splits of ownership that occurred prior to January 1, 1975, and that were the result of placement of public utilities, public roads or highways, or railroad lines through the property shall not be considered as evidence of an intent to develop such land and
CHAPTER 11-03: Review and Decision Procedures
Section 11-03-04: Specific Procedures
Subsection 15: Annexation
Supplement No 58 Ord-45-1, Ord-23-15, Amended; Ord-4-15, Amended)
March 2013 Boise Development Code
Page 65
shall not be sufficient evidence that the land has been laid off or subdivided in lots or blocks.
C. A single sale after January 1, 1975, of five acres or less to a family member of the owner for the purpose of constructing a residence shall not constitute a sale within the means of this Section. For purposes of this section, “family member” means a natural person or the spouse of a natural person who is related to the owner by blood, adoption, or marriage within the first degree of consanguinity. A written annexation plan has been prepared and published that is appropriate to the scale of the annexation contemplated and includes, at a minimum, the following elements:
A. The manner of providing tax-supported municipal services to the lands proposed to be annexed;
B. The changes in taxation and other costs, using examples, that would result if the subject lands were to be annexed;
C. The means of providing fee-supported municipal services, if any, to the lands proposed to be annexed;
D. A brief analysis of the potential effects of annexation upon other units of local government that currently provide tax-supported or fee-supported services to the lands proposed to be annexed; and
E. The proposed future land use plan and zoning designations, subject to public hearing, for the lands proposed to be annexed. In addition to the criteria set forth elsewhere in this Section, annexation of the following lands must meet the following requirements:
A. Property owned by Ada County or any entity within the County, that is used as a fairgrounds area under the provisions of chapter 8, Title 31, Idaho Code, or chapter 2, Title 22, Idaho Code, must have the consent of a majority of the Board of County Commissioners of Ada County; and
B. Property owned by a nongovernmental entity that is used to provide outdoor recreational activities to the public and that has been designated as a planned unit development of fifty acres or more and does not require or utilize any city services must have the express written permission of the nongovernmental entity owner. After considering the written and oral comments of property owners whose lands would be annexed and other affected persons, the Council may proceed with the enactment of an ordinance of annexation and zoning. In the course of the consideration of any such ordinance, the city must make express findings, to be set forth in the minutes of the Council meeting at which the annexation is approved as follows:
A. The land to be annexed meets the applicable requirements of this section and does not fall within the exceptions or conditional exceptions contained in this section.
B. The annexation would be consistent with the public purposes addressed in the annexation plan prepared by the city.
C. The annexation is reasonably necessary for the orderly development of the city.
CHAPTER 11-03: Review and Decision Procedures
Section 11-03-04: Specific Procedures
Subsection 15: Annexation
Supplement No 58 Ord-45-1, Ord-23-15, Amended; Ord-4-15, Amended)
March 2013 Boise Development Code
Page 66
Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, railroad rights-of-way property may be annexed pursuant to this section only when property within the city limits adjoins or will adjoin both sides of the rights-of-way.
(5) Category C
(a) Category C annexations are those in which the subject lands contain more than 100 separate private ownerships and platted lots of record and where landowners owning more than 50 percent of the area of the subject private lands have not evidenced their consent to annexation at the outset of the annexation process.
(b) Criteria
Boise Council may annex lands that would qualify under the requirements of Category ‘C’ annexation if the following requirements are met: Evidence of consent to annexation shall be established according to the following procedures: Following completion of all procedures required for consideration of a Category ‘B’ annexation, but prior to enactment of an annexation ordinance and upon an affirmative action by the Council, the city shall mail notice to all private landowners owning lands within the area to be annexed, exclusive of the owners of lands that receive water or sewer service and owners of lands that are subject to a recorded consent to annex. Such notice shall invite property owners to either give written consent or express written opposition to the annexation, include a description of how that consent or opposition can be made and where it can be filed, and inform the landowner where the entire record of the subject annexation may be examined. Such mailed notice shall also include a legal description of the lands proposed for annexation and a simple map depicting the location of the subject lands. Each landowner desiring to consent to or oppose the proposed annexation must submit the consent or opposition, in writing, to the City Clerk by a date specified in the notice, which shall not be sooner than 21 days after the date of the mailing of such notice. After the date specified in the notice for receipt of written consent or opposition, the City Clerk shall compile and present to the Council a report setting forth the total physical area sought to be annexed and the total physical area of the lands, as expressed in acres or square feet, whose owners have consented in writing to the annexation, plus the area of all lands receiving water or sewer service from the city and the area of all lands subject to a recorded consent to annex. Objections shall be considered, except that:
A. Objections received after the conclusion of the 21-day period shall not be considered unless the late objection is due to the city’s failure to follow the procedures provided herein.
B. Objections received from owners of lands subject to a recorded consent to annex, or from owners receiving water or sewer service from the city, shall not be considered objections for purposes of this section.
CHAPTER 11-03: Review and Decision Procedures
Section 11-03-04: Specific Procedures
Subsection 15: Annexation
Supplement No 58 Ord-45-1, Ord-23-15, Amended; Ord-4-15, Amended)
March 2013 Boise Development Code
Page 67
C. Upon receiving the City Clerk’s report, the Council shall review the report and may thereafter confirm whether consent was received from the owners of a majority of the land areas and those providing written consent, in addition to all lands subject to the implied consent provisions set forth herein and those subject to consent of record in the office of the Ada County Recorder. The results of the report shall be reflected in the minutes of the Council. If the report, as accepted by the Council, confirms that owners of more land area have consented to annexation than oppose such annexation, the Council may enact an ordinance of annexation, that shall be published and become effective according to the terms of the ordinance. If the report confirms that owners of more land area oppose annexation than consent to such annexation, the Category ‘C’ annexation shall not be authorized.
(6) Evidence of Consent to Annexation
(a) For purposes of this section, prior consent to annex shall be deemed given when: Consent is evidenced by written authorization or approval executed by the owner or the owner’s authorized agent. Implied consent: In category B and C annexations, valid consent to annex is implied for the area of lands connected to a water or
1. Pre
1. Pre--Application ConferenceApplication Conference
2. Neighborhood Meeting
2. Neighborhood Meeting
9. Appeal
9. Appeal
3. Application Submittal
3. Application Submittal
4.
4. NoticeNotice
5.
5. Application ProcessingApplication Processing
7. Decision
7. Decision
Council
Council
8. Modification
8. Modification
6. Public Hearing
6. Public Hearing
PZC
PZC
6. Public Hearing
6. Public Hearing
Council
Council
10.
10. Term of ApprovalTerm of Approval
Figure 11
Figure 11--0033..1515
Annexation Procedure
Annexation Procedure
KEY
KEY
Figure illustrates typical
Figure illustrates typical procedure. Exceptions may procedure. Exceptions may apply as noted in the text.apply as noted in the text.
Public
Public HearingHearing
CHAPTER 11-03: Review and Decision Procedures
Section 11-03-04: Specific Procedures
Subsection 15: Annexation
Supplement No 58 Ord-45-1, Ord-23-15, Amended; Ord-4-15, Amended)
March 2013 Boise Development Code
Page 68
waste water collection system operated by the city if the connection was requested in writing by the owner, or the owner’s authorized agent, or completed before July 1, 2008.
(b) Written consent to annex lands, if recorded in the Ada County Recorder’s office, shall be binding upon subsequent purchasers, heirs, or assigns of lands addressed in the consent. Lands need not be contiguous or adjacent to the city limits at the time the landowner consents to annexation for the property to be subject to a valid consent to annex; provided however, no annexation of lands shall occur, irrespective of consent, until such land becomes contiguous or adjacent to Boise City.
C. Procedures
Figure 11-03.15 shows the procedural steps in the review of applications for annexation. The common procedures of Section 11-03-03.4 shall apply, with modifications as indicated below.
(1) Step 1: Pre-Application Conference
Required.
(2) Step 2: Neighborhood Meeting
Required.
(3) Step 3: Application Submittal
A request for the annexation of property into the city may be initiated by the Council, the PZC, or by property owners or holders of valid purchase. When the annexation request is initiated by the property owner, the PZC may expand or modify the annexation request.
(4) Step 4: Notice
(a) The Director shall provide notice for advisory and decision hearings pursuant to Section 11-03-03.4 and this Section.
(b) For Category B lands, compliance with the notice and hearing procedures governing a zoning district boundary change as set forth in Section 67-6511, Idaho Code, on the question of whether the property should be annexed and, if annexed, the zoning designation to be applied thereto; provided however, the initial notice of public hearing concerning the question of annexation and zoning shall be published in the official newspaper of the city as designated in Section 1-20-01 and mailed by first class mail to every property owner with lands included in such annexation proposal not less than 28 days prior to the initial public hearing. All public hearing notices shall establish a time and procedure by which comments concerning the proposed annexation may be received in writing and heard and, additionally, public hearing notices delivered by mail shall include a one page summary of the contents of the city’s proposed annexation plan and shall provide information regarding where the annexation plan may be obtained without charge by any property owner whose property would be subject to the annexation proposal.
(5) Step 5: Application Processing
The Director shall refer the application to other agencies and prepare a report of findings and recommendations pursuant to Section 11-03-03.4 and this Section.
(6) Step 6: Public Hearing(s)
Public hearings shall be as follows:
CHAPTER 11-03: Review and Decision Procedures
Section 11-03-04: Specific Procedures
Subsection 16: Comprehensive Plan Amendment
Supplement No 58 Ord-45-1, Ord-23-15, Amended; Ord-4-15, Amended)
March 2013 Boise Development Code
Page 69
(a) Planning and Zoning Commission
The PZC shall hold at least one public hearing for each annexation request. The PZC shall file its recommendation with the City Clerk. The PZC's recommendation shall be that the annexation will: Incorporate the Boise sewer planning area; Honor negotiated area of impact agreements; Attempt to balance costs of services with anticipated revenues; and Promote other goals of population balance, contiguous development, and prevention of costs due to leap frog development.
(b) City Council
The Council shall hear an annexation request in a public hearing pursuant to Section 11-03-03.4.
(7) Step 7: Decision
The Council shall render a decision in a public hearing pursuant to Section 11-03-03.4 and this Section. The implementation of a decision to annex shall conclude with the passage of an ordinance of annexation.
(8) Step 8: Modification
Not applicable.
(9) Step 9: Appeal
(a) The general provisions of Section 11-03-03.49 are not applicable.
(b) In accordance with Idaho Code 67-6526(d), a renegotiation may be initiated by the Boise Council or the Board of Ada County Commissioners.
(10) Step 10: Term of Approval
An annexation approval does not lapse.
16. COMPREHENSIVE PLAN AMENDMENT
A. Purpose and Applicability
The Council may amend the Comprehensive Plan pursuant to this Section in order to address changed conditions, to implement changes in public policy, or to advance the general welfare.
1. Pre
1. Pre--Application ConferenceApplication Conference
2. Neighborhood Meeting
2. Neighborhood Meeting
9. Appeal
9. Appeal
3. Application Submittal
3. Application Submittal
4.
4. NoticeNotice
5.
5. Application ProcessingApplication Processing
7. Decision
7. Decision
Council
Council
8. Modification
8. Modification
6. Public Hearing
6. Public Hearing
PZC
PZC
6. Public Hearing
6. Public Hearing
Council
Council
10.
10. Term of ApprovalTerm of Approval
Figure 11
Figure 11--0033..1616
Comprehensive Plan
Comprehensive Plan AmendmentAmendment
KEY
KEY
Figure illustrates typical
Figure illustrates typical procedure. Exceptions may procedure. Exceptions may apply as noted in the text.apply as noted in the text.
Hearing
Hearing
CHAPTER 11-03: Review and Decision Procedures
Section 11-03-04: Specific Procedures
Subsection 16: Comprehensive Plan Amendment
Supplement No 58 Ord-45-1, Ord-23-15, Amended; Ord-4-15, Amended)
March 2013 Boise Development Code
Page 70
B. Procedures
Figure 11-03.16 shows the procedural steps in the review of applications for a comprehensive plan amendment. The common procedures of Section 11-03-03.4 shall apply, with modifications as indicated in this Section. The PZC may recommend amendments to the Land Use Map component of the Comprehensive Plan not more frequently than every six months. Amendments to the text of the plan may be recommended by the PZC at any time.
(1) Step 1: Pre-Application Conference
Required for area specific map amendments.
(2) Step 2: Neighborhood Meeting
Required for area specific map amendments.
(3) Step 3: Application Submittal
Required. The Director shall establish deadlines for comprehensive plan amendment applications.
(4) Step 4: Notice
Required for area specific map amendments.
(5) Step 5: Application Processing
Required. Criteria as follows:
(a) The Director shall prepare a report indicating whether the proposed amendment is consistent with the other elements of the Comprehensive Plan; the predicted effect of the proposed development on the future growth of the city and the existing goals, objectives, and policies of the Comprehensive Plan; and listing any revisions to this Code that would be needed to implement the proposed amendment.
(b) No amendment to the Comprehensive Plan may be recommended by the PZC or approved by the Council unless such amendment is consistent with the other elements of the Comprehensive Plan and the Comprehensive Plan Land Use Map, or where the other components of the plan are changed to create internal consistency.
(6) Step 6: Public Hearing(s)
(a) The PZC shall hear each application and prepare a recommendation to the Council.
(b) The Council shall render a final decision.
(7) Step 7: Decision
The Council may approve a Comprehensive Plan amendment based on the following criteria:
(a) Is required for the public convenience or necessity, or for the general welfare of the community;
(b) Is necessary to address changes in conditions within the community that have occurred since the Boise City Comprehensive Plan was adopted or is necessary to correct one or more goal, objective, or policy that exist in the plan;
(c) Is in compliance with and will further the goals, objectives, and policies of the Boise City Comprehensive Plan;
CHAPTER 11-03: Review and Decision Procedures
Section 11-03-04: Specific Procedures
Subsection 17: Hillside Development Permits
Supplement No 58 Ord-45-1, Ord-23-15, Amended; Ord-4-15, Amended)
March 2013 Boise Development Code
Page 71
(d) Will not create inconsistencies between the goals, objectives, and policies within or between any chapter of the Boise City Comprehensive Plan; and
(e) Will not place an undue burden on transportation or other public facilities in the planning area, and does not adversely impact the delivery of services by any political subdivision providing services.
A comprehensive plan amendment shall become effective when enacted by resolution by the Council.
(8) Step 8: Modification
Not applicable.
(9) Step 9: Appeal
A decision of the Council is final.
(10) Step 10: Term of Approval
A comprehensive plan amendment approval does not lapse.
17. HILLSIDE DEVELOPMENT PERMITS
A. Purpose and Applicability
To ensure development of sloped land occurs in a manner consistent with Comprehensive Plan goals and objectives. Applies to any development proposal for properties when any topographical slope exceeds fifteen percent or where adverse conditions associated with slope stability, expansion soils, high water table and springs, erosion or sedimentation are present as determined by the Director or City Engineer.
CHAPTER 11-03: Review and Decision Procedures
Section 11-03-04: Specific Procedures
Subsection 17: Hillside Development Permits
Supplement No 58 Ord-45-1, Ord-23-15, Amended; Ord-4-15, Amended)
March 2013 Boise Development Code
Page 72
B. Procedures
Figure 11-03.17 shows the procedural steps in the review of applications
(1) Step 1: Pre-Application Conference
Not required.
(2) Step 2: Neighborhood Meeting
Not required.
(3) Step 3: Application Submittal
Required except for Category I.
(4) Step 4: Notice
Required.
(a) Category I - no notice required.
(b) Category II - approval notice mailed to owners within a minimum of 300’ radius.
(c) Category III - public hearing notice shall be sent in compliance with Section 11-03-03.4.
(5) Step 5: Application Processing
(a) Category I is processed as part of building permit application.
(b) For Category II and III the Director shall refer the application to other agencies and prepare a report pursuant to Section 11-03-03.4 for Category III applications.
(c) Category III – a public work session shall be held approximately 33 days after acceptance of application.
(6) Step 6: Public Hearing(s)
Category III - a public hearing is required pursuant to Section 11-03-03.4.
(7) Step 7: Decision
The PZC may approve a Hillside development based on the following criteria:
(a) The proposed development is in compliance with the technical requirements of Section 11-07-08 including those related to grading, drainage, hazardous areas, revegetation, preservation of outstanding and unique features; and
(b) The proposed development, if it complies with all conditions imposed, will not adversely affect other property in the vicinity; and
1. Pre
1. Pre--Application ConferenceApplication Conference
2. Neighborhood Meeting
2. Neighborhood Meeting
9. Appeal
9. Appeal
3. Application
3. Application SubmittalSubmittal
4.
4. NoticeNotice
5.
5. Application ProcessingApplication Processing
7. Decision
7. Decision
Director or PZC
Director or PZC
8. Modification
8. Modification
6. Public Hearing
6. Public Hearing
PZC
PZC
10.
10. Term of ApprovalTerm of Approval
Figure 11
Figure 11--0033..1717
Hillside Development
Hillside Development Procedure Procedure
KEY
KEY
Figure illustrates typical
Figure illustrates typical procedure. procedure. Exceptions may Exceptions may apply as noted in the text.apply as noted in the text.
Public
Public HearingHearing
CHAPTER 11-03: Review and Decision Procedures
Section 11-03-04: Specific Procedures
Subsection 18: Floodplain Permits
Supplement No 58 Ord-45-1, Ord-23-15, Amended; Ord-4-15, Amended)
March 2013 Boise Development Code
Page 73
(c) The land itself is capable of the volume and type of development proposed as determined by geological, hydrological and soils engineering analysis; and
(d) The project does not create a potential hazard of flooding, soil instability, fire, erosion, etc.
(e) The proposal complies with all requirements of the Zoning Ordinance for foothills gulches including the requirements of Section 11-07-08 and the Floodway and Floodplain Ordinance.
(8) Step 8: Modification
Applicable.
(9) Step 9: Appeal
As per 11-03-03.4.
(10) Step 10: Term of Approval
A hillside approval shall lapse after 36 months.
18. FLOODPLAIN PERMITS
A. Purpose and Applicability
To promote public health, safety and general welfare, and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas.
B. Procedures
Figure 11-03.16 shows the procedural steps in the review of applications.
(1) Step 1: Pre-Application Conference
Required for variance to floodplain application only.
(2) Step 2: Neighborhood Meeting
Required for variance to floodplain application only.
(3) Set 3: Application Submittal
Required.
(4) Step 4: Notice
Required per Section 11-03-03.4 for variances.
(5) Step 5: Application Processing
Must be processed concurrently with other development applications.
(a) Any request for an allowed or permitted use or structure within the floodplain, shall be reviewed and acted upon by the Director.
(b) For variance requests the application is referred to other agencies and report prepared pursuant to Section 11-03-03.4.
1. Pre
1. Pre--Application ConferenceApplication Conference
2. Neighborhood Meeting
2. Neighborhood Meeting
9. Appeal
9. Appeal
3. Application Submittal
3. Application Submittal
4. Notice
4. Notice
5. Application Processing
5. Application Processing
7. Decision
7. Decision
Director
Director
8. Modification
8. Modification
6. Public Hearing
6. Public Hearing
10.
10. Term of ApprovalTerm of Approval
Figure 11
Figure 11--003.163.16
Floodplain Permit
Floodplain Permit
KEY
KEY
Figure illustrates typical
Figure illustrates typical procedure. Exceptions may procedure. Exceptions may apply as noted in the apply as noted in the text.text.
Public
Public HearingHearing
CHAPTER 11-03: Review and Decision Procedures
Section 11-03-04: Specific Procedures
Subsection 19: River System Permits
Supplement No 58 Ord-45-1, Ord-23-15, Amended; Ord-4-15, Amended)
March 2013 Boise Development Code
Page 74
(6) Step 6: Public Hearing
Required for variance request only. Heard by PZC.
(7) Step 7: Decision
Per Chapter 11-08 Flood Hazard Regulations.
(8) Step 8: Modification
Not applicable.
(9) Step 9: Appeal
Appeal of applications is per Section 11-03-03.4.
(10) Step 10: Term of Approval
Approval shall lapse after 24 months.
19. RIVER SYSTEM PERMITS
A. Purpose and Applicability
To protect public health, safety and general welfare and implement the Comprehensive Plan and the Boise River Plan. The regulations of this District shall apply to all lands and waters and all aquatic, wetland, riparian and upland environments within the jurisdiction of Boise City that lie:
(1) Within the 100-year Floodplain boundaries adjacent to the Boise River, or
(2) Within the Setback Lands and Waters (Section 11-05-06.1.E), or
(3) Within Class A, Class B and Class C areas covered by Section 11-05-06.1.E.
B. Procedures
Figure 11-03.19 shows the procedural steps for this application.
(1) Step 1: Pre-Application Conference
Not Required.
(2) Step 2: Neighborhood Meeting
Not Required unless application determined to be complex by Director.
(3) Step 3: Application Submittal
(a) Required.
(b) Conceptual Applications may be submitted as follows: A concept approval request must be accompanied by an entitlement application for the intended use. A concept approval is a statement by the City of Boise that a general development plan including the
1. Pre
1. Pre--Application ConferenceApplication Conference
2. Neighborhood Meeting
2. Neighborhood Meeting
9. Appeal
9. Appeal
3. Application Submittal
3. Application Submittal
4.
4. NoticeNotice
5.
5. Application ProcessingApplication Processing
7. Decision
7. Decision
Director or PZC
Director or PZC
8. Modification
8. Modification
6.
6. Public HearingPublic Hearing
PZC
PZC
10.
10. Term of ApprovalTerm of Approval
Figure 11
Figure 11--0033..1919
River System Permits
River System Permits
KEY
KEY
Figure illustrates typical
Figure illustrates typical procedure. Exceptions may procedure. Exceptions may apply as noted in the text.apply as noted in the text.
Public
Public HearingHearing
CHAPTER 11-03: Review and Decision Procedures
Section 11-03-04: Specific Procedures
Subsection 19: River System Permits
Supplement No 58 Ord-45-1, Ord-23-15, Amended; Ord-4-15, Amended)
March 2013 Boise Development Code
Page 75
general arrangement of uses, open spaces, location of streets and other infrastructure, etc. is acceptable. A concept review allows the applicant to obtain approval of a general development plan without incurring the expense of preparing detailed plans and studies until after the concept approval. Applications shall include at least the following:
A. Location of floodway and floodplain boundaries,
B. The 6500 cfs flow line,
C. Greenbelt (70'), eagle habitat (200') setbacks and delineation of all setback lands and waters
D. Visible wetlands and surface features.
E. Each phase of a concept approval requires a detailed Boise River System permit.
(4) Step 4: Notice
Property owners and residents on both sides of the river or channel 500’ upstream and 1000’ downstream shall be noticed in accordance with the agency referrals and timelines set forth in Section 11-03-03.4.
(5) Step 5: Application Processing
(a) Parks Board review is required when it is adjacent to or includes the Greenbelt setback lands and waters.
(b) Extended review may be required.
(c) Concurrent review of related applications is required.
(6) Step 6: Public Hearing
Public hearing is required pursuant to Section 11-03-03.4 unless decision made by Director.
(7) Step 7: Decision
(a) Decision authority rests with the PZC except the Director may approve applications that: Do not affect more than 100 lineal feet of river bottom or bank, nor more than one-half acre of Class A or B lands; and, Do not materially alter, fully restores, or enhances the existing surface and groundwater hydrology, soils, plan and animal communities and habitats present within or adjacent to the project; and, Provide for the maintenance of storm water detention/sedimentation basins and stabilization structures.
(b) Approval Criteria The proposed development is in compliance with the applicable Standards for Uses in Class A, B or C lands and waters. The proposed development complies with all the policies and standards of the Boise Comprehensive Plan, the Boise River Plan, the Floodplain Ordinance and the Boise River System Ordinance
CHAPTER 11-03: Review and Decision Procedures
Section 11-03-04: Specific Procedures
Subsection 20: Certificate of Appropriateness
Supplement No 58 Ord-45-1, Ord-23-15, Amended; Ord-4-15, Amended)
March 2013 Boise Development Code
Page 76
The proposed development includes measures designed to insure that natural resources functions and values are preserved or enhanced and maintained. The proposed development complies with or shall comply with all local, State and Federal laws and regulations.
(8) Step 8: Modification
Applicable.
(9) Step 9: Appeal
Applicable pursuant to Section 11-03-03.4.
(10) Step 10: Term of Approval
Approval shall lapse after 24 months unless otherwise conditioned.
20. CERTIFICATE OF APPROPRIATENESS
A. Certificate of Appropriateness Required for Alteration, Demolitions or Relocations, Changes in Zoning Classification or Changes in Use in Historic Districts or Historic Districts-Residential
(1) Alterations in Historic Districts
(a) General Rule After the designation by ordinance of an historic district, no exterior feature, as defined within this chapter, of any building, site, structure or object (including, but not limited to, walls, pavement or other appurtenant features), nor above ground utility structure nor any type of outdoor advertising sign shall be erected, altered, restored, moved or demolished within such district until after an application for a Certificate of Appropriateness has been submitted and approved by the Commission. A certificate will be required whether or not a Building Permit is required, and a Certificate of Appropriateness must be granted in all cases before an applicant can obtain any other permit. Confirmation of Classification - As part of the application process for a Certificate of Appropriateness, the Planning Staff shall confirm the contributing or non-contributing classification of the property based on the criteria set forth in the definitions of Section 11-012-04. In the event that the property's level of significance may have changed since the last survey, staff shall prepare a report stating why the property should be reclassified and provide a copy to the applicant. A change in classification shall be subject to approval in accordance with Section 11-05-09.7 by vote of the Commission prior to considering the applicant's request for a Certificate of Appropriateness. The Commission may delegate to the Planning Director review of Certificates of Appropriateness that are listed as “staff level” under the Certificate of Appropriateness Matrix adopted by the Historic Preservation Commission and are in compliance with the design guidelines on file in the Planning and Development Services Department.
(b) Exceptions
No Certificate of Appropriateness is required for the following items:
CHAPTER 11-03: Review and Decision Procedures
Section 11-03-04: Specific Procedures
Subsection 20: Certificate of Appropriateness
Supplement No 58 Ord-45-1, Ord-23-15, Amended; Ord-4-15, Amended)
March 2013 Boise Development Code
Page 77
Interior arrangement of any building or structure. Temporary structures and features that do not remain in existence for a time period greater than a total of 45 days in any consecutive 12 month period. A site or building improvement that does not require a certificate in the Certificate of Appropriateness Matrix as adopted by resolution by the Historic Preservation Commission and on file in the Planning and Development Services Department.
(2) Demolition or Relocation in Historic Districts or Historic Districts-Residential
After the designation by ordinance of an historic district, or historic district - residential, no building, site, structure or object which is a part of such district shall be demolished or moved until after an application for a Certificate of Appropriateness relating to the demolition or moving of such building, site, structure or object has been submitted to and approved by the Commission. A certificate will be required whether or not a Building Permit is required and a Certificate of Appropriateness must be granted in all cases before an applicant can obtain any other permit required for the demolition or moving of any building, site, structure or object which is part of an historic district or historic district - residential.
(3) Change in Zoning Classification or Change in Use in Historic Districts or Historic Districts-Residential
Any change in zoning classification or change in use that requires a Conditional Use Permit or Administrative Review as set forth in Chapter 11-04, Zoning Districts or a Record of Survey as required by Section 11-03-04.5 within a designated Historic District or Historic District - Residential shall first require approval of a Certificate of Appropriateness.
B. Procedures
Figure 11-03.20 shows the review procedure. The common procedures of Section 11-03-03.4 shall apply, with modifications as indicated in this Section.
(1) Step 1: Pre-Application Conference
Required. For applications that will be heard by the Historic Preservation Commission, the applicant is required to do the following prior to submittal of the application: Not more than 6 months, nor less than one day prior to submittal of the application, hold a pre-application staff conference(s) with the Planning Director and invited referral agencies. The staff must complete a pre-application conference verification form provided by the Director during the conference, have the applicant sign it, obtain the Director’s signature, and the applicant shall submit it with the application.
(2) Step 2: Neighborhood Meeting
Not required.
(3) Step 3: Application Submittal
(a) General Rule
Required. An application for a Certificate of Appropriateness shall be submitted by the owner of the property, or by a representative of such person, on a form designated by the Commission and containing such information as required by the Commission.
CHAPTER 11-03: Review and Decision Procedures
Section 11-03-04: Specific Procedures
Subsection 20: Certificate of Appropriateness
Supplement No 58 Ord-45-1, Ord-23-15, Amended; Ord-4-15, Amended)
March 2013 Boise Development Code
Page 78
(b) Demolition or Relocation
Required. For any application seeking Demolition or Relocation the applicant shall provide the following: A written statement as to why the building, site, structure or object should be demolished. Photographs of the building, site, structure or object to be demolished, as well as of adjacent properties. If the applicant wished to be considered for 11-03-04.20.B.7(b)iii.A.4 under SectionError! Reference source not found. under Section Error! Reference source not found. Demolitions or Relocations – Findings they shall provide the following additional information:
A. Two written reports, prepared by licensed design professionals appropriate to the nature of the project, at least one of which shall be disinterested, stating the structural soundness of the building or structure proposed for demolition and suitability for reuse.
B. An analysis of the cost to rehabilitate existing structure plus construct the additional square footage and other goals of the application. These costs shall be completed to the cost of demolishing any existing structures and the equivalent new construction by a licensed design professional appropriate to the nature of the project.
(4) Step 4: Notice
(a) Commission Action
Required.
(b) Staff Level Action
Required. Within 2 calendar days of the decision, the Planning Director shall notify, in writing, the applicant, property owners and residents adjacent to the parcel (including those properties across a street, alley, canal or other right-of-way) and the registered neighborhood association informing them of the action taken and their right to appeal. Notification shall be deemed complete on the date notice is provided to the U.S. Postal Service.
(5) Step 5: Application Processing
Required.
CHAPTER 11-03: Review and Decision Procedures
Section 11-03-04: Specific Procedures
Subsection 20: Certificate of Appropriateness
Supplement No 58 Ord-45-1, Ord-23-15, Amended; Ord-4-15, Amended)
March 2013 Boise Development Code
Page 79
(6) Step 6: Public Hearing(s)
Required. Prior to approval or denial of a Certificate of Appropriateness, the Commission shall schedule a public hearing and 14 calendar days prior to the hearing, notice shall be mailed to the applicant, to the property owners and residents within 300 feet of the exterior boundary of the parcel under consideration and to the registered neighborhood association.
(7) Step 7: Decision
(a) Action by the Commission
The Commission shall make every effort to act on an application in accordance with the applicable findings cited in Section 11-03-04.20.B.7(b) within six weeks (42 days) based upon published cut-off and hearing dates. An application shall be deemed to have been approved and a favorable Certificate of Appropriateness shall be issued by the Commission unless one of the following occurs on or before the 42nd day if; A hearing cannot be held due to lack of a quorum; If the Commission makes a specific finding at the public hearing that there is good cause to continue the application. Good cause includes, but is not limited to, lateness of the hour, or a determination by the Commission that the submitted materials are incomplete to make a well informed decision on the application. Approvals - If the Commission determines the proposed request is appropriate, it shall approve such application with its reasons for the decision and any applicable Conditions of Approval and shall issue to the applicant a Certificate of Appropriateness. Denials - If the Commission determines that a Certificate of Appropriateness should not be issued, it shall place upon its records the reason for such determination and shall notify the applicant in writing of its reasons and recommendations, if any, as to what actions could be taken in order to obtain a certificate.
1. Pre
1. Pre--Application ConferenceApplication Conference
2. Neighborhood Meeting
2. Neighborhood Meeting
9. Appeal
9. Appeal
3. Application Submittal
3. Application Submittal
4.
4. NoticeNotice
5.
5. Application ProcessingApplication Processing
7. Decision
7. Decision
HPC or Director
HPC or Director
8. Modification
8. Modification
6. Public
6. Public HearingHearing
HPC
HPC
10.
10. Term of ApprovalTerm of Approval
Figure 11
Figure 11--0033..2020
Certificate of
Certificate of Appropriateness Appropriateness
KEY
KEY
Figure illustrates typical
Figure illustrates typical procedure. Exceptions may procedure. Exceptions may apply as noted in the text.apply as noted in the text.
Public
Public HearingHearing
CHAPTER 11-03: Review and Decision Procedures
Section 11-03-04: Specific Procedures
Subsection 20: Certificate of Appropriateness
Supplement No 58 Ord-45-1, Ord-23-15, Amended; Ord-4-15, Amended)
March 2013 Boise Development Code
Page 80
(b) Findings for Granting a Certificate of Appropriateness
The Commission shall review each application with the findings outlined below as pertain to the request for a Certificate of Appropriateness. The Commission may attach Conditions of Approval to the application to insure compliance with the findings. Modifications to the applications may be submitted and will be considered at a staff level. In reviewing the modification the Planning Director will utilize the original findings under which the application was reviewed to ensure the project still complies with the requirements for a Certificate of Appropriateness. General Findings
The Commission shall find that the design of the project is consistent with the following plans and guidelines that apply to the property:
A. 1993 Downtown Boise Plan;
B. Urban Renewal Plans, including, but not limited to:
1) River Myrtle – Old Boise Urban Renewal Plan.
2) Westside Downtown Urban Renewal Plan.
C. Design Guidelines for Residential Historic Districts;
D. Boise City Historic Preservation Plan (dated July 1979);
E. The Secretary of the Interior’s Standards for the Treatment of Historic Properties with Guidelines for Preserving, Rehabilitating, Restoring & Reconstructing Historic Buildings (The Secretary of the Interior’s Standards);
F. A Field Guide to American Houses by Virginia & Lee McAlester;
G. American Vernacular Design 1870-1940 An Illustrated Glossary by Herbert Gottfried and Jan Jennings; and
H. Design Guidelines for Commercial Historic Districts with the Secretary of the Interior’s Standards for Historic Preservation August 2009. Alterations - Findings
The Commission’s decision in regard to Certificates of Appropriateness for alterations, as described in Section 11-03-04.20.A(1), shall be based on the following findings as applicable to that property:
A. That the request is consistent with the Design Guidelines for Boise City’s Historic Districts;
B. That the request is consistent with the Boise City Design Guidelines for Residential Historic Districts;
C. That the request is consistent with The Secretary of the Interior’s Standards for Rehabilitation, or other standards as applicable (preservation, restoration or reconstruction);
D. That the request supports the goals, objectives and policies of the Boise City Comprehensive Plan and the plans referenced therein;
E. That based on the adopted design guidelines the request will not be incongruous with the historical, architectural, archeological, educational or cultural aspects of the district; and
F. That the request complies with the dimensional standards and other applicable requirements of Title XI (Zoning Ordinance) including, but not limited to, setbacks, height restrictions and parking requirements unless the Commission finds that modifying those standards is necessary to protect the overall characteristics of the district and to comply with the adopted design guidelines.
CHAPTER 11-03: Review and Decision Procedures
Section 11-03-04: Specific Procedures
Subsection 20: Certificate of Appropriateness
Supplement No 58 Ord-45-1, Ord-23-15, Amended; Ord-4-15, Amended)
March 2013 Boise Development Code
Page 81
Demolitions or Relocations - Findings
A. Approval by Commission
In order for the Commission to approve a demolition or relocation request at least 3 out of the 5 following findings must be met:
1) That the building, site, structure or object is not classified as contributing within the district as stated on the survey form on file in the Planning and Development Services Department.
2) That the building, site, structure or object cannot reasonably meet National, State or Local criteria for designation as an historic property.
3) That demolition of the building, site, structure or object would not have an adverse impact on the character of the district and/or the adjacent properties.
4) That the owner has reasonably demonstrated that rehabilitation of the building, site, structure or object would not be economically practical, realistic or viable based on review of the information required in Section11-03-04.20.B.3(b)iii shall to be provided by the applicant at the time the request for a Certificate of Appropriateness is submitted.
5) That plans have been submitted to redevelop the property if the demolition proceeds and such plans will have a positive effect on the district and/or adjacent properties. The size, scale, use, materials and/or overall design of the project may be considered as qualities for producing a positive effect.
B. Approval by Staff
In some instances a Certificate of Appropriateness for demolition of a structure may be granted at a staff level if the following findings can be made:
1) The Commission has granted a partial demolition, has approved the replacement structure and the plans for the replacement structure remain the same; and
2) The Building Official deems in writing that a full demolition is necessary for life safety and there are no other cost effective alternatives. Change in Zoning Classification or Change in Use - Findings
The Commission’s decision in regard to Certificates of Appropriateness for a change in zoning classification or a change in use as described in 11-03-04.20.A(3) above shall be based on the following findings:
A. That the request supports the Boise City Comprehensive Plan goals, objectives and policies contained within Chapter 5/Parks, Recreation and Cultural Resources, and the applicable neighborhood plans; and
B. That the request will be congruous with the historical, architectural, archeological, educational or cultural significance of the district.
CHAPTER 11-03: Review and Decision Procedures
Section 11-03-04: Specific Procedures
Subsection 20: Certificate of Appropriateness
Supplement No 58 Ord-45-1, Ord-23-15, Amended; Ord-4-15, Amended)
March 2013 Boise Development Code
Page 82
“HD” Overlay Zone - Findings
For projects within an “HD” overlay zone, the following objectives and findings, in addition to those cited under Section11-03-04.20.B.7(b), shall be considered where applicable to the proposal:
A. Objective - Site Design
The application shall be reviewed by the Commission to determine compatibility and impact both on and adjacent to the site as it relates to access, parking lot design, landscaping, grading and storm drainage, and other development of the site. To accomplish said objective, the Commission shall coordinate design input and requirements from other agencies. The decision of the Commission with regards to site design shall be based upon the following findings as they relate to historic preservation:
1) Finding 1: Traffic Impact, Pedestrian and Bicyclist Provisions
That the site design minimizes impact of traffic on adjacent streets and that the pedestrian and bicyclist have been provided for by requiring sidewalks, landscaping and safe parking lot design as appropriate.
Considerations Relative to Finding 1:
• The impact and effect of the site development plan on traffic conditions on contiguous streets and adjoining properties or neighborhoods.
• The layout of the site with respect to separation or integration of vehicular, pedestrian and bicycle traffic patterns.
• The design of off-street parking facilities as they relate to access points, building location and total site development to prevent traffic conflict or congestion.
• The location, arrangement and dimensions of truck loading ramps, docks and bays and vehicle service facilities.
• The coordination of the site development with planned right-of-way alignments, acquisitions and street improvements.
2) Finding 2: Landscaping
That the proposed landscaping enhances the historic district and neighborhood with attributes that include, but are not limited to, protection of desirable existing trees, provision of street trees and adequate screening methods where needed to buffer adjacent uses and unsightly areas or features.
Considerations Relative to Finding 2:
• The location, height and materials of walls, fences, hedges and screening plantings to insure harmony with adjacent developments.
CHAPTER 11-03: Review and Decision Procedures
Section 11-03-04: Specific Procedures
Subsection 20: Certificate of Appropriateness
Supplement No 58 Ord-45-1, Ord-23-15, Amended; Ord-4-15, Amended)
March 2013 Boise Development Code
Page 83
• The planting of street trees and the unnecessary destruction of existing trees and landscape features.
• The provision of plantings or other screening methods reasonably required to conceal outdoor storage areas, trash receptacles, exposed machinery installation, service areas, truck loading areas, utility buildings and installations and similar accessory areas or other unsightly developments.
3) Finding 3: On-site Grading and Drainage
That on-site grading and drainage have been designed so as to minimize off-site impact and provide for erosion control as required by the Boise City Public Works Department, Ada County Highway District and/or other jurisdictional agency.
4) Finding 4: Utility Service Systems
That utility service systems and equipment do not detract from the building design or adjacent buildings, and the size and location of all service systems are appropriate and maintainable.
Considerations Relative to Finding 4:
• Electrical and telephone service systems shall be installed underground unless deemed appropriate due to location or existing conditions.
• The location, design and screening of transformers and mechanical and electrical equipment does not detract from the design of the building or adjacent properties;
B. Objective - Structure Design
The design of all proposed buildings shall be reviewed in accordance with the Design Guidelines for Boise City’s Historic Districts and/or Boise City Design Guidelines for Residential Historic Districts, as well as the following findings:
1) Finding 1: Building Mass
The mass of the building shall be reviewed for its relationship to other buildings within the historic district and area, and with the use proposed by the applicant.
2) Finding 2: Proportion of Building Facades
The height to width relationship shall be compatible and consistent with the predominant architectural character of the historic district.
3) Finding 3: Shadow Relief/Design Interest
CHAPTER 11-03: Review and Decision Procedures
Section 11-03-04: Specific Procedures
Subsection 20: Certificate of Appropriateness
Supplement No 58 Ord-45-1, Ord-23-15, Amended; Ord-4-15, Amended)
March 2013 Boise Development Code
Page 84
The exterior of the building shall provide shadow relief and design interest compatible with the architectural character of the area.
4) Finding 4: Relationship of Exterior Materials
The appropriateness of materials and colors (paint colors are not reviewed for single-family residential structures) shall be reviewed as they relate to building mass, shadow relief and compatibility with other buildings within the historic district and area.
5) Finding 5: Multiple-family Buildings
Multiple-family building (any building containing more than 2 residential units) must be designed to include features which add to the visual and aesthetic appearance of the structure and help prevent a sterile, box-like appearance. Such features may include the use of brick or stone, roof or facade modulation, planter boxes, bay windows, balconies, porches, etc. The commission must make a finding that specific design features have been added to enhance the physical appearance of such multiple-family residential structures.
6) Finding 6: Commercial/Industrial Buildings Adjacent to Residential Uses
That the building is designed to minimize impacts on adjoining (including across a street or alley) residential uses and/or residential zones.
Considerations Relevant to Finding 6:
• Overhead doors for service and/or repair activities and loading activities are located at the side of the building most opposite to any residential neighborhood/ dwelling or residential zone, unless it can be demonstrated that there are no other viable options and there will be mitigation through use of walls, berms, landscaping, etc.
• Building walls that face residential uses or zones provide visual interest through use of a variety of materials/compatible colors, fenestration (wall openings), roof line variations, wall modulation and/or other architectural method that will minimize blank walls.
• Wall lights facing any residential use or zone are shielded to prevent glare or light fall on the adjacent property. The Commission may require a reduction in height of the lights on the building, or footcandles, if it is determined that the proposed lights will have a negative impact on the adjoining properties.
CHAPTER 11-03: Review and Decision Procedures
Section 11-03-04: Specific Procedures
Subsection 20: Certificate of Appropriateness
Supplement No 58 Ord-45-1, Ord-23-15, Amended; Ord-4-15, Amended)
March 2013 Boise Development Code
Page 85
• Mechanical equipment on the roof, or adjacent to the building, shall be located in areas that are furthest away from residential uses or zones, unless it can be demonstrated that there will not be visual and/or noise impacts on the adjacent properties due to screen walls, equipment design or other factors.
C. Objective - Adopted Plans and Design Guidelines
The Commission shall find that the design of the project is consistent with the plans and guidelines listed in Section11-03-04.20.B.7(b)i.
(c) Action by Planning Director
Within 14 calendar days after receipt of an application, the Planning Director shall investigate the request and shall either approve, modify or deny such application.
(8) Step 8: Modification
Not applicable.
(9) Step 9: Appeal
(a) Appeal of Commission Level Decisions
Any applicant or party of record aggrieved by a determination of the Commission may appeal to the City Council within 10 calendar days of the decision in accordance with Chapter 11-03, Review and Decision Procedures. The decision is deemed to have been made on the date that the Commission adopts written findings of fact and conclusions of law. An appeal from the Council may be taken to a court of competent jurisdiction.
(b) Appeal of Staff Level Decisions
A decision of the Planning Director may be appealed to the Commission within 10 calendar days from the date the notice is mailed in accordance with Chapter 11-03, Review and Decision Procedures. The applicant may request a waiver of the 10 day appeal period for staff level approvals if the request is made in writing and accompanied by the signatures of all adjacent property owners and residents and a representative of the registered neighborhood association indicating that they do not object to the waiver request. The Planning Director shall review all pertinent information and issue a decision on the request.
(10) Step 10: Term of Approval
The term of approval for a Certificate of Appropriateness shall be two years. The Commission may grant up to two 2-year extensions. Certificates of Appropriateness are automatically extended when an associated conditional use is extended.
SUPPLEMENT NO. 58, Ord 45-15, ORD 9, 11, 14 &15 2013(ORD 42-13 1029-13)
March 2013 Boise Development Code
Page 86
CHAPTER 11-04: ZONING DISTRICTSZONING DISTRICTS 11-04-01. GENERAL PROVISIONS
This chapter establishes the zoning districts and contains district purpose statements and district-specific regulations. Chapter 11-05, Overlay and Specific Plan Districts, contains the purpose statements and district regulations for overlay districts. Chapter 11-06, Use Standards, and Chapter 11-07, Development and Design Standards, identify the uses allowed within the districts and the dimensional standards applying to development in the districts.
1. ZONING DISTRICTS ESTABLISHED
The incorporated area of the Boise City is divided into the zoning districts shown in Table 11-04.1.
A. Zoning Districts Table
Table 11-04.1: Zoning Districts Established District Type Abbreviation District Name
Open Land
A-1
Open Lands, Park
A-2
Open Land, Reserve
Residential
R-1A
Single Family Residential, Large Lot
R-1B
Single Family Residential, Suburban
R-1C
Single Family Residential, Urban
R-1M
Town Lot Residential
R-2
Medium Density Residential
R-3
Multi-Family Residential
Office
N-O
Neighborhood Office
L-O
Limited Office
R-O
Residential-Office
Commercial
C-1
Neighborhood Commercial
C-2
General Commercial
C-3
Service Commercial
C-4
Planned Commercial
C-5
Central Business
PC
Pedestrian Commercial
Industrial
M-1
Light Industrial District
M-2
Heavy Industrial District
T-1
Technological-Industrial Park
T-2
Technological-Manufacturing Park
Special Purpose
HS
Health Services District
U
University District
B. Relationship of Base Zoning Districts and Overlay Districts
Where a property is designated as an overlay district as well as a base zoning district, the regulations governing development in the overlay district shall apply in addition to the regulations of the base district. In the event of a conflict between the two, the standards for the overlay district shall control.
2. ZONING MAP
The zoning districts are shown on the Official Zoning Map. Procedures for amending the Zoning Map are in Section 11-03-04.3, Rezone. The Zoning Map, together with all notations, references, and other information shown thereon, and all amendments thereto, is a part of this Code and shall have the same force and effect as if said map or maps was fully set forth and described herein.
CHAPTER 11-04: Zoning Districts
Section 11-04-01: General Provisions
Subsection 3: General Standards
Supplement No 58 Ord-45-1, Ord-23-15, Amended; Ord-4-15, Amended)
March 2013 Boise Development Code
Page 87
A. Boundaries Generally
The boundaries of zoning districts are delineated upon the Official Zoning Map.
B. Rules for Interpretation of Boundaries
Wherever any uncertainty exists as to the boundary of a district, the following rules shall apply:
(1) Where any boundary line is indicated as following a street, alley, waterway, railroad right-of-way or public way, it shall be construed as following the center line thereof.
(2) Where a boundary line is indicated as approximately following a lot line, such lot line shall be construed to be the boundary line.
C. Original Map and Copies
The map will be maintained and copies will be obtained through Boise City Planning and Development Services Department.
3. GENERAL STANDARDS
A. Height Exceptions, Generally
Exceptions to height limits for structures and appurtenances in this Code not otherwise modified in this Section may be authorized by a conditional use permit decided by the PZC.
B. Air Terminal Height Restrictions
In addition to the provisions of this Code, the height of structures may be further restricted by Title XII, Air Terminal Regulations, of the Boise City Code.
C. Setbacks Measurement
(1) Setbacks are measured from the property line unless otherwise indicated in a specific zone. When based on the street type consult the most recently adopted ACHD Functional Classification Map. When setbacks are required by building story, the setback is measured to each individual story as follows:
(2) When a building setback line is delineated on any plat, the setback shown on the plat shall govern.
Figure 11-04.1: Setback measurement
CHAPTER 11-04: Zoning Districts
Section 11-04-02: Open Land Districts
Subsection 4: Permitted Uses in Any Yard
Supplement No 58 Ord-45-1, Ord-23-15, Amended; Ord-4-15, Amended)
March 2013 Boise Development Code
Page 88
4. PERMITTED USES IN ANY YARD
A. Into Any Yard
The following shall be permitted to encroach in any yard as indicated:
(1) Cornices, canopies, eaves, or other projections that do not increase the volume of space enclosed by the building and do not project into any required yard more than two feet; provided that an unroofed stair and landing together with a railing may project not more than three feet into a front yard or six feet into a rear yard.
(2) Chimney, not more than eight feet in width, projecting not more than two feet.
(3) Flagpoles, antennas, and other tall structures shall conform to the height limit allowed within the zone unless approved in accordance with the provisions of Section 11-04-01.3.
(4) Window wells projecting no more than three feet.
B. Into Rear Yards
The following shall be permitted to encroach in rear yards: An unroofed balcony that does not project more than four feet into such yard. Support structures for balconies shall be located outside required yards. 11-04-02. OPEN LAND DISTRICTS
1. GENERAL PURPOSE OF ALL OPEN LAND DISTRICTS
To provide for uses such as parks; schools; dedicated open spaces; protected environmental sites such as wetlands and riparian areas; hazardous areas such as floodways, steep slopes, landslides, and airport approach areas; low-density residential development; and agriculture.
2. OPEN LAND VERY LOW DENSITY (A-1) DISTRICT
To provide for low density residential use and land uses requiring larger land areas for development such as parks, schools, golf courses, agriculture, rural residential neighborhoods,.
3. OPEN LAND RESERVE (A-2) DISTRICT
A. Purpose
To provide for permanent open space and to properly guide growth of the fringe areas of the city. The A-2 district classification should be applied to property that is not intended for development, or for property that the city desires to be subject to stronger development limitations than would be provided by the A-1 district. Lands may be assigned to an A-2 district classification to:
(1) Set aside lands for open space uses, including floodways, riparian areas, steep slopes, and flood control facilities;
(2) Enhance and preserve the character of parks and other publicly owned properties;
(3) Encourage agricultural and grazing uses;
(4) Serve as a low intensity use zone.
CHAPTER 11-04: Zoning Districts
Section 11-04-03: Residential Districts
Subsection 4: Dimensional Standards for Open Land Districts
Supplement No 58 Ord-45-1, Ord-23-15, Amended; Ord-4-15, Amended)
March 2013 Boise Development Code
Page 89
4. DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS FOR OPEN LAND DISTRICTS
Table 11-04.2 Dimensional Standards for Open Lands Dimensional Standard A-1 A-2 Lot Area, Minimum (square feet) Interior Lots
1 Acre
40 Acres Corner Lots Average Lot Width, Minimum (feet) Interior Lots
50
100 Corner Lots Street Frontage, Minimum (feet)
30
100 Density, Maximum (units/acre)
1
1 unit/ 40 acres Open Space per Unit, Maximum
N/A Building Height, Maximum (feet)
45, 35* Setbacks, Minimum (feet) Front Yard / Side Yard, Street
20*
40* Side Yard, Interior
10*
20* Rear Yard
30*
60* NOTES: * Applies when the property abuts a residential use or district.
11-04-03. RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
1. GENERAL PURPOSES OF RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
A. Single Family Residential (R-1A, R-1B, and R-1C) Districts
To provide a range and variety of districts for predominantly single-family residential uses within the urban community. Land may be classified to these respective classifications for location, topographic, or other reasonable purposes, and to guide the physical growth and stability of the city.
B. Residential Town Lot (R-1M) District
To provide a flexible residential zone which allows the creation of narrow lots that can be developed in blocks for urban row houses or combined into wider lots for single family detached housing.
C. Residential Medium Density (R-2) District
To provide for attached housing development in moderate densities integrated within neighborhoods.
D. Residential Multiple-Family (R-3) District
To provide for higher density residential development in close proximity to retail, employment, transit and other concentrated uses.
CHAPTER 11-04: Zoning Districts
Section 11-04-03: Residential Districts
Subsection 2: Dimensional Standards for Residential Districts
Supplement No 58 Ord-45-1, Ord-23-15, Amended; Ord-4-15, Amended)
March 2013 Boise Development Code
Page 90
2. DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS FOR RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS Table 11-04.3 Dimensional Standards for Residential Districts Dimensional Standard R-1A R-1B R-1C R-2 R-3 R-1M Attached Housing Detached Housing Lot Area, Minimum (square feet) Interior Lots
20,000
9,000
5,000
2,160
4,320 Corner Lots
7,000
3,360
5,520 Average Lot Width, Minimum (feet) Interior Lots
100
75
50
18
36 Corner Lots
70
28
46 Street Frontage, Minimum (feet)
30
18
36 Density, Maximum (units/acre)
2.1
4.8
8.0
14.5
43.5
17 Open Space per Unit, Maximum
N/A
10 % Net Lot Area Building Height, Maximum (feet)
35
45
35 Setbacks, Minimum (feet) Front Yard / Side Yard, Street
20
10 Side Yard, Interior*
10
5
1 story: 5
2 stories: 10
3+ stories: 15
0, 5 for end units Rear Yard
30
15
1-2 stories: 15
3+ stories: 20
With alley: 5;
Without alley 15 *The interior side setback shall be at least half the building height but no more than 15 feet for a principal building other than a single family or duplex dwelling.
3. EXCEPTIONS TO SETBACK STANDARDS
A. Exceptions in the Residential Zoning Districts
(1) Except in the R-1M zoning district, a single-family or duplex residence may have a 15-foot front and street side setback, for living space and side entry garages. provided that the distance along the inside edge of the driveway is no less than 20 feet. This exception does not apply if setbacks have been approved through a planned unit development or delineated on the subdivision plat.
CHAPTER 11-04: Zoning Districts
Section 11-04-03: Residential Districts
Subsection 4: Dimensional Standards for Parking in R-1M District
Supplement No 58 Ord-45-1, Ord-23-15, Amended; Ord-4-15, Amended)
March 2013 Boise Development Code
Page 91
(2) For corner lots, either street may be designated as the front yard. Once chosen, the front, street-side, rear, and interior-side yard designations may not be changed. Building design shall match the designated yards.
4. DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS FOR PARKING IN R-1M DISTRICT
5. FINDINGS FOR CONDITIONAL USES IN THE A-1 AND A-2 DISTRICTS
A. The proposed use; its bulk, height, intensity and location on the property; and all grading, paving and other associated site development modifications, are consistent with preserving the core values of the property as identified in the Comprehensive Plan or other appropriate guiding document, entitlement or deed restriction associated with the property.
B. The proposed use is consistent with the applicable open space requirements and allowances in Section 0 Foothills Planned Development Standards.
C. The use is compatible with, or can be conditioned to be compatible with, adjacent land uses. Conditions may include limitations on type, size, amount, location or operation of the use and all other property development modifications associated with the use. Table 11-04.4: Setbacks for Parking Lots and Parking Structures Dimensional Standards R-1M Front yard
20 Side Yard Street
20 Side Yard Interior
Attached: 5 for end units; Detached: 5 Rear Yard
5 Any yard adjacent to interstate or connector
20
Figure 11-04.2: Example of Side Entry Garage location with 15’ setback
CHAPTER 11-04: Zoning Districts
Section 11-04-04: Office Districts
Subsection 6: R-1M District Parking Standards
Supplement No 58 Ord-45-1, Ord-23-15, Amended; Ord-4-15, Amended)
March 2013 Boise Development Code
Page 92
6. R-1M DISTRICT PARKING STANDARDS
A. Each attached unit must have one and one-half parking spaces, one of which must be covered. The required covered parking must be located at the rear of the property and be accessed by an alley. Other parking must be located at least ten feet behind the front facade of the units.
B. Each detached unit must have two parking spaces with at least one space covered. Parking shall be located either at the rear of the lot and be accessed from an alley, or must be located at least ten feet behind the front facade of the home and be accessed by a driveway that, for the portion in front of the home, is no more than 12 feet wide.
C. Tandem parking may be permitted. 11-04-04. OFFICE DISTRICTS
1. GENERAL PURPOSE OF OFFICE DISTRICTS
A. Residential Office (R-O) District
(1) Provide a buffer between high-intensity commercial areas and higher density residential areas or institutional and government uses;
(2) Facilitate mixed-use development in areas identified for mixed-use in the Comprehensive Plan, the Downtown Boise Plan, and the River Street-Myrtle Street Urban Design Plan; and
(3) Provide for higher density residential and office uses with an emphasis on high quality urban design and pedestrian orientation.
B. Standards
(1) Certain conditional uses in the R-O district as indicated in the use table in Chapter 11-06, Use Regulations, may only be approved as part of a larger mixed-use project of principally allowed uses such as office or residential and shall not exceed 30 percent of the gross floor area of the mixed-use project within which they are included.
(2) The conditional uses may be included within a principally permitted use building or as a separate building within a multi-building, mixed-use project. The conditional use may not be occupied until an equal amount of floor area of the principally allowed uses have been constructed to the core or shell stage and are available for tenant finish.
(3) Conditional use applications shall not be accepted in the R-O districts for stand-alone commercial uses, except for a grocery use. Flexible development standards and the application of design review principles are intended to be used in this district to stress residential and mixed-use design principles.
C. Setback Exceptions
The following special setback encroachment provisions apply in the R-O zoning district.
(1) Detached accessory structures may occupy a required rear yard setback area, provided five-foot side yard setback is provided on one side of the lot. In the case of a corner lot, a detached accessory structure shall meet both street side yard setback and clear vision triangle.
CHAPTER 11-04: Zoning Districts
Section 11-04-04: Office Districts
Subsection 1: General Purpose of Office Districts
Supplement No 58 Ord-45-1, Ord-23-15, Amended; Ord-4-15, Amended)
March 2013 Boise Development Code
Page 93
(2) For the encroachments set forth in Table 11-04-5, the following rules apply.
Table 11-04.5: Encroachments into Setbacks in R-O Zoning District Feature Coverage Standard/Setback Encroachment
Modulated Façade
(see (a) below)
Front, Street, or Interior Side Yard
50%
80%
Decks, Patios, or Similar Types of Features Located Above the Ground Floor
Front or Street Side Yard
100%
50%
(a) For a modulated façade, encroachment into and coverage of a required setback shall be allowed for facade (wall of building) modulation, provided the maximum facade length without wall modulation does not exceed 20 feet and a minimum wall modulation depth of three feet is provided within that length.
(b) “Encroachment Coverage” means the maximum percentage of land area within the permitted setback encroachment(s) that may be covered by structure.
(c) Modification of setback or height requirements, except those meeting the standards of this Section, shall require a conditional use permit.
D. Neighborhood Office (N-O) District
To allow office uses serving nearby neighborhoods in buildings and on sites that are small relative to office developments in other zoning districts. The zone also provides for residential development.
E. Standards
Development shall be of a scale and character similar to nearby residential development to promote compatibility.
F. Limited Office (L-O) District
(1) Purpose
The Limited Office (L-O) District is intended to accommodate office space in locations that are served by primary access, but that are inappropriate for commercial development because of proximity to residential uses. The zone also provides for residential development.
(2) Standards
Office uses permitted in the L-O District shall be located and designed so as to be compatible with adjacent residential uses.
CHAPTER 11-04: Zoning Districts
Section 11-04-04: Office Districts
Subsection 2: Dimensional Standards for Office Districts
Supplement No 58 Ord-45-1, Ord-23-15, Amended; Ord-4-15, Amended)
March 2013 Boise Development Code
Page 94
2. DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS FOR OFFICE DISTRICTS Dimensional Standard R-O N-O L-O Lot Area, Minimum (square feet) Residential
2,500
3,000
5,000 Non-Residential
5,000 Per Dwelling Unit
500
None
1,000 Average Lot Width, Minimum (feet) Interior Lots
25 for residential; 50 for non-residential
50 Corner Lots Street Frontage, Minimum (feet)
25
30 Density, Maximum (units/acre)
87.1
14.5
43.5 Building Height, Maximum (feet)
65; 45 when adjacent to R-1A, R-1B, R-1C, R-1M and SP-01 zones or any existing single family home.
35
45 Setbacks, Minimum (feet) Front Yard/ Side Yard, Street
10; 20 if fronting a principal or arterial street
10
10 Side Yard, Interior
15 (total combined width)
5; 10*
1 story: 5
2 stories: 10
3+ stories: 15 Rear Yard
5 Setbacks Maximum Front Yard/ Side Yard, Street
N/A NOTES: *Applies when the property abuts a residential district.
3. DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS FOR PARKING IN OFFICE DISTRICTS Table 11-04.7: Setbacks for Parking Lots and Parking Structures Dimensional Standards N-O L-O Front yard
20 Side Yard Street
20 Side Yard Interior 1 or 2-Story
5; 10* >2-Story Rear Yard Any yard adjacent to interstate or connector
10 NOTES: *Applies when the property abuts a residential district.
CHAPTER 11-04: Zoning Districts
Section 11-04-05: Commercial Districts
Subsection 4: R-O Zoning District Parking Standards
Supplement No 58 Ord-45-1, Ord-23-15, Amended; Ord-4-15, Amended)
March 2013 Boise Development Code
Page 95
4. R-O ZONING DISTRICT PARKING STANDARDS
A. Open-air parking areas (including access driveways) shall be allowed within interior side yards provided that a minimum five foot wide landscaped area is maintained along the side property line. The street side yard setback area shall be landscaped to screen such parking areas.
B. If a lot's rear property line fronts on a public alleyway, open-air parking shall be allowed up to the interior side lot line for a depth of not more than twenty-four feet as measured from the rear lot line.
C. Shared parking shall be authorized by the Director upon application for review subject to meeting required findings as specified in Section 11-07-03.3.D. 11-04-05. COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS
1. GENERAL PURPOSE OF COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS
A. Neighborhood Commercial (C-1) District
To provide for commercial uses of a small scale in or near residential neighborhoods. The emphasis of the district is on uses which will provide services for nearby residential areas, and other uses which are compatible with residential uses, and having relatively little impact. The zone is intended for sites that are small relative to sites in other commercial districts. Neighborhood commercial developments should be limited to sites of 10 acres or less, and are more typically located on sites of 5 or fewer acres. The zone also provides for residential development.
B. Neighborhood Commercial (C-1) Standards
(1) All allowed primary and accessory uses in the C-1 district shall be conducted entirely within enclosed buildings, except the following: Automobile service station, automobile sales lot, parking lot, required loading and parking space, drive-in bank service, signs, and landscaping.
(2) No use shall be permitted as accessory to a listed use that involves or requires the production of goods that are not clearly intended for retail sale or use on the premises.
(3) Neighborhood commercial developments should be limited to sites of ten acres or less, and are more typically located on sites of five or fewer acres.
(4) Shopping center site design shall provide for pedestrian access between building entrances and adjacent residential uses unless pedestrian access is blocked by existing walls, fences, or the configuration of existing residential lots, or where pedestrian access creates a nuisance or significantly compromises public safety.
(5) Site design shall include pedestrian paths or crosswalks between buildings on the site. Where applicable, pad buildings shall be linked to anchor buildings with functional pathways of a size to accommodate landscaping, characteristics of the principal use of the site, and car bumper overhang.
(6) Site design shall include pedestrian paths or crosswalks, or a combination, linking one or more building entrances to the street or streets.
CHAPTER 11-04: Zoning Districts
Section 11-04-05: Commercial Districts
Subsection 1: General Purpose of Commercial Districts
Supplement No 58 Ord-45-1, Ord-23-15, Amended; Ord-4-15, Amended)
March 2013 Boise Development Code
Page 96
(7) Landscaping adjacent to buildings, parking areas, and sidewalks shall provide for adequate visual surveillance and safety of pedestrian access ways.
C. General Commercial (C-2) District
To provide a district for community and regional commercial and retail uses. The zone also provides for residential development.
D. Service Commercial (C-3) District
To provide for commercial activities of a service nature that are more intensive and that may be semi-industrial in character, but do not require an industrial location. The zone also provides for residential development.
E. Planned Commercial (C-4) District
To promote imaginative, innovative, and comprehensively planned commercial developments, medium- to high- density residential projects in mixed-use or predominantly commercial areas are encouraged. The zone also provides for residential development.
F. Planned Commercial (C-4) Standard
Nearly all uses within the C-4 Planned Commercial zone require approval of a planned development conditional use application by the PZC. The submittal of conditional use applications as planned developments is necessary to promote integrated site planning and to minimize access points. To accomplish the purpose of the C-4 District, the highest standards of architecture, landscaping, and site planning are encouraged.
G. Central Business (C-5) District
To address the needs of the city's central business district and to provide for activities conducive to a compact and concentrated urban downtown mixed-use center.
H. Central Business (C-5) Standards
(1) Classification, Contiguous Locations
Lands may be classified C-5 where contiguous to existing C-5 designated lands. All applications to establish C-5 zoning of noncontiguous parcels shall be accompanied by a development agreement application. Land that is not contiguous to the C-5 district but located in an urban renewal district may be classified as C-5 but shall be subject to the generally applicable approval criteria for a conditional use permit as well as for a development agreement. Uses shall be subject to the standards of Section 11-07-06.3.
(2) Classification, Non-Contiguous Locations
Land that is not contiguous to existing C-5 zoning may be classified C-5 for the purpose of encouraging the development of urban housing in downtown Boise urban renewal districts. Land being considered for C-5 zoning under this section shall be subject to the following requirements and standards.
(a) The parcel(s) is located in either the Central Downtown, River Myrtle-Old Boise, Westside Downtown, or 30th Street urban renewal district.
(b) The parcel(s) is in an area of the urban renewal district in which the proposed use(s) is supported by the applicable urban renewal plan and the Boise City Comprehensive Plan.
(c) Unless initiated by the City, applications to reclassify zoning districts subject to this section shall be accompanied by a development agreement and development plans. Standards for compatibility, land uses, height, bulk, setbacks, and other elements shall be as directed by the applicable urban renewal plan and shall be incorporated into the development agreement.
CHAPTER 11-04: Zoning Districts
Section 11-04-05: Commercial Districts
Subsection 2: Dimensional Standards for BUILDINGS IN Commercial Districts
Supplement No 58 Ord-45-1, Ord-23-15, Amended; Ord-4-15, Amended)
March 2013 Boise Development Code
Page 97
(d) Uses shall be subject to the standards of Section 11-07-06.3, containing district specific development standards for the C-5 zone, with the following exceptions: Residential uses shall be permitted on the ground floor. The design of the ground floor shall incorporate pedestrian-friendly elements but design is not limited to that which will accommodate the retail and other uses listed in Section 11-07-06.3.B. Floor area ratio bonus provision in Section 11-07-06.3.D shall not apply.
(ord-14-14, Amended, 4/2/14)
2. DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS FOR BUILDINGS IN COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS Table 11-04.8 Setbacks (in feet) for Buildings Dimensional Standard C-1 C-2 C-3 C-4 C-5 Lot Area, Minimum (square feet) Residential Uses, Interior Lot
5,000
25,000
None Residential Uses, Corner Lot
7,000 Per Dwelling Unit
1,000
None Non-residential Use, Any Lot
0
25,000
None Average Lot Width, Minimum (feet) Residential Uses, Interior Lot
50
N/A Residential Uses, Corner Lot
70 Non-residential Uses, Interior Lot
0
60
None Non-residential Uses, Corner Lot
70 Street Frontage, Minimum (feet)
30 Floor Area Ratio, Maximum Residential Uses
1.5
N/A Non-residential Uses
N/A
4.0 Lot Coverage, Buildings/Total, Maximum (percent)
N/A Building Height, Maximum (feet)
35
45
N/A Setbacks, Minimum (feet) Front Yard
10
0 Side Yard, Street
10
0 Rear Yard or Side Yard, Interior 1 Story
0;10*
5; 10*
0; 5* 2 Stories
0; 15*
10; 15*
0; 10* 3+ Stories
15
0; 15*
NOTES: * Setback when the property abuts a residential use or district.
CHAPTER 11-04: Zoning Districts
Section 11-04-06: Industrial Districts
Subsection 3: Dimensional Standards for Parking in Commercial Districts
Supplement No 58 Ord-45-1, Ord-23-15, Amended; Ord-4-15, Amended)
March 2013 Boise Development Code
Page 98
3. DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS FOR PARKING IN COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS Table 11-04.9: Setbacks (in feet) for Parking Lots and Service Drives Dimensional Standards C-1 C-2 C-3 C-4 C-5 Front yard
10
10
10 Side Yard Street
10
10
10 Rear Yard or Side Yard Interior
5, 10*
10’; 15*
5; 10* Any yard adjacent to interstate or connector
10
20
10 NOTES: * Setback when the property abuts a residential use or district. 11-04-06. INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS
1. GENERAL PURPOSE OF INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS
A. Light Industrial (M-1) District
To provide locations for light industrial uses that may be appropriate near commercial or residential development.
B. Heavy Industrial (M-2) District
To provide locations for industrial activity including uses that for reasons of health, safety, or general welfare are not permitted in the M-1 District. M-2 lands should be separated from commercial or residential development and M-2 uses should not create hazardous conditions.
C. Technological-Industrial (T-1) District
To provide for well-designed technological-industrial parks that can accommodate light industrial, technological, professional office and similar uses. These parks may be adjacent to residential districts if they are located on an arterial street and are not materially detrimental to the health, safety and welfare of nearby residents.
D. Technological-Manufacturing (T-2) District
To provide for manufacturing and technological facilities that may have a greater impact on the surrounding area than industries allowed in the T-1 District. T-2 lands should be served by major transportation facilities and be buffered from adjacent residential areas.
E. Standards for T-1 and T-2 Uses
(1) Operation must be free of odor, dust, smoke, cinders, gas, fumes, noise, vibrations, refuse matter, water-carried waste or other emissions.
(2) All uses shall have direct access to an arterial street, which may be through the interior street network of the park. Access onto local streets is prohibited.
(3) The DRC must find compatibility with surrounding uses through appropriate site design, building construction, landscaping, etc.
CHAPTER 11-04: Zoning Districts
Section 11-04-06: Industrial Districts
Subsection 3: Dimensional Standards for Parking in Commercial Districts
Supplement No 58 Ord-45-1, Ord-23-15, Amended; Ord-4-15, Amended)
March 2013 Boise Development Code
Page 99
F. Approval Criteria for Rezoning to T-2
(1) The rezone is consistent with the Boise City Comprehensive Plan; and
(2) The proposed “internal” and “external” boundaries are in keeping with the purpose of the T-2 Zone as stated in subsection 11-04-06.1.F; and
(3) The rezone will not adversely affect the health, peace, comfort, or welfare of persons residing or working in the surrounding area; and
(4) The subject property fronts on a major highway or arterial street; and
(5) The subject property is adequate in size and shape to accommodate development features prescribed in this Code and to integrate the property with uses in the surrounding area.
G. Standards for T-2
(1) Design Review
(a) To mitigate potential negative impacts on adjacent development, a concept map differentiating "peripheral" and "internal" development areas is required as part of an application to rezone to T-2. Areas approved as "peripheral" shall be subject to the design review process outlined in Section 11-03-04.12, Design Review.
(b) Because these developments are usually large enough to create an inner character compatible with surrounding uses, areas approved as "internal" shall be exempt from the design review process, unless otherwise required by this Section.
(c) Buildings taller than 45 feet in an area designated “internal” are subject to Design Review. The Director may waive this requirement where it can be demonstrated that the visual impacts associated with such buildings are mitigated to a level of insignificance due to the proximity of surrounding buildings or structures.
(2) Landscape Master Plan
(a) These provisions are intended to create a flexible procedure for the utilization of both traditional and alternative landscape materials (xeric, native and hardscape) in “peripheral” areas. The landscape master plan shall provide the DRC with a clear understanding of landscaping themes, location, size /scale, and function. The Director may waive the requirement for additional detailed landscape plans where future development proposals are found to be in compliance with an approved landscape master plan.
(b) Approval Criteria
To approve a landscape master plan, the DRC shall make the following findings:
CHAPTER 11-04: Zoning Districts
Section 11-04-06: Industrial Districts
Subsection 3: Dimensional Standards for Parking in Commercial Districts
Supplement No 58 Ord-45-1, Ord-23-15, Amended; Ord-4-15, Amended)
March 2013 Boise Development Code
Page 100
i. That perimeter areas and parking lots visible from adjacent streets are attractively landscaped with a mix of deciduous and evergreen vegetation and /or alternative plantings;
ii. That views of buildings and building entryways visible from the freeway or public streets are enhanced by landscaping; and,
i. That there are adequate buffers from residential land uses.
2. DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS FOR INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS Table 11-04.10 Dimensional Standards for Industrial Districts Dimensional Standard M-1 M-2 T-1 T-2 Lot Area, Minimum (square feet) Residential Uses, Interior Lot
N/A
N/A; minimum site area 20 acres
N/A; minimum site area 200 acres Residential Uses, Corner Lot Per Dwelling Unit Non-residential Use, Any Lot Average Lot Width, Minimum (feet) Residential Uses, Interior Lot
N/A Residential Uses, Corner Lot Non-residential Uses, Interior Lot
N/A Non-residential Uses, Corner Lot Street Frontage, Minimum (feet)
30 Floor Area Ratio, Maximum Residential Uses
N/A Non-residential Uses Lot Coverage, Buildings/Total, Maximum (percent)
80/100
35/70
60/80 Building Height, Maximum (feet)
55
45
150*** Setbacks, Minimum (feet) Front Yard
20
1 story: 60, 100*; 2+stories: 70, 100*
45 +1 for every 1-foot increase in building height above 45 feet, 100* Side Yard, Street
15, 20* Rear Yard or Side Yard, Interior 1 Story
0, 15* 2 Stories 3+ Stories
NOTES:
* Setback when the property abuts or is across the street from a residential use or district.
** Setback when property has street frontage on a Gateway Street as defined in this Code.
*** Controlled by a 45 degree angle of bulk plan from all exterior property lines up to the maximum height of 150 feet.
CHAPTER 11-04: Zoning Districts
Section 11-04-07: Special Purpose Districts
Subsection 1: Health Services (HS) District
Supplement No 58 Ord-45-1, Ord-23-15, Amended; Ord-4-15, Amended)
March 2013 Boise Development Code
Page 101
3. DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS FOR PARKING IN INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS Table 11-04.11 Setbacks for Parking Lots and Parking Structures Dimensional Standards M-1 M-2 T-1 T-2 Front yard
7: 20*
7: 20*
20 Side Yard Street
7
7
20 Side Yard Interior
0: 15*
0: 15*
15 Rear Yard Any yard adjacent to interstate or connector ccccconnectorconnnector connector connconnector
10
10
20 NOTES: * Setback when the property abuts a residential use or district.
11-04-07. SPECIAL PURPOSE DISTRICTS
1. HEALTH SERVICES (HS) DISTRICT
To provide for health and medical related uses near major medical institutions. Limited office and multiple-family residential uses may be allowed that have similar low intensity land use characteristics and that provide support services to the health and medical uses.
2. PEDESTRIAN COMMERCIAL (PC) DISTRICT
A. Purpose
The purpose of the Pedestrian Commercial (PC) district is to provide for pedestrian-friendly retail, office, and mixed-use developments in a pedestrian-friendly environment. The district regulations are designed to facilitate convenient access, minimize traffic congestion, and reduce visual clutter along arterials and collectors, while fostering pedestrian-oriented design. Buildings in the PC District must be located and designed to relate to the street with a pedestrian scale. The PC District may also be used to demonstrate compliance with Boise City Comprehensive Plan policies when a commercial use is requested but the parcel has not been designated on the Land Use Map for Commercial Use, or as a means of permitting mid-block commercial development that meets the goals of the Boise City Comprehensive Plan. Residential uses are encouraged in conjunction with commercial uses in this district.
B. Additional Development Standards
Additional standards may be found in Section 11-07-06.2.E(2)(d)
3. UNIVERSITY (U) DISTRICT
To allow for the consistent development of Boise State University throughout its planned expansion area. The district is intended to encourage and facilitate planned and integrated expansion on property identified with the University’s Master Plan and designated in the Comprehensive Plan.
A. Specific Standards
(1) All uses permitted in the U District shall be directly associated with the operation and maintenance of the University and shall serve primarily the students, faculty, employees, and alumni of the University, or shall be intended to support and facilitate public attendance of educational, arts, sport, or cultural events and offerings of the University.
Figure 11-04-3: PC District Setbacks
CHAPTER 11-04: Zoning Districts
Section 11-04-07: Special Purpose Districts
Subsection 3: University (U) District
Supplement No 58 Ord-45-1, Ord-23-15, Amended; Ord-4-15, Amended)
March 2013 Boise Development Code
Page 102
(2) In reviewing all A* and C applications in the U district, the Director will require additional parking for all new buildings and all building expansions according to the standards within Section 11-07-03, Off-street Parking and Loading Standards; or, if no specific standard is listed, at a ratio of one parking space per 250 square feet of gross floor area. Fire access to existing and new buildings must be shown on all A* and C application site plans submitted to the Director. A letter from the Idaho State Fire Marshal verifying compliance of the building plans with state requirements regarding fire safety shall be submitted to the Director prior to construction.
CHAPTER 11-04: Zoning Districts
Section 11-04-07: Special Purpose Districts
Subsection 4: Dimensional Standards for Special Purpose Districts
Supplement No 58 Ord-45-1, Ord-23-15, Amended; Ord-4-15, Amended)
March 2013 Boise Development Code
Page 103
4. DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS FOR SPECIAL PURPOSE DISTRICTS
Table 11-04.12 Dimensional Standards for Special Purpose Districts Dimensional Standard HS U PC Lot Area, Minimum (square feet) Residential
6,000 Interior Lots;
7,000 Corner Lots
-
-
Non-Residential Per Dwelling Unit
None
-
1000 Average Lot Width, Minimum (feet) Interior Lots
60
-
-
Corner Lots
70 Street Frontage, Minimum (feet)
30
-
- Density, Maximum (units/acre)
43.5
-
43.5 Building Height, Maximum (feet)
78
75; 45 if less than 50 feet from BSU campus boundary
35; 50 on arterial with four lanes and 80 feet of right of way Setbacks, Minimum (feet) Front Yard/ Side Yard, Street
20
20 from BSU campus boundary
15; 20 if fronting on arterial street Side Yard, Interior
1 story: 5
2 stories: 10
3+ stories: 15
0; 10* Rear Yard
15 for buildings up to 35 ft. in height; 0 on a public alley; 30 for buildings greater than 35 ft. in height Setbacks Maximum Front Yard/ Side Yard, Street
N/A
N/A
30 on an arterial; 22 on a collector or local street; 0 on an alley
NOTES: * Applies when the property abuts a residential use or district.
CHAPTER 11-04: Zoning Districts
Section 11-04-07: Special Purpose Districts
Subsection 5: Dimensional Standards for Parking in Special Purpose Districts
Supplement No 58 Ord-45-1, Ord-23-15, Amended; Ord-4-15, Amended)
March 2013 Boise Development Code
Page 104
5. DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS FOR PARKING IN SPECIAL PURPOSE DISTRICTS Table 11-04.13: Setbacks (in feet) for Parking Lots and Parking Structures Zoning district(s) HS PC U Front yard
7
N/A
10 from any right-of-way; except 0 on an alley. Side Yard Street
N/A Side Yard Interior 1 or 2-Story
5; 10* >2-Story Rear Yard
5 for covered parking accessed from an alley or when the rear of the lot abuts another parking area of at least 30 ft. in depth. Any yard adjacent to interstate or connector
10
N/A
SUPPLEMENT NO. 58, Ord 45-15, ORD 9, 11, 14 &15 2013(ORD 42-13 1029-13)
March 2013 Boise Development Code
Page 105
CHAPTER 11-05: OVERLAY OVERLAY AND SPECIFIC PLAN AND SPECIFIC PLAN DISTRICTSDISTRICTS 11-05-01. GENERAL PROVISIONS
1. OVERLAY AND SPECIFIC PLAN DISTRICTS
All lands shall be assigned a base zoning district established in Chapter 11-04. In addition, some lands may be designated one or more overlay district. Where a property is assigned an overlay district, both sets of regulations apply, with those of overlay controlling in case of conflict between the two. An overlay district may apply additional requirements or allow exceptions to the standard regulations of the base zone.
Table 11-05.1: Overlay and Specific Plan Districts Abbreviation District Name Conservation Overlay Districts
Hyde Park Conservation District
Near North End Conservation District Design Overlay Districts
D
Design Review Overlay District
HD
Historic Design Review Overlay District
DD
Downtown Design Review Overlay District
C
Capitol Boulevard Special Design District
EF
East Fairview Overlay District Neighborhood Overlay Districts
BSN
Big Sky Neighborhood District
S
Sycamore Neighborhood District Parking Reduction Overlay Districts
P-1
Central Downtown Parking District
P-2
River-Myrtle Parking District
P-3
South Downtown Parking District Waterways Overlay Districts
Boise River System Overlay District
Flood Protection Overlay Districts
Specific Plan Districts
SP-1
Harris Ranch Specific Plan District
SP-2
Barber Valley Specific Plan District
11-05-02. CONSERVATION OVERLAY DISTRICTS
1. GENERALLY
A. Purpose
To preserve the character of selected neighborhoods and to protect unique areas of the city from inappropriate development. A conservation overlay district is usually applied to residential neighborhoods with certain identifiable attributes embodied in architecture, use, urban design, geography, or history. A conservation district can be used to protect neighborhoods from changes that would otherwise be allowed by the underlying zoning.
CHAPTER 11-05: Overlay and Specific Plan Districts
Section 11-05-02: Conservation Overlay Districts
Subsection 2: Hyde Park Conservation District
Supplement No 58 Ord-45-1, Ord-23-15, Amended; Ord-4-15, Amended)
March 2013 Boise Development Code
Page 106
B. Designation of Conservation Districts
Conservation districts shall be designated by ordinance. Neighborhoods or areas selected for consideration for a conservation district designation shall meet at least one of the following criteria:
(1) Has a distinctive character with identifiable attributes embodied in architecture, use, urban design, or history that make it a unique and integral part of the city’s identity; or
(2) Has a recognized neighborhood identity and a definable physical character that may have a high artistic value or a relationship to urban centers or historic districts and that makes the area’s conservation significant to the city’s history or function.
C. Establishment of Conservation District
(1) Conservation district provisions may apply additional requirements or allow exceptions to the standard regulations of the base zone.
(2) Prior to adoption of a conservation district ordinance in a district that may be of historic significance as determined by the Director, the HPC shall have the opportunity to review and comment on the proposed ordinance.
(3) Prior to recommending an area for designation as a conservation district, the PZC shall:
(a) Conduct any necessary studies, research, or investigations; and
(b) Assess neighborhood and landowner support; and
(c) Prepare a report containing recommendations.
(4) See Section 11-03-04.3, Rezone for procedures to establish a district.
2. HYDE PARK CONSERVATION DISTRICT
A. Purpose
To maintain the historical commercial district as a functioning community asset and maintain a mix of commercial, office and residential uses. The district encourages land uses that are determined to be key to the district’s long-term health and sustainability. The district regulations are intended to protect the historical and architectural character of Hyde Park and establish parking standards for this area. Parking requirements are on a graduated scale for certain uses to encourage street-level retail and restaurants as well as second story office uses. Shared parking is encouraged to reduce the need for surface parking.
CHAPTER 11-05: Overlay and Specific Plan Districts
Section 11-05-02: Conservation Overlay Districts
Subsection 2: Hyde Park Conservation District
Supplement No 58 Ord-45-1, Ord-23-15, Amended; Ord-4-15, Amended)
March 2013 Boise Development Code
Page 107
(1) Hyde Park Conservation District
B. Map and Boundaries
(1) Boundary Map
C. Uses
The following are prohibited:
(1) Parking garages; and
(2) New off-site parking lots. On-site parking lots used as leasable off-site parking that existed prior to March 14, 2006 may continue to be used.
D. District Parking Standards
(1) Parking requirements shall follow Table 11-05.2, below.
Table 11-05.2 Parking Allowances in the C-1CHP Zone Land Use Graduated Scale of Use/ Unit of Measure Required Parking Spaces (C-1CHP) RESTAURANT
0 - 40 seats
1 space/ 20 seats
41- 80 seats**
1 space / 10 seats
Over 81 seats**
1 space / 2 seats RETAIL
0-750 square feet
1 space
751-2000 sq. ft.**
1 space/ 300 sq. ft.
Over 2001 sq. ft.**
1 space/ 200 sq. ft. OFFICE
Street level
100 sq. ft.
1 space
Upper floor
300 sq. ft.
1 space **Parking requirements are cumulative.
Figure 11-05.1: Boundary of Hyde Park Conservation District
CHAPTER 11-05: Overlay and Specific Plan Districts
Section 11-05-02: Conservation Overlay Districts
Subsection 2: Hyde Park Conservation District
Supplement No 58 Ord-45-1, Ord-23-15, Amended; Ord-4-15, Amended)
March 2013 Boise Development Code
Page 108
(2) Outdoor or seasonal seating shall be counted as regular seating and is required to meet all parking and zoning code requirements. Existing outside seating shall be considered a legal non- conforming use as allotted in Table 11-05.3.
(3) The allotment of parking for each business is included in the appendices of this Code.
(4) Tandem parking is permitted in rear yards with alley access, provided setbacks and appropriate backup requirements are met.
(5) All off-site parking shall have a valid contract. This contract shall state:
(a) The location of the parking space(s),
(b) The contract is binding on all successors and run with the land,
(c) How the parking spaces are to be maintained and who is responsible,
(d) That the parking cannot be revoked without prior approval of the City, and must show revocation for good cause, and
(e) Provide 60 day’s notice of termination to the City.
CHAPTER 11-05: Overlay and Specific Plan Districts
Section 11-05-02: Conservation Overlay Districts
Subsection 2: Hyde Park Conservation District
Supplement No 58 Ord-45-1, Ord-23-15, Amended; Ord-4-15, Amended)
March 2013 Boise Development Code
Page 109
Table 11-05.3 Hyde Park Conservation District Parking Space Allotment Chart Address Current Business Leaseable square feet* Number of seats, if applicable Existing number of parking spaces Parking Space Assignments 13th Street
1620
Stinker Gas Station
2880
none
5
1-5
1615
Fabricworks Int. Renovations
890
none
1
110
1612
Java Hyde Park
1148
(1330 Building Permit)
10
2
6-7
1611
Blue Moon
1654
(1400 owner provided)
none
3
107-109
1609
Ten K Villages
1404
none
5
102-106
1607
Trip Taylor Bookseller
1252
none
2
100-101
1606
Parking lot
none
19 + 1HC
(8-27)
1605A
MSE Millennium
none
5
11-16
1605B
Casa Mexico
90
14
8-10 & 17-27
1603
Forget Me Not
10,800
none
2
98-99
1602
Lucky 13
2730
190
7
28-34
1530
Taste
1640
25
(see Richards)
(see Richards)
1521
Idaho River Sports
8105
none
1
90
1520
Richards
2275
165
13 + 1HC
35-43 & 48-52
1519
Vince’s Barber Shop
none
1
94
1517 ½
Big Bikes
none
1
93
1517
Antique Store
none
1
92
1512
Parilla Grill
1400
76
7
44-47 & 53-55
1513
The Gallery
3616
none
1
91
1510
House
2572
none
3
56-58
1509
Certified Rug
4224
none
6
84-89
1508
House
none
3
59-61
1507
Hyde Park Books
none
0
None
1502
Goody’s
(2300 owner provided)
84
4
62-65
1501
Harry’s
108
19
66-83 Eastman
CHAPTER 11-05: Overlay and Specific Plan Districts
Section 11-05-02: Conservation Overlay Districts
Subsection 3: Near North End Conservation District
Supplement No 58 Ord-45-1, Ord-23-15, Amended; Ord-4-15, Amended)
March 2013 Boise Development Code
Page 110
Table 11-05.3 Hyde Park Conservation District Parking Space Allotment Chart Address Current Business Leaseable square feet* Number of seats, if applicable Existing number of parking spaces Parking Space Assignments
1304
Integrated Packaging Sys.
none
1
97 Alturas
1306
Polar Design
2200 (owner provided)
none
2
95-96
1304
Antiques
none
-
- * per Ada County Assessor’s Office 2/21/05
3. NEAR NORTH END CONSERVATION DISTRICT
A. Purpose
(1) Encourage continued residential uses;
(2) Protect the historical and architectural character of the neighborhood using adaptive reuse methods;
(3) Encourage redevelopment and renovation of established historic institutional uses;
(4) Allow for adaptive reuse of existing structures for multiple-family residential and office uses;
(5) Minimize demolition of structures for parking lots or new office developments; and
(6) Maintain the district as a transitional area between the commercial intensity of downtown and the predominant single-family residential neighborhoods of the north end.
CHAPTER 11-05: Overlay and Specific Plan Districts
Section 11-05-02: Conservation Overlay Districts
Subsection 3: Near North End Conservation District
Supplement No 58 Ord-45-1, Ord-23-15, Amended; Ord-4-15, Amended)
March 2013 Boise Development Code
Page 111
B. Map and Boundaries
(1) Boundary Map
(2) Boundary Description
The Near North End Conservation District Boundary is described as follows: Encompassing the area from the north side of W. Franklin Street, north to the south side of Fort Street and from the east side of 17th Street to the west side of 4th Street.
C. Standards
The following restrictions and allowances beyond the requirements of the base zone district shall apply.
(1) Parking Allowances for Adaptive Reuse in the L-O and R-3 Zone
Tandem parking may be allowed for the adaptive reuse of a single-family structure for office or multi-family residential or historic institutional use may be granted the following allowances for parking requirements:
(a) Tandem parking in the rear yard, with alley access, is permitted.
(b) The use of shared parking agreements and parking joint use agreements will be encouraged.
(2) Adaptive Reuse Limitation for Additions
Buildings that are adaptively reused pursuant to the provisions of this section may be expanded in size up to 50 percent as existed on August 21, 2001, provided:
Figure 11-05.2: Boundary of Near North End Conservation District
CHAPTER 11-05: Overlay and Specific Plan Districts
Section 11-05-03: Design Overlay Districts
Subsection 1: Capitol Boulevard Special Design (C) District
Supplement No 58 Ord-45-1, Ord-23-15, Amended; Ord-4-15, Amended)
March 2013 Boise Development Code
Page 112
(a) The expanded portion is in keeping with the architecture of the existing building; and
(b) The site is large enough to accommodate the required number of off-street parking spaces without the granting of a variance for setbacks or landscape.
(3) Off-Site Parking Structure Allowances for Historical Institutional Uses
Off-site parking structures (garages) designed to blend with the predominate architectural theme of the surrounding area and which include a significant residential component, may be considered by the Commission through the Conditional Use Permit process.
(4) Standards for parking structures and lots in the NNE overlay district:
(a) An off-site parking garage for a historical use may be allowed by conditional use permit provided that it is designed to blend with the predominant architectural theme of the surrounding area and that it includes a significant residential component.
(b) New off-site parking lots are prohibited, except on parcels demonstrated to have been vacant on or before August 21, 2001. This prohibition shall not preclude the use of existing on-site parking lots as “for rent” off-site parking.
(c) Where the base zoning district is R-3, on-site surface parking lots larger than 2,500 square feet are prohibited, unless incorporated within a new residential use or within and as part of the renovation, redevelopment, or expansion of a historic institutional use. As used in this paragraph the phrase, “incorporated within” shall mean located in an interior or rear yard of a development so that it is not visible from the public street. 11-05-03. DESIGN OVERLAY DISTRICTS
1. CAPITOL BOULEVARD SPECIAL DESIGN (C) DISTRICT
The City recognizes the importance of Capitol Boulevard and desires to protect and enhance its special character. Capitol Boulevard is one of the principal gateway streets in the State of Idaho. It links two of the most important historic buildings in the city - the State Capitol and the Boise Depot. In between these buildings lie a variety of uses that are of importance to the community, including cultural centers and parks, Boise State University, hotels, retail establishments, and restaurants.
CHAPTER 11-05: Overlay and Specific Plan Districts
Section 11-05-03: Design Overlay Districts
Subsection 1: Capitol Boulevard Special Design (C) District
Supplement No 58 Ord-45-1, Ord-23-15, Amended; Ord-4-15, Amended)
March 2013 Boise Development Code
Page 113
A. Map
(1) Boundary Map
(a) North of the Boise River to, and including, the State Capitol: Properties located wholly or partially within one block of Capitol Boulevard to the east and west, or 350 feet from the curb line of Capitol Boulevard where no streets exist;
(b) South of the Boise River to and including the Depot;
(c) East side of Capitol Boulevard: Properties located wholly or partially within 500 feet of the curb line of Capitol Boulevard, and as projected in a straight line south to the railroad tracks at the Depot; and
(d) West side of Capitol Boulevard: Properties located wholly or partially within the area west of Capitol Boulevard from the Boise River southeast along the centerline of Lusk Street, 1,275 feet, more or less, to the centerline of Sherwood Avenue, thence southwest along the centerline of Sherwood Avenue, 325 feet, more or less, to the centerline of LaPointe Street, thence Southeast 600 feet, more or less, to a point that is 500 feet from the curb line of Capitol Boulevard at the extension of the centerline of Yale Street, thence south along a line that is 500 feet from the curb line of Capitol Boulevard to the centerline of Crescent Rim Drive, thence southeast 198 feet, more or less, along the centerline of Crescent Rim Drive to the centerline of Eastover Terrace, thence south along the centerline of Eastover Terrace 368 feet, more or less, to the railroad tracks at the Depot.
Figure 11-05.3: Boundary of Capital Boulevard Special Design District
CHAPTER 11-05: Overlay and Specific Plan Districts
Section 11-05-03: Design Overlay Districts
Subsection 1: Capitol Boulevard Special Design (C) District
Supplement No 58 Ord-45-1, Ord-23-15, Amended; Ord-4-15, Amended)
March 2013 Boise Development Code
Page 114
B. District Subareas
The District is divided into four areas:
(1) Downtown Corridor: Both sides of Capitol Boulevard from centerline of Front Street north to the centerline of State Street.
(2) Central Corridor: Both sides of Capitol Boulevard from centerline of Front Street south to the Boise River.
(3) Entrance Corridor: East side of Capitol Boulevard from the Boise River to the Depot.
(4) Exit Corridor: West side of 9th Street and Capitol Boulevard from the Boise River south to the Depot.
(5) Subareas Boundary Map
C. Design Review Permit
Design is required for the following:
(1) Increase in building size by 10 percent or in parking lot size by 25 percent.
(2) Replacement of more than 25 percent of a building.
(3) Any new building or parking lot.
Figure 11-05.4: Subareas Map of Capital Boulevard Special Design District
CHAPTER 11-05: Overlay and Specific Plan Districts
Section 11-05-03: Design Overlay Districts
Subsection 1: Capitol Boulevard Special Design (C) District
Supplement No 58 Ord-45-1, Ord-23-15, Amended; Ord-4-15, Amended)
March 2013 Boise Development Code
Page 115
(4) A facade remodel that utilizes different materials and design features (A color change or the addition of non-permanent features such as fabric awnings are not subject to design review.)
D. Standards
(1) Streetscape Requirements
Streetscape improvements for Capitol Boulevard shall comply with the adopted Capitol Boulevard Streetscape Master Plan.
(a) Applicability
The streetscape improvements shall be required and shown on the development plans when: Constructing a new building or parking lot; Constructing an addition greater than 30 percent of the original square footage of the building, provided the addition is greater than 2,500 square feet gross floor area; or Constructing a parking lot addition along Capitol Boulevard that is greater than 50 percent of an existing parking area.
(b) Standards Downtown Corridor from Jefferson Street to Front Street
For each section of the Corridor, required improvements include, but are not limited to:
A. Brick streetscape shall remain along the west side of Capitol Boulevard from Bannock Street to Front Street.
B. Streetscape upgrades consistent with the “Urban Sidewalk – Brick” prototype in the Capitol Boulevard Streetscape Master Plan along the east side of Capitol Boulevard from Bannock Street to Front Street shall be considered at the time of application review.
C. Ten-foot wide detached sidewalk and nine-foot wide landscape strip adjacent to the street, with street trees, shrubs, and historic street lights along both sides of Capitol Boulevard from Bannock Street to Jefferson Street. Central Corridor Front Street to Fulton Street
A. Relocated curb to form a 52-foot wide road section measured curb to curb.
B. Sidewalks with brick dry-laid pavers.
C. Planters with street trees, shrubs, and low steel fencing, as shown in the Capitol Boulevard Streetscape Master Plan.
D. Furnishing zone with historic street lights as shown in the Capitol Boulevard Streetscape Master Plan.
E. Benches, litter receptacles, movable planters, bicycle racks, & newsstands as shown in the Capitol Boulevard Streetscape Master Plan.
F. Kiosks, public art, and transit stops may be considered. Central Corridor Fulton Street to the Boise River
A. Relocated curb to form a 52-foot wide road section (curb to curb).
B. Concrete sidewalks.
CHAPTER 11-05: Overlay and Specific Plan Districts
Section 11-05-03: Design Overlay Districts
Subsection 1: Capitol Boulevard Special Design (C) District
Supplement No 58 Ord-45-1, Ord-23-15, Amended; Ord-4-15, Amended)
March 2013 Boise Development Code
Page 116
C. Landscape strips with lawn and street trees.
D. Historic street lights. Entrance and Exit Corridors
A. Concrete sidewalks.
B. Landscape strips with lawn, shrubs, or street trees.
C. A second row of deciduous trees.
D. Historic street lights.
E. Bus stop shelters at select locations.
(2) Building/Structure Setbacks
(a) Downtown Corridor
The setbacks of the underlying zone shall apply, except a 25-foot setback from the property line is required along Capitol Boulevard for any portion of a structure that is 45 feet or higher.
(b) Central Corridor
Minimum setbacks shall be as follows: 45 feet from the centerline of Capitol Boulevard for structures up to 45 feet in height. 75 feet from the centerline of Capitol Boulevard for any portion of a structure that is higher than 45 feet. Only approved awnings, canopies, or similar projections may encroach into the public right-of-way.
(c) Entrance and Exit Corridors
Minimum setbacks shall be as follows: 20 feet from the property line along Capitol Boulevard for structures less than 45 feet in height. 35 feet from the property line along Capitol Boulevard for any portion of a structure that is higher than 45 feet.
(d) Required Improvements within Entrance and Exit Corridor Setback Areas
At-grade setback areas shall include landscaping, and one or more of the following: An extension of the streetscape, such as a pedestrian space or a plaza utilizing benches, pavers, and other design elements; Sculptures, public art, or architectural design features; Canopies and other external decorative features, provided they do not encroach more than 30 percent into the setback; Sign(s; and Low decorative masonry walls of three feet or less (see also Section 11-07-06.2.E(2)(d) Landscaping, Fences, Walls, and Screening).
(3) Parking Lot Setbacks and Requirements
(a) New Structures/Lots
New detached structures and parking lots along Capitol Boulevard shall comply with the following:
CHAPTER 11-05: Overlay and Specific Plan Districts
Section 11-05-03: Design Overlay Districts
Subsection 1: Capitol Boulevard Special Design (C) District
Supplement No 58 Ord-45-1, Ord-23-15, Amended; Ord-4-15, Amended)
March 2013 Boise Development Code
Page 117
Downtown Corridor
Parking lots shall be located below or behind buildings facing Capitol Boulevard. Central, Entrance, and Exit Corridors
Parking is allowed along the sides of the building provided the width of the parking area does not exceed 50 percent of the site frontage along Capitol Boulevard. Parking may not be located closer to Capitol Boulevard than the building, and shall not be allowed closer than 20 feet from Capitol Boulevard.
(b) Parking Lot Screening
Parking lots shall be screened using one or more of the following, unless otherwise approved by the DRC. Decorative masonry screen walls – that may include wrought iron fencing. The maximum length without modulation may not exceed 30 feet. Landscaping plantings that will provide year-round screening.
(4) Building Design
Buildings shall be designed to the highest standards with consideration of the following:
(a) All building facade materials should be high quality to enhance the appearance of Capitol Boulevard. The same facade materials or other architecturally compatible facade materials should be used for all exposed building walls and other architectural features.
(b) Architectural style is not to be restricted, however the appearance of the building will be reviewed based on the use of materials and color, the quality of design, use of architectural details, and compatibility with the overall Boulevard development.
(c) Blank walls facing Capitol Boulevard are not allowed.
(d) Buildings located on corner sites that can be viewed from Capitol Boulevard should be given significance through the use of architectural elements, special materials, or height.
(e) Distinctive roof or other termination of the building facade.
(f) Windows, doors, eaves, and parapets should be proportional to one another.
(g) New buildings and any modifications to historic buildings shall comply with the "Design Guideline for Boise City's Historic Commercial Districts" and the Secretary of the Interior Guidelines.
(h) Canopies and awnings at street level should not be illuminated and should be functional for purposes of pedestrian use.
(i) Mechanical equipment should be well screened from public right-of-way with materials that are harmonious to the building.
(j) Utilities shall be installed underground, except for transportation facilities.
(5) Lighting
Low pedestrian/landscape lighting is encouraged and street lighting shall conform to the Capitol Boulevard Streetscape Master Plan.
CHAPTER 11-05: Overlay and Specific Plan Districts
Section 11-05-03: Design Overlay Districts
Subsection 2: East Fairview Interim Overlay District
Supplement No 58 Ord-45-1, Ord-23-15, Amended; Ord-4-15, Amended)
March 2013 Boise Development Code
Page 118
(6) Vehicular Access
(a) Curb cuts shall be limited to encourage pedestrian activity.
(b) Access points shall be defined with landscaping or other decorative elements.
(7) Restrictions along Capitol Boulevard
The following shall not front on to Capitol Boulevard:
(a) Off-street service/loading areas;
(b) Trash dumpsters;
(c) Outdoor storage areas;
(d) Fuel pumps; and
(e) Drive-up windows.
(8) Signage
Sign standards for the C District shall be as indicated in Chapter 11-010, Sign Standards.
(ord-13-14, Amended, 4/2/2014)
2. EAST FAIRVIEW INTERIM OVERLAY DISTRICT
A. Purpose
The East Fairview (EF) Interim Overlay District is established to create unique pedestrian-oriented exterior setback and streetscape standards for selected parcels (see zoning map) within the East Fairview Corridor between 30th Street and 24th Street. This Interim Overlay District shall expire upon replacement with a permanent zoning district for the larger 30th street corridor.
B. Standards
Within the EF Interim Overlay District, the following standards shall override or supplement the applicable base standards of the C-4D zone (see Section 11-07-06.2.E(2)(d) for standards for the D and DD overlay districts, and Section 11-07-06.2.E(2)(d) for standards for the HD overlay district):
(1) Exterior Setbacks
(a) Building and Parking Setbacks from Fairview Avenue and Main Street: A minimum setback of 17 feet and a maximum setback of 25 feet from back of curb.
(b) Building and Parking Setbacks from Numbered Streets: A minimum of 13-feet and a maximum of 17 feet from back of curb.
(2) Building Height
The maximum building height shall be 60 feet.
(3) Streetscapes
(a) Streetscape Standards on Fairview Avenue and Main Street: A minimum of 10 feet of continuous landscaping behind back of curb and a minimum of 7 feet of detached sidewalk between the landscaping and the building.
(b) Streetscape Standards on Numbered Streets: A minimum of 6 feet of continuous landscaping behind back of curb and a minimum of 7 feet of detached sidewalk between the landscaping and the building. Alternatives to continuous landscaping may be approved by conditional use permit.
CHAPTER 11-05: Overlay and Specific Plan Districts
Section 11-05-04: Neighborhood Overlay Districts
Subsection 1: Big Sky Neighborhood (BSN) Overlay District
Supplement No 58 Ord-45-1, Ord-23-15, Amended; Ord-4-15, Amended)
March 2013 Boise Development Code
Page 119
(4) Parking Area Requirements
(a) Parking lots shall not dominate the street frontage or interrupt pedestrian routes. All parking areas shall be located to the side or rear of the principle building. Parking lots should be located behind buildings or in the interior of the block whenever possible. Low walls contained with landscaping should screen parking areas from views from the street.
(b) Parking areas shall not abut street intersections or occupy lots which terminate a street vista. A street vista means the view, framed by buildings, as the termination of the axis of a thoroughfare.
(c) All sites, where feasible, shall provide two-way cross-access to adjacent parcels.
(d) Surface parking lots not associated with a principal use shall be prohibited.
(5) Building Design Requirements
All buildings shall provide a front entrance addressing the primary street frontage. 11-05-04. NEIGHBORHOOD OVERLAY DISTRICTS
1. BIG SKY NEIGHBORHOOD (BSN) OVERLAY DISTRICT
A. Purpose
To preserve the large lots and open character of the Big Sky Neighborhood; to retain the rural personality of this unique location; and to encourage agrarian uses through more flexible standards to maintain, protect, and enhance land use and livability.
CHAPTER 11-05: Overlay and Specific Plan Districts
Section 11-05-04: Neighborhood Overlay Districts
Subsection 1: Big Sky Neighborhood (BSN) Overlay District
Supplement No 58 Ord-45-1, Ord-23-15, Amended; Ord-4-15, Amended)
March 2013 Boise Development Code
Page 120
B. Map
(1) Boundary Map
C. Residential Standards
(1) Setbacks
(a) New residential buildings, additions to existing residential buildings, and detached outbuildings greater than 500 square feet or 15 feet in height shall be subject to the following setback standards: Front setbacks as measured from the property line shall be 35 feet minimum, 85 feet maximum, and within five feet of the average setbacks of the adjacent properties. Side and rear setbacks shall be a minimum of 20 feet from the property line.
(b) Detached outbuildings with an area of up to 500 square feet and height less than 15 feet may have a reduced sides and rear setbacks of 10 feet from the property line.
(2) Enclosed Garage
Dwelling units, including each unit of a duplex, shall have an enclosed garage with an interior dimension of at least 20 feet wide by 20 feet long.
CHAPTER 11-05: Overlay and Specific Plan Districts
Section 11-05-04: Neighborhood Overlay Districts
Subsection 1: Big Sky Neighborhood (BSN) Overlay District
Supplement No 58 Ord-45-1, Ord-23-15, Amended; Ord-4-15, Amended)
March 2013 Boise Development Code
Page 121
(3) Entrances to Residential Units
Front doors of residential units shall face the street.
(4) Two-Family Dwelling Standards
Duplexes in the BSN overlay district shall be subject to the specific design criteria as per Section 11-06-03.1.B and agricultural and setback standards described in paragraph D, below.
D. Livestock Standards
The keeping of livestock and agricultural uses in the BSN overlay district shall be subject to the standards of Section11-06-07.4.D, and the standards in this Section. Where the standards of this section conflict with 11-06-07.4.D , this Section shall control.
(1) Allowed Uses
The keeping of livestock, small animals, and similar or related agricultural uses are allowed in the BSN district subject to the regulations of this section.
(2) Minimum Lot Area for Large Animals
A minimum lot area of one-half acre is required for large animals as defined.
(3) Animal Reserve Area
A minimum area of one-half acre is required for the keeping and care of two animal units. Stables, paddocks, barns, and similar structures may be counted as part of the reserve area, but structures other than those related to the care of animals shall not be counted as part of the reserve area.
(4) Minimum Lot Area and Location for Small Animals
No minimum lot area is required for keeping small animals. All animal units and small animals shall be kept behind the front of the principal dwelling.
(5) Animal Density Standards
(a) The maximum animal density shall be two animal units per one-half acre of reserve area. Additional reserve areas must be added in one-half-acre increments to calculate the allowed number of animal units allowed on a particular parcel.
(b) The keeping of chickens in conjunction with the keeping of large animals is an exception to animal density standards. Up to six mature chickens may be kept simultaneously in addition to the large animals allowed per lot based on the density standard.
(6) Definitions
(a) Small animals include rabbits, poultry, geese, ducks turkeys, domestic birds and game birds, excluding such birds as are caged and housed in the dwelling and other animals deemed as such by the Director and not raised for commercial purposes. FFA, 4-H and other student projects are not considered commercial purposes.
(b) Large animals include horses, mules, donkeys, llamas and cows.
(c) One animal unit equals the following: One each of horse, mule, donkey, llama or cow Two mature sheep or goats 12 mature chickens or ducks
CHAPTER 11-05: Overlay and Specific Plan Districts
Section 11-05-04: Neighborhood Overlay Districts
Subsection 1: Big Sky Neighborhood (BSN) Overlay District
Supplement No 58 Ord-45-1, Ord-23-15, Amended; Ord-4-15, Amended)
March 2013 Boise Development Code
Page 122
6 mature geese or turkeys 10 mature rabbits
(d) Concentrated feeding area is that part of a site in which animals are raised or kept in the reserve area. A concentrated feeing area may include any feeding or holding operation where animals are concentrated in an area that is: Not normally used for pasture or growing crops in which animal waste may accumulate; or Any trough or similar feeding apparatus.
(7) Setbacks and Enclosures
(a) Concentrated feeing areas and buildings housing animals shall be located behind the front of the principal dwelling. Buildings for housing animals must also comply with the setback standards for the Big Sky Neighborhood Overlay.
(b) Livestock shall be kept within enclosures such that said livestock is prevented from encroaching on, and/or damaging, neighboring properties, fences or vegetation; or public streets. Enclosures may include fences, corrals, barns, pens, etc.
(8) Best Management Practices (BMPs)
To protect surface and ground water quality and to avoid any adverse impact to wells, irrigation ditches, and other beneficial uses. A BMP is defined as a practice or combination of practices which are the most effective, practicable means of preventing or reducing the amount of pollution generated by non-point sources to a level compatible with water quality goals. The following BMPs must be met.
(a) Fencing
Enclose one or more areas on the site with a permanent fence or structure to function as a barrier to livestock and other animals as needed in order to prevent access to and protect streams, canals, and ditches from trampling, erosion and contamination.
(b) Filter Strips for Streams, Canals and Ditches
Maintain a gently sloping strip of ground over vegetation to filter runoff from that portion of the site occupied by animals. Filter strips shall distribute waste matter uniformly across the high end of the strip and allow waste to flow through and across the strip; promote the filtering of nutrients, runoff water, and other materials through the grass in a manner in which they are absorbed by the soil, an ultimately taken up by the plants.
(c) Runoff Control System
Employ a combination of practices to prevent animal waste runoff to surface water and adjacent properties. Practices may include diversion of runoff from the lot, roof runoff systems, lot shaping, settling basins, and filter strips or buffer areas.
(d) Liquid and Solid Waste Management System
Employ a system for managing liquid and solid waste in a manner that: Ensures fecal matter and other solid wastes do not create or promote nuisances, odors and disease-carrying insects and animals; and Does not degrade air, soil, or water resources
CHAPTER 11-05: Overlay and Specific Plan Districts
Section 11-05-04: Neighborhood Overlay Districts
Subsection 2: Sycamore Neighborhood (S) Overlay District
Supplement No 58 Ord-45-1, Ord-23-15, Amended; Ord-4-15, Amended)
March 2013 Boise Development Code
Page 123
The appropriate system will typically include the frequent spreading of liquid and solid waste, composting of manures, and off-site disposal.
(e) Additional BMPs shall be required if those listed above are shown to be ineffective. If a resident does not properly maintain or utilized BMPs, then the resident shall immediately cease the keeping of animals as defined in this ordinance. The owner or resident can consult the following agencies for additional technical assistance: Ada Soil Conservation District Natural Resources Conservation Service Idaho Soil Conversation Commission University of Idaho Extension Service Boise City Public Works Department
2. SYCAMORE NEIGHBORHOOD (S) OVERLAY DISTRICT
A. Purpose
To preserve and encourage land use and development that is consistent with the semi-rural, agricultural character and lifestyle of the Sycamore neighborhood, while promoting the public health, safety, and general welfare of present and future residents of the neighborhood and Boise City.
CHAPTER 11-05: Overlay and Specific Plan Districts
Section 11-05-04: Neighborhood Overlay Districts
Subsection 2: Sycamore Neighborhood (S) Overlay District
Supplement No 58 Ord-45-1, Ord-23-15, Amended; Ord-4-15, Amended)
March 2013 Boise Development Code
Page 124
B. Map and Boundaries
(1) Boundary Map
C. Specific Standards
(1) Setbacks
In the S overlay district, excluding lots fronting on 39th, Catalpa, and Taft Streets, the required setback for buildings and parking areas on vacant or undeveloped lots is determined by the average setback of the principal building on the two adjoining lots abutting the same street. In no case will the required setback be less than 20 feet or greater than 40 feet. Additions to existing buildings in the S overlay district are also subject to this setback standard.
(2) Agricultural Standards
The keeping of livestock, small animals, and similar or related agricultural uses in the S overlay district shall be subject to the generally applicable use standard of Section 11-
Figure 11-05.5: Map of Sycamore Neighborhood Overlay District
CHAPTER 11-05: Overlay and Specific Plan Districts
Section 11-05-04: Neighborhood Overlay Districts
Subsection 2: Sycamore Neighborhood (S) Overlay District
Supplement No 58 Ord-45-1, Ord-23-15, Amended; Ord-4-15, Amended)
March 2013 Boise Development Code
Page 125
06-07.4.D, and the standards in this Section. Where the standards of this section conflict with the generally applicable standards, this Section shall control.
(a) Allowed Uses
The keeping of livestock, small animals, and similar or related agricultural uses are allowed subject to the regulations of this section.
(b) Minimum Lot Size
A minimum lot or parcel size of 21,780 square feet (one-half acre) is required for large animals as defined in this section. The area of the lot or parcel used for any human dwelling shall be included when computing the one-half acre minimum lot size needed to qualify for large animals.
(c) Animal Reserve Area
A minimum animal reserve area of 10,890 square feet (one-quarter acre) is required for the keeping and care of large animals. Stables, paddocks, barns, and similar structures may be counted as part of the reserve area, but structures other than those related to the care of animals shall not be counted as part of the reserve area.
(d) Area for Small Animals
No minimum lot area is required for keeping small animals as defined in this section, although small animals are subject to the animal density standards. All small animals as defined shall be kept behind the front of the principal dwelling.
(e) Animal Density Standards The maximum animal density for large animals shall be one animal unit per one-quarter acre of reserve area. The reserve area shall be used to calculate the allowed number of large animals allowed on a particular parcel. For reserve areas larger than one-quarter acre, the one animal unit: one-quarter acre ratio shall be applied to determine the allowed number of animals. Shared reserve areas on adjacent lots may be added to the owner’s reserve area to calculate the number of large animals allowed on the owner’s lot. The maximum animal density for small animals shall be one animal unit per one-quarter acre of land area behind the front of the principal dwelling. The area used for calculating the allowed number of small animals shall not include land occupied by any building not used for housing said animals. For areas of land different from one-quarter acre, the one animal unit: one-quarter acre ratio shall be applied to determine the allowed number of animals. The keeping of chickens in conjunction with the keeping of large animals is an exception to animal density standards. Up to six chickens may be kept simultaneously and in addition to the large animals allowed per lot based on the density standard. No more than one rooster shall be kept on any single parcel, regardless of the size of the parcel.
(f) Site Plan
As deemed necessary, the Director may require the owner or resident to submit a site plan, subject to approval, for the purpose of determining the amount of land available on a particular site for the keeping of animals pursuant to the standards of this section.
CHAPTER 11-05: Overlay and Specific Plan Districts
Section 11-05-04: Neighborhood Overlay Districts
Subsection 2: Sycamore Neighborhood (S) Overlay District
Supplement No 58 Ord-45-1, Ord-23-15, Amended; Ord-4-15, Amended)
March 2013 Boise Development Code
Page 126
(g) Setbacks for Concentrated Feeding Areas, Buildings, and Pasture and Reserve Areas
Concentrated feeding areas and buildings housing animals shall be located behind the front of the principal dwelling and a minimum of ten feet from all property lines. Fully enclosed buildings must comply with the setback standards for the base zone and, therefore, may in some cases be set back less than ten feet from the property line. Pasture or reserve areas shall be located behind the front of the principal dwelling, and may otherwise be located at the side and rear property line.
(h) District Perimeter Setback
Animal reserve areas for large animals shall be set back a minimum of 30 feet from any residential lot located outside the S district.
(i) Enclosures Required
Livestock shall be kept within enclosures that prevent animals from encroaching on neighboring properties or public streets. Enclosures may include fences, corrals, barns, pens, etc.
(j) Best Management Practices
The owner or resident shall utilize Best Management Practices (BMPs) to protect surface and ground water quality and to avoid any adverse impact to wells and other beneficial uses. A BMP is defined as a practice or combination of practices that are the most effective, practicable means of preventing or reducing the amount of pollution generated by non-point sources to a level compatible with water quality goals. Any owner or resident intending to keep livestock and other animals pursuant to this section shall implement the following BMPs: Fencing
Enclose one or more areas on the site as needed with a permanent fence or structure to function as a barrier to livestock and other animals to prevent access to and protect streams, canals, and ditches from trampling, erosion, and contamination. Filter Strips for Streams, Canals, and Ditches
Maintain a gently sloping strip of ground cover vegetation to filter runoff from the portion of the site occupied by animals. Filter strips shall distribute waste matter uniformly across the high end of the strip and allow waste to flow through and across the strip and shall promote the filtering of nutrients, runoff water, and other material through the grass so that they can be absorbed by the soil and ultimately taken up by the plants. Runoff Control System
Employ a combination of practices to prevent animal waste runoff to surface water and adjacent properties. Practices may include diversion of runoff from the lot, roof runoff systems, lot shaping, settling basins, and filter strips or buffer areas. Liquid and Solid Waste Management System
Employ a system for managing liquid and solid waste in a manner that: a) ensures fecal matter and other solid wastes do not create or promote nuisances, odors and disease-carrying insects and animals, and b) does not degrade air, soil, or water resources. The appropriate system will
CHAPTER 11-05: Overlay and Specific Plan Districts
Section 11-05-05: Parking Reduction Overlay Districts
Subsection 1: General Purpose of Parking Reduction Overlay Districts
Supplement No 58 Ord-45-1, Ord-23-15, Amended; Ord-4-15, Amended)
March 2013 Boise Development Code
Page 127
typically include the frequent spreading of liquid and solid waste, composting of manures, and off-site disposal. Additional BMPs
Additional BMPs shall be required if those BMPs listed above are shown to be ineffective. The owner or resident can consult the following agencies for additional technical assistance: Ada Soil Conservation District Natural Resources Conservation Service (Home*A*Syst/Farm*A*Syst Program), Idaho Soil Conservation Commission, The University of Idaho Extension Service, and the Boise Public Works Department.
(k) Periodic Assessment
At three-year intervals the residents and property owners in the S District and the Director shall assess the impact and effectiveness of the standards of this section in protecting residents and owners of the district and those outside the district from unwanted impacts. 11-05-05. PARKING REDUCTION OVERLAY DISTRICTS
1. GENERAL PURPOSE OF PARKING REDUCTION OVERLAY DISTRICTS
To accommodate the need for alternative off-street parking ratios in accordance with the special needs of the downtown area.
2. MAP
A. Map
CHAPTER 11-05: Overlay and Specific Plan Districts
Section 11-05-06: Waterways Overlay Districts
Subsection 3: P-1 Parking District Standards
Supplement No 58 Ord-45-1, Ord-23-15, Amended; Ord-4-15, Amended)
March 2013 Boise Development Code
Page 128
3. P-1 PARKING DISTRICT STANDARDS
No off-street parking is required within the P-1 district, as indicated in Table 11-07.1, Off-Street Parking Requirements. This provision does not provide exemption from off-street loading requirements.
4. P-2 PARKING DISTRICT STANDARDS
Parking requirements in the P-2 district are indicated in Table 11-07.1, Off-Street Parking Requirements.
5. P-3 PARKING DISTRICT STANDARDS
Parking requirements in the P-3 district are indicated in Table 11-07.1, Off-Street Parking Requirements. 11-05-06. WATERWAYS OVERLAY DISTRICTS
1. BOISE RIVER SYSTEM OVERLAY DISTRICTS
To ensure that development along the river is sensitive to fish and wildlife, the riparian area, recreation and flood protection.
A. Goals
(1) Flood Protection
(a) To ensure protection from flooding.
(b) To allow for conveyance the 100-year flood without property damage or loss of life.
(2) Fish and Wildlife
(a) To preserve, protect, and enhance the abundance and diversity of fish, wildlife and riparian resources.
(b) To control runoff and pollution so as to protect water quality of the river and its tributaries.
(3) Recreation Amenities
(a) To protect the Boise River as a public asset to the city and a major amenity for its citizens.
(b) To maintain the Boise River Greenbelt.
(4) Development Opportunities
(a) To ensure that development is designed to enhancement and protect rivers riparian, fish, wildlife and recreational values.
(b) To provide and maintain continuous public access to and along the river including appropriate facilities for parking of bikes and motor vehicles.
B. Boise River System Management District Boundaries; Subdivision Plat Notes; Ordinances and Regulations to Comply With
(1) All subdivisions which include land that lies within the floodplain shall have the following note on the face of the plat: "This subdivision includes lands which are in the floodplain and are subject to the regulations of Chapter 11-08, Flood Hazard Regulations and 11-05-06.1, Boise River System Overlay Districts. The Planning Division should be consulted for details."
(2) The following ordinances and regulations of uses within the district apply:
CHAPTER 11-05: Overlay and Specific Plan Districts
Section 11-05-06: Waterways Overlay Districts
Subsection 1: Boise River System Overlay Districts
Supplement No 58 Ord-45-1, Ord-23-15, Amended; Ord-4-15, Amended)
March 2013 Boise Development Code
Page 129
Table 11-05.4 Regulations and Uses Land Classification Floodplain Ordinance (Ch. 11-08) Use Standards of Boise River Ordinance Mitigation Section of Boise River Ordinance (11-05-06.1.I) Enhancement Section of Boise River Ordinance (where appropriate) (11-05-06.1.J) Boise River Development System Permit Required (11-03-04.19)
Class A
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Class B
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Class C
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
C. Map and Boundaries
(1) Boundary Map
[Reserved]
(2) Districts
The Boise River System overlay district shall include the following areas:
(a) Floodway and Floodway Fringe Overlay Districts
Lands within the 100-year floodplain boundaries adjacent to the Boise River, including lands designated within the Floodway (F) and Floodway Fringe (FF). These boundaries adjacent to the Boise River are determined by the FEMA Flood Boundary and Floodway Map. A copy of this map is available at the Development Services Department. The Director with recommendation from the City Engineer shall provide boundary interpretations where necessary.
(b) Alluvial Overlay District
Tributary and Foothill Gulch floodplains and associated alluvial fans (AO zones) standards are addressed in Chapter 11-08, Flood Hazard Regulations.
(3) Boundary Descriptions
(a) Floodway (F) District Boundary Description
The Floodway District shall have the boundaries as follows: The Channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot, as shown in the Flood Insurance Study for Boise City, Idaho.
(b) Flood Fringe (FF) District Boundary Description
The Floodway Fringe District shall have boundaries as follows: The area between the floodway boundary and the boundary of the 100 Year Flood.
(c) Area of Shallow Flooding (AFS) District Boundary Description
The Area of Shallow Flooding District shall have boundaries as area shown on the Flood Insurance Rate Map as an AO zone with base flood depths from one to three feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate, and where velocity flow may be evident.
CHAPTER 11-05: Overlay and Specific Plan Districts
Section 11-05-06: Waterways Overlay Districts
Subsection 1: Boise River System Overlay Districts
Supplement No 58 Ord-45-1, Ord-23-15, Amended; Ord-4-15, Amended)
March 2013 Boise Development Code
Page 130
D. A, B, and C Lands and Waters Classifications
The BRS overlay district includes lands and waters that provide natural resource functions and values including the preservation of fish and wildlife amenities shall be classified as “Class A, B, or C lands and waters.”
(1) Class A, B, and C Lands and Waters Established
(a) Located in the Planning Division Office is a set of master maps delineating class A, B, and C lands and waters. The precise boundaries shall be determined on a case-by-case basis based on available maps, studies, outside agency input and on-site inspections.
(b) The Boise River Fish and Wildlife Habitat Study, (Sather-Blair, et al, 1983), shall be used as a reference that provides objectives for preservation and management actions for Class A and Class B areas.
(2) Class A Lands and Waters –Extremely Important for Preservation
Class A lands and waters provide extremely important habitats for fish and wildlife and for flood control and protection. The objective is to preserve and protect these lands for their benefits to fish and wildlife in general and to protect Bald Eagle, Great Blue Heron, trout, and water fowl habitats in particular. These areas include, but are not limited to:
(a) Floodways;
(b) Areas with a high degree of plant community diversity;
(c) Black cottonwood riparian plant community;
(d) Riparian forests
(e) Scrub-shrub wetlands;
(f) Emergent wetlands within the floodplain (exclusive of working irrigation canals);
(g) A 300 foot radius around Great Blue Heron rookeries;
(h) Eagle winter habitat which includes lands within 200 feet of the 6500 c.f.s. line, as determined by the Public Works Department based on their monitoring of annual flows, east of Walnut Street on the north side of the river and east of Phase 4 of the River Run Subdivision on the south, and forested wetlands east of these points;
(i) Lands within the riparian setback lands and waters;
(j) The banks of side channels and tributary stream areas within the jurisdiction of this overlay district;
(k) Islands within the river;
(l) Trout spawning waters;
(m) Riparian areas of tributary streams within the jurisdiction of this overlay district including channels that convey floodwaters and areas that meet the definition of wetlands; and
(n) The Barber Pool Natural Preserve.
CHAPTER 11-05: Overlay and Specific Plan Districts
Section 11-05-06: Waterways Overlay Districts
Subsection 1: Boise River System Overlay Districts
Supplement No 58 Ord-45-1, Ord-23-15, Amended; Ord-4-15, Amended)
March 2013 Boise Development Code
Page 131
(3) Class B Lands and Waters - Moderately Important for Preservation
Class B lands and waters provide good potential for improvements to natural resource functions and values. Development should improve natural resource functions and values and avoid negative. Class B lands and waters include, but are not limited to:
(a) Agricultural lands;
(b) Gravel pit ponds and small lakes; and
(c) Intermittent tributary streams.
(4) Class C Lands – Least Important for Preservation
Class C lands provide limited fish and wildlife habitat. Development should provide landscaping and habitat improvements. These areas include, but are not limited to:
(a) Public and private parks where current uses preclude enhancement of fish and wildlife habitat;
(b) Diversion dams;
(c) Residential and commercial developments;
(d) Lands surrounding gravel ponds;
(e) Subdivided properties;
(f) Former industrial areas; and
(g) Vacant lands in urban centers.
E. Setbacks
Setbacks are intended to protect and preserve the river; Greenbelt; Great Blue Heron rookeries; eagle perching, feeding, and loafing areas; and riparian areas.
(1) Boise River Setback
The setback for structures and parking areas is 70 feet from the 6500 c.f.s. line of the Boise River or 5 feet from the boundary of all dedications or easements granted to the City for greenbelt purposes in excess of 65 feet.
(2) Greenbelt Setback
The greenbelt setback for structures and parking areas is 70-feet measured landward from the 6500 c.f.s. setback line.
(3) Great Blue Heron Rookeries Setback
300 feet around Great Blue Heron rookeries. Rookeries shall be designated by the city and the Idaho Fish and Game Department.
(4) Eagle Perching, Feeding, and Loafing Setback
200 feet from the 6500 c.f.s, east of Walnut Street along the north side of the Boise River, and east of Phase 4 of the River Run subdivision along the south side of the Boise River.
(5) Riparian Setback
(a) Tier 1 Waterway
A side channel with a width of less than 15 feet or with a flow of less than five c.f.s. shall have a riparian setback of 20 feet.
CHAPTER 11-05: Overlay and Specific Plan Districts
Section 11-05-06: Waterways Overlay Districts
Subsection 1: Boise River System Overlay Districts
Supplement No 58 Ord-45-1, Ord-23-15, Amended; Ord-4-15, Amended)
March 2013 Boise Development Code
Page 132
(b) Tier 2 Waterway
A side channel at least 15 feet wide or with a flow of between 5 to 150 c.f.s. shall have a riparian setback of 25 feet.
(c) A minimum of 15 feet shall be maintained between the riparian setback and structures to allow for lawns and patios.
F. Allowed Uses and Improvements
The following uses and improvements are allowed in Class A lands and waters areas subject to the standards for uses, mitigation and enhancement provisions set forth in this chapter. All uses not explicitly listed are prohibited from the Class A lands and waters area.
(a) Signs (non-commercial);
(b) Restrooms and snack bars (except for existing uses;
(c) River bridges and paved access to river bridges;
(d) Fish and wildlife habitat improvements;
(e) Irrigation weirs, diversion dams, and inlets;
(f) Water inlets to supply domestic water;
(g) Greenbelt structures under existing bridges;
(h) Greenbelt paths or non-paved pedestrian paths that may provide limited access to the river and may run into or through lands designated as Class A habitat areas.
(i) Paved bicycle paths, limited to: Existing paths; The Lander Street sewage treatment plant path; The Warm Springs park area pedestrian path and bridge and; Where an existing railroad right-of-way is already located or that may require, donated, or used as a bicycle path;
(j) Natural parks;
(k) Bank and channel stabilization projects;
(l) Hydro-electric and flood protection dams;
(m) Selected public piers and beaches;
(n) Public utility lines such as water and sewer lines;
(o) Storm drain outlets and detention basins;
(p) Water pump facilities;
(q) Gravel extraction including reuse of gravel extraction lands;
(r) One housing unit per 20 acres or legal non-conforming lot;
(2) Class B Lands and Waters and Class C Lands
Uses allowed in Class B and Class C areas are limited to those listed in Table 11-06.1.
CHAPTER 11-05: Overlay and Specific Plan Districts
Section 11-05-06: Waterways Overlay Districts
Subsection 1: Boise River System Overlay Districts
Supplement No 58 Ord-45-1, Ord-23-15, Amended; Ord-4-15, Amended)
March 2013 Boise Development Code
Page 133
G. Standards
(1) Standards Applicable to All Development within the Boise River System Overlay District
(a) Emergent Wetlands
In recognition of their importance and their scarcity, emergent wetlands shall be preserved as follows: Emergent wetlands surrounded by Class B or Class C lands may be replaced with a wetland of equal size, provided that the created emergent wetland has the same or greater degree of natural resource functions and values as did the impacted emergent wetland. The emergent wetland may be relocated anywhere on the project site, except within Class C lands. If the emergent wetland is relocated to a site within existing Class A lands, then the land area of Class A lands and waters shall be enlarged by an amount no less than the size of the impacted emergent wetland.
(b) Enhancement of Water Resources
Proposals to use or create a water amenity shall be design to accommodate wetland and riparian functions and waterfowl, wildlife, trout, or warm water fish habitats.
(c) Parks and Open Spaces Intense activity portions of parks shall be located outside of Class A lands. Open spaces such as parks, golf courses, greenbelt areas, parking lots, etc., within the floodplain shall be designed and operated to flood and provide storage capacity during flood flows in excess of 6500 c.f.s.
(d) Emergency Access
New developments shall include provisions for emergency access as determined by the Boise Fire Department.
(e) Greenbelt Access
Developments shall provide for public access to the Boise River greenbelt and public parking for bicycles and motor vehicles.
(f) Landscaping
Landscaping shall utilize native or naturalized plant materials that provide wildlife food and shelter. Manicured landscaping and lawns are prohibited in Class A lands and in riparian areas and setbacks.
(g) Bank and Channel
Bank or channel stabilization measures (e.g., rip-rap, drop structures, large cobble) shall include over-planting with shrubs and trees and the deliberate enhancement of fish habitat.
(h) Screening Requirements Structures shall be screened from view from the Greenbelt and the river with landscaping that will grow to a height of at least 20 feet within ten years.
CHAPTER 11-05: Overlay and Specific Plan Districts
Section 11-05-06: Waterways Overlay Districts
Subsection 1: Boise River System Overlay Districts
Supplement No 58 Ord-45-1, Ord-23-15, Amended; Ord-4-15, Amended)
March 2013 Boise Development Code
Page 134
Parking areas located between the structure and the Boise River shall be screened from view by landscaping or decorative fencing at least five feet in height. Appropriate landscaping should be utilized to screen habitat areas from new development.
(i) Construction Fencing
Fencing shall be installed where construction activities abut a riparian area.
(2) Additional Standards Applicable to Class A Lands and Waters
(a) Class A areas within a development or subdivision shall be preserved in single common ownership through a conservation easement or other method approved by the city.
(b) The removal of living or dead vegetation from the floodway shall not be permitted unless: The vegetation poses a threat to persons or property; The vegetation contributes to a dangerous restriction of the flow of floodwater; or The removal of vegetation is part of an approved mitigation and enhancement plan.
(c) Removal of vegetation shall be confined to the minimum necessary, while still maintaining the natural riparian areas. Removal of vegetation is subject to approval by the Planning Director after review and recommendation by the Urban Forestry Division of the Boise City Parks and Recreation Department.
(d) Emergency situations under (2) (a) and (b) above may require actions to be taken before the Director can be contacted. If that is the case, then the action taken shall be reported to the Director and mitigation efforts shall be taken if the Director requires them.
(3) Additional Standard Applicable to Class B Lands and Waters
Development shall improve natural resource functions and values and shall mitigate negative impacts.
(4) Additional Standard Applicable to Class C Lands
Development plans shall provide for habitat improvements and landscaping to create screens and buffer between wildlife habitat areas and new.
H. Conditions for Permits
(1) Conditions may be attached that:
(a) Require compliance with applicable specifications, standards or requirements of the Idaho Department of Water Resources, Army Corps of Engineers, the Idaho Fish and Game Department, U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, Environmental Protection Agency, Boise City, or other agencies.
(b) Require preservation of existing vegetation, and mitigation or enhancement of natural resource functions and values as set forth in Sections 11-05-06.1.I and 11-05-06.1.J of this chapter.
CHAPTER 11-05: Overlay and Specific Plan Districts
Section 11-05-06: Waterways Overlay Districts
Subsection 1: Boise River System Overlay Districts
Supplement No 58 Ord-45-1, Ord-23-15, Amended; Ord-4-15, Amended)
March 2013 Boise Development Code
Page 135
(c) Require landscaping consistent with the objectives of the Greenbelt or the extension of the natural setting of the river.
(d) Limit reclamation of eroded stream banks in the floodway and require overflow channels to remain open.
(e) Limit construction to certain periods of time.
(f) Require certification by a licensed engineer that conditions have been fulfilled.
I. Mitigation
(1) Purpose
(a) To offset negative impacts of a proposed development on the natural resource functions and values in Class A and B lands and waters.
(b) Mitigation goals for Class A and B lands will be no net loss of existing natural resource functions and values associated with flood protection, fish and wildlife habitat, recreation and other goals of the Comprehensive Plan and Boise River Plan.
(2) Natural Resource Functions and Values
Natural resource functions and values are:
(a) Water quality,
(b) Habitat for fish and wildlife,
(c) Nutrient retention and removal,
(d) Channel stability,
(e) Food chain support,
(f) Flood storage and de-synchronization,
(g) Groundwater recharge and discharge,
(h) Recreation,
(i) Aesthetics, and
(j) Cultural resources.
(3) Mitigation Measures and Sequencing for Class A, B, and C Lands and Waters
The mitigation sequence will be examined in the order listed below. Several mitigation measures may be used in combination to provide the greatest protection to the resource. Different mitigation sequencing may be used provided extensive evidence is submitted and adequately demonstrates the impacts and public benefits available. The burden shall be on the applicant to demonstrate compliance with the minimum standards described in this Section.
(a) Mitigation Measures for Class A and B Lands and Waters
Mitigation measures from the most to the least preferable are: Avoid adverse impacts by selecting alternative alignments or locations. Minimize impacts by limiting encroachments, using less intrusive construction techniques, or other methods. Restore the impact area to as near its original condition as possible. In-kind on-site compensation.
CHAPTER 11-05: Overlay and Specific Plan Districts
Section 11-05-06: Waterways Overlay Districts
Subsection 1: Boise River System Overlay Districts
Supplement No 58 Ord-45-1, Ord-23-15, Amended; Ord-4-15, Amended)
March 2013 Boise Development Code
Page 136
In-kind off-site compensation.
(b) Mitigation Measures for Class C Lands and Waters
Mitigation is not required. Development in Class C lands shall not adversely affect adjacent and nearby habitat in Class A or Class B lands.
(4) Procedures for Development of Mitigation Plan
(a) Generation of Field Data
To accurately describe existing conditions, constraints, and their magnitude, existing natural resource functions and values will be assessed by the applicant. This assessment must be provided with the project application for review by the city along with a comprehensive technical plan to mitigate for impacts to natural resource functions and values, or to enhance natural resource functions and values.
(b) Early Coordination with Resource and Regulatory Agencies
Consultation with government agencies that have resource responsibilities must be initiated by the applicant as soon as practicable to determine the natural resource functions and values existing within the area requiring a Boise River System development permit. Consultation shall also include a discussion of the presence of threatened and endangered species, and species of special concern; fish and wildlife habitat requirements and their sensitivity to disturbance; and measures needed to mitigate for project related impacts or to enhance existing habitat. Consultation shall be documented.
(c) Comprehensive Mitigation Design
Proposed modifications to Class A and B lands and waters shall include: Preliminary Mitigation Plan
A preliminary site plan identifies the location and quality of existing natural resources, impacts to those resources attributable to the proposed project, and proposed mitigation measures. Final Mitigation Plan
A. Upon approval of the Boise River System development permit a final site plan shall be developed by the applicant that includes a detailed description, plan view, profile, and typical sections of the mitigation project. The final site plan will fully describe proposed changes to the resource and the materials and methods used to accomplish mitigation.
B. The final site plan may be offered to the state and federal agencies for review. Comments of these agencies will be fully considered by the city in its determination of whether the final site plan is in accordance with the Boise River System development permit.
(d) Performance Monitoring
The applicant shall monitor the performance of constructed mitigation improvements for a minimum period of 18 months unless otherwise fixed by the PZC. Acceptable performance shall be judged by comparing measured values to previously agreed upon standards.
CHAPTER 11-05: Overlay and Specific Plan Districts
Section 11-05-06: Waterways Overlay Districts
Subsection 1: Boise River System Overlay Districts
Supplement No 58 Ord-45-1, Ord-23-15, Amended; Ord-4-15, Amended)
March 2013 Boise Development Code
Page 137
J. Enhancement
(1) Purpose
To encourage innovative development design to increase the quantity and improve the quality of existing natural resource functions and values.
(2) Enhancement Plans
Enhancement plans may be submitted but are not required as part of an application for a Boise River System development permit.
(3) Enhancement Design Standards
(a) Enhancement of Class A, B, and C Waters Enhancement of Waters Held by the Idaho Department of Fish and Game
Enhancement or creation of water amenities that use waters held by Idaho Department of Fish and Game shall be designed for the propagation and perpetuation of fish and wildlife resources. Enhancement of Non- Idaho Department of Fish and Game Waters
Enhancement or creation of water amenities not held by Idaho Department of Fish and Game may be designed to enhance fish and wildlife resources or to provide a visual amenity.
(b) Enhancement of Class A, B, and C Passive Open Space Lands Class A Passive Lands
Class A passive open space lands shall be designed with the primary intent of providing enhancement to fish, wildlife and riparian resources with specific design or attention given to eagles, Great Blue Heron, trout, and water fowl. Vegetation shall be predominantly native or naturalized plant species. Class B and C Passive Open Space Lands
Class B and C passive open space lands should be designed to encourage the creation of fish, wildlife, and riparian resources and to create transition between natural areas and areas of more intense development. Vegetation may be a combination of native or naturalized vegetation and ornamental or exotic species. Native and Naturalized Vegetation
Native and naturalized vegetation should be located near established or created habitat areas and may transition to more ornamental species towards or within the development. Waiver of Standards
A. In order to provide an incentive for higher quality and more extensive enhancement plans, waivers of zoning and subdivision standards may be requested.
B. Waivers may be granted by the PZC or Council on enhancement plans that have been designed in accordance with this section and that the enhancement plan is in compliance with the Boise River System overlay district.
C. Waiver of standards may be approved when evidence presented meets the following conclusions of law:
CHAPTER 11-05: Overlay and Specific Plan Districts
Section 11-05-06: Waterways Overlay Districts
Subsection 1: Boise River System Overlay Districts
Supplement No 58 Ord-45-1, Ord-23-15, Amended; Ord-4-15, Amended)
March 2013 Boise Development Code
Page 138
D. That the proposed enhancement plan is in compliance with the applicable standards of Section 11-05-06.1.I of this chapter.
E. That the proposed enhancement plan complies with all local, state and federal laws and regulations.
F. That the waivers requested ensure a benefit to the public. Waivers Examples
A. The waiver of sidewalk standards for the construction of pedestrian, bicycle or nature trails that functionally replace the sidewalk. Provision of pedestrian pathways is encouraged on both sides of streets.
B. Reduction in street width standards to minimize impervious surfaces and to provide more land for vegetation and habitat improvements, provided, however, that private streets are to be discouraged.
C. Density transfers and clustering of uses to provide larger areas for habitat improvements.
D. Permit stream and irrigation system waivers from the design requirements of the subdivision provisions of this Code.
E. Permit fencing waivers from irrigation and streams as required in the subdivision provisions of this Code.
F. Permit waivers of drainage standards, as long as drainage and water quality goals are met.
G. Permit flexibility in the enhancement of existing marginal Class A lands by permitting enhancements that improve the river riparian values.
H. Waivers that address public safety considerations.
I. Flexibility in lot size and setback standards to provide large areas increasing habitat. Any waiver or variance from setback requirements under this overlay district must be shown to be required by legal necessity (a taking would otherwise occur) or to promote and enhance public safety, or that strict compliance with the setback in a given area would result in more damage to the habitat and environment than would granting the waiver or variance under the provisions of this and other overlay district(s) or other Code provisions.
(4) Procedures for Development of Enhancement Projects
(a) The same field data required to satisfy Section 11-05-06.1.I(4) shall be gathered and used to aid in the design of the enhancement plan.
(b) A combined mitigation and enhancement preliminary plan may be submitted if the plans clearly designate that features fulfill the mitigation requirements and that features fulfill the enhancement plan. Enhancement features may be considered part of a mitigation plan only if such features meet the standards of Sections 11-05-06.1.I(1) and (3).
(5) Performance Monitoring
The applicant shall monitor the performance of constructed enhancements for a minimum period of 18 months unless otherwise fixed by the PZC. Acceptable performance shall be judged by comparing measured values to standards that were previously agreed-upon.
CHAPTER 11-05: Overlay and Specific Plan Districts
Section 11-05-07: Special Purpose Overlay Districts
Subsection 1: Airport Overlay Zone District
Supplement No 58 Ord-45-1, Ord-23-15, Amended; Ord-4-15, Amended)
March 2013 Boise Development Code
Page 139
11-05-07. SPECIAL PURPOSE OVERLAY DISTRICTS
1. AIRPORT OVERLAY ZONE DISTRICT
[Reserved] 11-05-08. SPECIFIC PLAN DISTRICTS
1. PURPOSE
Specific plan districts provide a means to modify or create new zoning regulations for unique areas and developments where other conventional zoning mechanisms cannot achieve the desired results. Specific plans shall implement and be consistent with the Boise City Comprehensive Plan land use map and policies.
2. SCOPE
A. Examples of Specific Plans
Specific plans may take the form of mixed use districts and planned communities or planned development. Each specific plan has its own non-transferable set of regulations. The regulations may include: zoning standards, design guidelines, site plan, infrastructure plan, phasing plan and other elements. Specific plans are adopted into the zoning code by ordinance and become either the base zone or an overlay zone for the property.
B. Basic Specific Plan
A specific plan may be an overlay zone that modifies or expands the base zone to allow different dimensional standards, streetscape treatments, and architectural designs. Every basic specific plan should include a detailed site plan and illustrations.
C. Complex Specific Plan
A specific plan may also address a very large site of hundreds of acres. In this case, the specific plan may include many different chapters with detailed standards for the issues addressed in each chapter. For example, a large planned community specific plan may include a detailed land use plan with lotting patterns, building envelopes, and street networks. Detailed zoning standards could be included that address setbacks, building heights, mix of uses, and parking ratios. A design chapter could describe materials, architectural styles and sign programs. A Landscape Section could address common open space areas with a plant palette and irrigation plans. A transportation chapter could include roadway cross sections and streetscapes, pathways, or a public transportation or transportation management program. An infrastructure chapter could address the location, sizing and timing of sewer, water, fire and other facilities. An environmental chapter could address water quality, riparian protection, revegetation of graded slopes and similar issues. A phasing chapter could identify how the construction would proceed and at which point in time certain infrastructure elements would be installed. A review process chapter could describe the specific review and approval process for individual phases within the project. In this case, the specific plan might constitute all aspects of project approval short of subdivision final plat approval.
3. LAND USE CONTROLS
The type of uses and amount of development in a SP district shall be as established by the specific plan. Pre-existing legal non-conforming uses shall be permitted in a SP district. Any permitted or conditional use may be included in a specific plan district.
4. INITIATION
An amendment may be initiated by a property owner or authorized agent, the PZC, or the Council. If the property is not under a single ownership, the majority of ownership shall join in the application, and a map
CHAPTER 11-05: Overlay and Specific Plan Districts
Section 11-05-08: Specific Plan Districts
Subsection 5: Minimum Area Standards
Supplement No 58 Ord-45-1, Ord-23-15, Amended; Ord-4-15, Amended)
March 2013 Boise Development Code
Page 140
showing the extent of ownerships shall be submitted with concept plans and materials. For the purposes of this Section, a majority of ownership shall be defined as either 75 percent of the affected owners or 75 percent of the affected land area. For projects larger than 200 acres, a neighborhood scoping meeting, per Section 11-03-03.2, between the applicant and the City of Boise shall be conducted prior to application submittal to determine which supporting materials and specific plan elements shall be appropriate and required for the proposal.
5. MINIMUM AREA STANDARDS
The minimum area of a SP district shall be two acres or one city block.
6. REQUIRED AND OPTIONAL ELEMENTS
A specific plan shall include some or all of the following elements:
A. A map depicting the proposed pattern of land use and open space, with acreage by land use type.
B. A written document, describing in detail the zoning standards for all land uses including but not limited to: setbacks, height, density, parking, floor area ratios, landscaping, signage, lighting requirements, and similar issues. When the existing base zone is left in place and the specific plan becomes an overlay zone, this document need only address the elements that differ from the standards of the base zone.
C. A map depicting the proposed street and lot pattern.
D. A map depicting the location and configuration of all infrastructure/public services and facilities proposed within the specific plan district. Such facilities include but are not limited to roads, sewers, lift stations, drainage facilities, fire stations, police substations, parks, libraries, communications equipment, and similar facilities.
E. A phasing plan for development of all uses and supporting infrastructure.
F. A capital improvement program for all infrastructure.
G. A written and illustrated document, describing in detail any design guidelines for the development, including but not limited to: architectural style, materials, colors, themes, streetscapes, public realm elements, and similar issues.
H. A written document describing the review, approval, and amendment process for all proposed uses and phases in the project.
I. Other elements such as grading plans, wildlife mitigation plans, open space management plans, hazardous materials remediation plans, etc.
7. PROCEDURES
The PZC shall consider an application for rezone to a SP District and shall at the same time consider the proposed Specific Plan accompanying the application.
A. Required Findings
The PZC shall forward a recommendation to the Council based on findings that the specific plan:
(1) Is consistent with the goals, objectives and policies of the Comprehensive Plan, with particular emphasis placed upon those polices related to diversity of housing,
CHAPTER 11-05: Overlay and Specific Plan Districts
Section 11-05-09: Historic Preservation Districts
Subsection 8: Adopted Specific Plans
Supplement No 58 Ord-45-1, Ord-23-15, Amended; Ord-4-15, Amended)
March 2013 Boise Development Code
Page 141
mixing and integration of uses, pedestrian and transit design, level of service provision and environmental protection;
(2) Is compatible with surrounding development and properly integrates land uses and infrastructure with adjacent properties;
(3) Includes adequate provisions for utilities, services, roadway networks and emergency vehicle access; and public service demands will not exceed the capacity of existing and planned systems; and
(4) Will enhance the potential for superior urban design and land use in comparison with development under the base district provisions that would apply if the specific plan were not approved.
B. Zoning Map Designation
A SP district shall be noted on the zoning map by the designation "SP," followed by the number of the SP district based on order of adoption. The SP may be either appended to the base zone as an overlay, or may be the primary zoning with no other base zone.
C. Status of Specific Plan
A specific plan adopted by ordinance of the Council shall be administered as prescribed by the Council and as established by the provisions of the specific plan for review, approval, and amendment. Adopted specific plans shall be listed by name and number in Section 11-05-08.8 of this ordinance and shall be maintained on file in the Director as a bound and printed document.
D. Review of Plans
Application for building permits for projects in a SP district shall be accepted only if the project plans are consistent with the standards of the adopted Specific Plan.
8. ADOPTED SPECIFIC PLANS
Adopted specific plans are included in Chapter 11-13. 11-05-09. HISTORIC PRESERVATION DISTRICTS
1. PURPOSE
The purpose of this section is to promote the educational, cultural and economic welfare of the public of the city by engaging in a comprehensive program of historic preservation to promote, preserve and protect historic buildings, structures, sites, monuments, streets, squares and neighborhoods which serve as visible reminders of the historical, archeological, architectural, educational and cultural heritage of the city. It is the further purpose of this section for the social, economic and environmental advantages of the city to promote the use and conservation of such property, to stabilize and improve property values in historic areas, and to encourage new buildings and developments that will be harmonious with the existing historical, archeological, architectural, educational and cultural buildings, structures, sites, streets, squares and neighborhoods.
2. HISTORIC PRESERVATION COMMISSION
There is hereby created and established a Historic Preservation Commission which shall consist of no less than 5 but up to 9 members who shall be appointed by the Mayor with the advice and consent of the Council. Members of the Commission shall be appointed with due regard to the proper representation of such fields as history, architecture, urban planning, archeology and law. In addition, 1 member may be, at the time of appointment, under 18 years of age. The youth member shall be appointed to a term of up to 1 year and may be reappointed to up to 2 successive terms. The remaining members of the Commission are eligible for reappointment as provided by Section 1-21-8 of the Boise City Code. If a vacancy occurs,
CHAPTER 11-05: Overlay and Specific Plan Districts
Section 11-05-09: Historic Preservation Districts
Subsection 3: Organization, Officers, Rules, Meetings
Supplement No 58 Ord-45-1, Ord-23-15, Amended; Ord-4-15, Amended)
March 2013 Boise Development Code
Page 142
the Mayor with the consent of the Council shall appoint a member to fill the unexpired term. The members of the Commission shall serve without pay but shall be reimbursed by the city for necessary expenses incurred in connection with their duties. A quorum shall consist of 5 or more members.
3. ORGANIZATION, OFFICERS, RULES, MEETINGS
A. At their first meeting, the appointed Commissioners shall elect officers who shall serve for terms of 1 year. The Commission may establish any rules necessary for the orderly conduct of its business, and all meetings of the Commission shall be open to the public. The Commission shall keep a record of its resolutions, proceedings and actions.
B. The Commission shall provide public notice as outlined in the ordinance. A person may request notice through electronic mail, and if so, it shall be in addition to the mailed notice through the U.S. Postal Service.
4. POWERS AND DUTIES OF COMMISSION
The Commission shall exercise to the fullest extent the authority granted under Title 67 (State Government and State Affairs), Chapter 46 (Preservation of Historic Sites) of the Idaho State Code. Duties shall include, but not be limited to the following:
A. Conduct a survey of local historic properties of the city;
B. Recommend the lease, sale, transfer or disposition of historic property subject to rights of public access and other covenants and in a manner that will preserve the property;
C. Contract, with the approval of the local governing body, with the state or federal government, or any agency of either, or with any other person, firm, corporation, or organization, to accomplish the purposes of this section;
D. Cooperate with the federal, state and local governments in the pursuit of the objectives of historic preservation;
E. Participate in the conduct of land use, urban renewal and other planning processes undertaken by the city or any other entity;
F. Recommend ordinances and otherwise provide information for the purposes of historic preservation to the city;
G. Promote and conduct an educational and interpretative program on historic properties within the jurisdiction of the city; and
H. Enter, solely in performance of its official duties and only at reasonable times, upon private lands for examination or survey thereof. However, no member, employee or agent of the commission may enter any private property, building or structure without the express consent of the owner or occupant thereof.
5. FUNDING
A. For the purpose of providing funds for a Historic Preservation Commission, the Council may:
(1) Provide funds from current revenues;
(2) Receive and expend monies from any other available source or sources, or
CHAPTER 11-05: Overlay and Specific Plan Districts
Section 11-05-09: Historic Preservation Districts
Subsection 6: Designation of Historical Districts, Including Historical Districts - Residential
Supplement No 58 Ord-45-1, Ord-23-15, Amended; Ord-4-15, Amended)
March 2013 Boise Development Code
Page 143
(3) Use any combination of the foregoing.
B. Funds received for a Historic Preservation Commission may be accumulated from year to year and need not be expended during any one fiscal year, except that unexpended monies appropriated by the Council shall be deemed surplus to be budgeted and appropriated for the subsequent year as provided by law.
6. DESIGNATION OF HISTORICAL DISTRICTS, INCLUDING HISTORICAL DISTRICTS - RESIDENTIAL
Historic Districts shall be designated by ordinance and in accordance with the following requirements:
A. Criteria for Designation
The buildings, sites, structures and objects of an historic district shall meet one of the following 3 criteria:
(1) Historical or Cultural Importance
(a) Has significant character, interest or value, as part of the development, heritage or cultural characteristics of the city, state or nation; or is associated with the life of a person significant in the past; or
(b) Is the site of an historic event with a significant effect upon society; or
(c) Exemplifies the cultural, political, economic, social, educational or historic heritage of the community; or
(d) By being part of or related to a street, square, park or other distinctive area, should be developed or preserved according to a plan based on historic, cultural or architectural motif; or
(e) Owing to its unique location or singular physical characteristic, represents an established and familiar visual feature of the neighborhood, community or city; or
(2) Architectural Importance
(a) Portrays the environment in an era of history characterized by a distinctive architectural style; or
(b) Embodies those distinguishing characteristics of an architectural-type or engineering specimen; or
(c) Is the work of a designer, architect or craftsman whose individual work has significantly influenced the development of the city, state or nation; or
(d) Contains elements of design, detail, materials or craftsmanship which represent a significant innovation; or
(3) Archeological Importance
(a) Has yielded or may be likely to yield, information important in pre-history or history.
(b) Contains or is likely to contain physical remains, such as fossils, relics, monuments, art or symbols, of past human life and activities.
B. Commission Research and Report on Proposed District
The Commission, either on its own initiative or upon the request of the City Council, or upon the request of one or more owners of property in the area of a proposed historic district, may recommend the designation of one or more historic districts. Prior to recommending designation the
CHAPTER 11-05: Overlay and Specific Plan Districts
Section 11-05-09: Historic Preservation Districts
Subsection 6: Designation of Historical Districts, Including Historical Districts - Residential
Supplement No 58 Ord-45-1, Ord-23-15, Amended; Ord-4-15, Amended)
March 2013 Boise Development Code
Page 144
Commission shall conduct studies, research and investigations based on the relevant criteria given in Section 11-05-09.6.A regarding buildings, sites, structures and objects of such proposed historic district or districts. Thereafter, the Commission shall prepare a report containing recommendations concerning the area or areas to be included in the proposed historic district or districts.
C. Transmittal of Report to Planning and Zoning Commission
Copies of the report shall be transmitted for review and recommendation to the Planning and Zoning Commission. Not less than 60 days after the date of transmittal of such report to the Planning and Zoning Commission, the Historic Preservation Commission shall hold a public hearing regarding the proposed district.
D. Notice Requirements for Historic Preservation Commission Public Hearing
(1) Notice of the time, place and purpose of such hearing shall be given at least 14 calendar days prior to the hearing by one publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the city; and
(2) Notice of the hearing shall be given to the owners of all properties to be included in the district or districts and to the registered neighborhood association at least 14 calendar days prior to the hearing.
E. Final Report to City Council
After conducting the public hearing, the Commission may vote to proceed with the district, and shall submit a final report with its recommendations and a draft ordinance to the City Council.
F. Public Hearing by City Council
The City Council shall act upon the report and recommendation in accordance with the public hearing provisions of Chapter 11-03, Review and Decision Procedures. Upon approval by the Council of the ordinance establishing the historic district, the zoning maps shall be changed to reflect the addition of the "H" historic overlay zone.
G. Notification of District
(1) Upon passage of the ordinance, the owners of each property within the designated historic district, and the registered neighborhood association shall be given written notification of said designation by the Council.
(2) The Commission shall notify City Departments and other agencies as required under Section 11-05-09.16.
(3) One copy of the ordinance creating the district shall be filed in the office of the County Recorder of Ada County, Idaho.
H. Register of Historic Districts
The Commission shall maintain a register of historic districts as required under Section 11-05-09.16.
I. Investigation or Report Updates
The physical changes in the district that are approved by a Certificate of Appropriateness shall be added to the report/survey. Updates are not considered amendments to the historic district.
CHAPTER 11-05: Overlay and Specific Plan Districts
Section 11-05-09: Historic Preservation Districts
Subsection 7: Procedure For Reclassification of Buildings, Sites, Structures or Objects Located Within Designated Historic
Districts and Historic Districts -Residential
Supplement No 58 Ord-45-1, Ord-23-15, Amended; Ord-4-15, Amended)
March 2013 Boise Development Code
Page 145
7. PROCEDURE FOR RECLASSIFICATION OF BUILDINGS, SITES, STRUCTURES OR OBJECTS LOCATED WITHIN DESIGNATED HISTORIC DISTRICTS AND HISTORIC DISTRICTS -RESIDENTIAL
A. 50-Year Time Passage
Any building, site, structure or object located within a designated historic district may on the 50th anniversary of its original construction be deemed historic which may change the classification from a non-contributing property to a contributing property. Classification may be changed through a survey and public process as outlined below.
B. Reclassification
Upon the motion of the Commission, or at the request of the Planning Staff, property owner or applicant (with consent of the property owner if not the same), the Commission may reclassify a building, site, structure or object within a designated historic district or historic district - residential from non - contributing to contributing or from contributing to non – contributing. Criteria for reviewing such changes in classification may include, but are not limited to:
(1) Errors in Original Inventories
A building, site, structure or object may be reclassified from non-contributing to contributing or from contributing to non-contributing if the Commission determines that an error was made on the original survey.
(2) Alterations/Additions/Restorations
A building, site, structure or object may be reclassified from contributing to non-contributing or from non-contributing to contributing if alterations, additions or restorations have been made so that the classification prior to the change no longer reflects the proper classification after the change.
C. Findings for Changes in Classification
The Commission shall approve a change in classification based on the following findings:
(1) Whether or not the building, site, structure or object is eligible for the National Register of Historic Places.
(2) Whether or not the building, site, structure or object contributes to the district.
D. Application Form
An application for a reclassification shall be submitted to the Commission on a form designated by the Commission and containing such information as required by the Commission.
E. Public Hearing/Notification
The Commission shall schedule a public hearing on any reclassification under Subsection B above. Notice of the time, place and purpose of such hearing shall be mailed to all adjacent property owners and residents, and the registered neighborhood association at least 14 calendar days prior to the hearing.
F. Appeal
Any applicant or party of record aggrieved by a determination of the Commission may appeal to the City Council as provided in Chapter 11-03, Review and Decision Procedures.
8. DESIGNATION OF HISTORIC LANDMARKS
Historic Landmarks shall be designated by ordinance and in accordance with the following requirements:
CHAPTER 11-05: Overlay and Specific Plan Districts
Section 11-05-09: Historic Preservation Districts
Subsection 8: Designation of Historic Landmarks
Supplement No 58 Ord-45-1, Ord-23-15, Amended; Ord-4-15, Amended)
March 2013 Boise Development Code
Page 146
A. The building, site, structure or object proposed for such designation shall meet one or more of the criteria required in Section 11-05-09.6(A). In addition, it must meet the criteria established for inclusion in the National Register of Historic Places as such criteria are applied to historic properties in the State by the Idaho Historic Sites Review Board.
B. The Commission, either on its own initiative or upon the request of the City Council, or upon the request of the owner of the property proposed to be designated, may recommend the designation of an historic landmark. Prior to recommending the designation the Commission shall conduct studies, research and investigations based on the relevant criteria given in Section 11-05-09.6(A). Thereafter, the Commission shall prepare a report containing recommendations concerning the historic landmark proposed to be designated and a draft of the designating ordinance to the City Council. The report of the Commission shall include comments regarding the suitability of the historic landmark for preservation or restoration. In case there is a question of an adaptive or alternative use of the historic landmark, the report shall include a statement regarding the appropriateness of such adaptive or alternative use. The report shall also include a statement regarding the administrative and financial responsibility of the person or organization proposing to undertake all or a portion of the cost of acquisition, restoration, maintenance, operation or repair, or the cost of adaptive or alternative use of the property to the extent that any, such considerations apply to the property proposed for designation. If the owner of the property proposed for designation has not consented to such designation, the report of the Commission shall also include a statement regarding the appraised value of the property.
C. For each designated historic landmark, the designating ordinance shall require the waiting period prescribed by Section 11-05-09.16 to be observed prior to its demolition, material alteration, remodeling or removal. The designating ordinance shall also provide guidelines for a suitable sign or marker on or near the historic landmark indicating that the property has been so designated.
(1) For properties designated as a historic landmark and located within a local historic district, the portions of this ordinance pertaining to the districts, takes precedence over the 180 day waiting period for demolition of the structure.
(2) For State or Federal properties which are designated as historic landmarks, the designation is an honorary effort and the city acknowledges that the repair, maintenance, demolition or remodel of the structure is not within its jurisdiction.
D. The City Council shall hold a public hearing on the designating ordinance, after having given written notice to the owners and occupants of the property and the publication of such notice in the time and manner required by Section 11-05-09.16.
E. Following such public hearing, the Council may act on the designating ordinance.
F. Upon passage of the designating ordinance, the owners and occupants of each designated historic landmark shall be given written notification of said designation by the Council, and one copy of the designating ordinance shall be filed in the office of the County Recorder of Ada County, Idaho.
CHAPTER 11-05: Overlay and Specific Plan Districts
Section 11-05-09: Historic Preservation Districts
Subsection 9: Procedure for Removal of Historic Designation
Supplement No 58 Ord-45-1, Ord-23-15, Amended; Ord-4-15, Amended)
March 2013 Boise Development Code
Page 147
G. The Commission shall give notice of such designation to the Tax Assessor of Ada County, Idaho.
9. PROCEDURE FOR REMOVAL OF HISTORIC DESIGNATION
After the designation by ordinance of an historic district, historic district – residential; or property within such districts, such designation shall not be rescinded, except as hereinafter provided:
A. Application Form
The owner or owner's representative shall submit an application for removal of designation on a form designated by the Commission and containing such information as required by the Commission, including, but not limited to, a detailed explanation as to why the property (or properties) does not meet the criteria under which the district was adopted as outlined under Section 11-05-09.6.A(1)-(3). Nothing herein shall prevent the Commission from initiating such removals as well.
B. Public Hearing by Commission and Noticing Requirements
Prior to approval or denial of the application for removal of designation, the Commission shall schedule a public hearing on the request and notify, in writing, each property owner within the affected District if for removal of the entire historic District or 300’ radius from the property boundaries for an individual property removal within the district and the registered neighborhood association at least 14 calendar days prior to the hearing. Notice of the time, date, place and purpose of such hearing shall also be published at least 14 calendar days prior to such hearing in a newspaper of general circulation within the city.
C. Action by the Commission – Approval of the Request for Removal of Designation
(1) If, in the judgment of the Commission, when any building, site, structure or object included within a designated historic district, or designated as a historic landmark, has ceased to comply with the designation criteria or no longer exhibits the characteristics which qualified the property for inclusion within a historic district or for designation as an historic landmark, such property or properties may be recommended for exclusion from the boundary of such district, or if the district, as a whole, no longer complies with such criteria, it may be recommended for rescission of its historic designation, or such landmark may be recommended for rescission of its historic designation.
(2) If the Commission determines the proposed removal of designation is appropriate, it shall forthwith approve such application and shall prepare a report containing such recommendation of removal of designation and a draft of a proposed ordinance removing such designation to the City Council.
(a) Public Hearing by Council and Noticing Requirements
The City Council shall hold a public hearing on the proposed removal ordinance, after having given written notice as outlined in Section 11-05-09.6.A(1) above. The City Council shall act on the report and recommendation in accordance with the public hearing provisions of Chapter 11-03, Review and Decision Procedures.
(b) Notification of Approval of the Removal Ordinance
Upon approval of the ordinance, the owners and occupants of the historic district, historic district - residential or property within such district for which designation was removed shall be given written notification of such removal by the Council, and one copy of the ordinance shall be filed in the office of the County Recorder of Ada County, Idaho. The Commission shall give notice of such removal of designation to the Tax Assessor of Ada County, Idaho and to the Internal Revenue
CHAPTER 11-05: Overlay and Specific Plan Districts
Section 11-05-09: Historic Preservation Districts
Subsection 10: Procedure for Demolition or Change In Use of Historic Landmark
Supplement No 58 Ord-45-1, Ord-23-15, Amended; Ord-4-15, Amended)
March 2013 Boise Development Code
Page 148
Service, Boise office. The zoning maps shall be changed to reflect the removal of the "H" historic overlay zone.
D. Action by the Commission - Denial of the Request for Removal of Designation
If the Commission determines that the application for removal of designation should not be recommended, it shall place upon its records the reason for such determination and shall forthwith notify the applicant of such determination and a copy of its reasons and its recommendations, if any, as appearing in the records of said Commission.
(1) Appeal of Denial of the Request for Removal of Designation
Any applicant aggrieved by a determination of the Commission may appeal to the City Council in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 11-03, Review and Decision Procedures.
10. PROCEDURE FOR DEMOLITION OR CHANGE IN USE OF HISTORIC LANDMARK
An historic landmark designated by ordinance as herein provided which is not part of an historic district, may be demolished, materially altered, remodeled, relocated or put to a different use only after 180 days written notice of the owner's proposed action has been given to the Historic Preservation Commission in accordance with the following procedures:
A. During this period, the Commission may negotiate with the owner and with any other parties in an effort to find a means of preserving the property. The Commission may enter into negotiations with the owner for the acquisition by gift, purchase, or exchange of the property or any interest therein during this 180 day period or any such action as is reasonably necessary or appropriate for the continued preservation of the property.
B. The Commission may notify, in writing, property owners within a 300' radius of the historic landmark and the registered neighborhood association of the request to demolish, alter, remodel, relocate or change the use of the historic landmark; and may allow such owners and the registered neighborhood association to provide input within the 180 day waiting period.
C. The Commission may reduce the waiting period required by this section in any case where the owner would suffer extreme hardship unless a reduction in the required period were allowed. The Commission shall have the discretionary authority to waive all or any portion of the required waiting period, provided that the alteration, remodeling, relocation or change of use is undertaken subject to conditions agreed to by the Commission insuring the continued maintenance of the historical, architectural, archeological or cultural integrity and character of the property.
D. At the end of the required waiting period, as reduced or waived if such be the case, the designation of such historic landmark shall be rescinded and a draft of a proposed ordinance removing such designation shall be prepared and submitted to the City Council for approval.
CHAPTER 11-05: Overlay and Specific Plan Districts
Section 11-05-09: Historic Preservation Districts
Subsection 11: Ordinary Repairs; Public Safety
Supplement No 58 Ord-45-1, Ord-23-15, Amended; Ord-4-15, Amended)
March 2013 Boise Development Code
Page 149
11. ORDINARY REPAIRS; PUBLIC SAFETY
Nothing in this section shall be construed to prevent the ordinary maintenance or repair of any exterior feature in a historic district, or of any historic landmark which does not involve a change in design, material or outer appearance thereof, nor to prevent the construction, reconstruction, alteration, restoration or demolition of any such feature when the Building Official shall certify such is required for the public safety because of an unsafe or dangerous condition.
12. ACQUISITION OF PROPERTY
A. All lands, buildings, structures, sites or areas acquired by funds appropriated by the city shall be acquired in the name of the city unless otherwise provided by the governing board. So long as owned by the city, historic properties may be maintained by or under the supervision and control of the city.
B. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to allow the designation, regulation conditioning, restriction or acquisition of historic buildings, structures, sites or areas, or other properties or facilities owned by the state or any of its political subdivisions, agencies or instrumentalities.
13. ACQUISITION OF HISTORIC EASEMENTS
A. The city may acquire, by purchase or donation, historic easements in any area within the jurisdiction of the city wherever and to the extent the Council determines that the acquisition will be in the public interest. For the purpose of this section, “historic easement” means any easement, restriction, covenant or condition running with the land, designated to preserve, maintain or enhance all or part of the existing state of places of historical, architectural, archeological or cultural significance.
B. The City Council shall seek a recommendation from the Historic Preservation Commission regarding the historic easement and proposed resolution.
14. MAINTENANCE AND REPAIR REQUIRED; DEMOLITION BY NEGLECT
A. Any property located within an historic district, historic district – residential or designated as a landmark shall be preserved by the owner, or such other person or persons as may have the legal custody or control thereof, against decay and deterioration and free from unreasonable structural defects. The owner or other person having legal custody and control thereof shall repair such resource if it is found to have one or more of the following defects, or other defects that in the judgment of the Commission has a detrimental effect on the historical characteristics of the property or district.
(1) The deterioration of exterior walls or other vertical supports;
(2) The deterioration of roofs or other horizontal members;
(3) The deterioration of exterior chimneys;
(4) The deterioration or removal of exterior finishes or fenestration;
(5) The ineffective waterproofing of exterior walls, roofs and foundations including broken windows or doors; and
CHAPTER 11-05: Overlay and Specific Plan Districts
Section 11-05-09: Historic Preservation Districts
Subsection 15: Exemption from Fire or Building Codes
Supplement No 58 Ord-45-1, Ord-23-15, Amended; Ord-4-15, Amended)
March 2013 Boise Development Code
Page 150
(6) The deterioration of any feature so as to create or permit the creation of any hazardous or unsafe condition or conditions.
B. If the Commission makes a preliminary determination that a resource is being demolished by neglect, it shall direct the Boise City Building Division to notify the owner(s) of the resource of this preliminary determination, stating the reasons therefore, and shall give the owner of record 28 days from the date of mailing of such notice to commence work to correct the specific defects as determined by the Commission.
C. If the owner(s) fail to commence work within the time allotted as evidenced by a Building Permit, the Commission shall notify the owner(s) in writing to appear at a public hearing before the Commission at a date, time and place to be specified in said notice, which shall be mailed at least 28 days before the said hearing. The Commission shall also notify in writing adjacent property owners and the registered neighborhood association of such hearing. The Commission shall receive evidence on the issue of whether the subject resource should be repaired and the owner(s) may present evidence in rebuttal thereto. If, after such hearing, the Commission shall determine that the resource is being demolished by neglect, it may direct the City Attorney to commence legal action against the owner(s) if the necessary repairs are not completed within 90 days or a time frame as specified by the Commission.
15. EXEMPTION FROM FIRE OR BUILDING CODES
The Council, in order to promote the preservation and restoration of any historic landmark, or property within a historic district may, upon the recommendation of the Commission, exempt an historic landmark or property within a historic district from the application of the City Fire or Building Codes upon compliance with the criteria for exemption set forth in said codes and upon a finding that non-exemption would prevent or seriously hinder the preservation or restoration of said historic landmark or property in a historic district. Upon rescission of a historic designation, any code exemption herein granted shall be revoked effective the date of rescission.
16. NOTICE OF CITY DEPARTMENTS AND OTHER AGENCIES; REGISTER OF HISTORIC DISTRICTS AND LANDMARKS
In addition to all other transmittals and notices required by this Chapter, the Commission shall notify the departments of Boise City and other agencies regarding the designation or removal of designation of historic districts and landmarks, and shall maintain a register of such districts and landmarks.
A. Within 7 calendar days after the designation by ordinance of any historic district or landmark, the Commission shall notify all departments of Boise City and other governmental agencies having a regulatory or legally prescribed duty affecting such district or landmark. The notice shall state the fact of such designation, identify the boundary of the district, or the address of the landmark, and shall summarize the effect such designation will have.
B. The Commission shall maintain a current register and map of all historic districts and landmarks which have been designated by ordinance. Such register and map shall be made public and available to the city departments, other governmental agencies and any interested person.
CHAPTER 11-05: Overlay and Specific Plan Districts
Section 11-05-09: Historic Preservation Districts
Subsection 17: Signs
Supplement No 58 Ord-45-1, Ord-23-15, Amended; Ord-4-15, Amended)
March 2013 Boise Development Code
Page 151
17. SIGNS
In addition to a sign application, a staff level Certificate of Appropriateness shall be received for any sign located within a Historic District. The following finding shall be made in order to issue the Certificate of Appropriateness:
A. The sign shall be congruous with the building in design, materials, size and location.
18. PENALTIES
A. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished by a fine of not more than $1000.00.
B. Any person, who files with the Commission an application or request for a Certificate of Appropriateness who willfully makes any false statement in such application or request, or who, upon demand, willfully furnishes false information to the Commission, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished by a fine of not more than $1000.00.
C. For the purpose of this section, each day during which there exists any violation of any provision herein will constitute a separate violation.
SUPPLEMENT NO. 58, Ord 45-15, ORD 9, 11, 14 &15 2013(ORD 42-13 1029-13)
March 2013 Boise Development Code
Page 152
CHAPTER 11-06: USE REGULATIONSUSE REGULATIONS 11-06-01. TABLE OF ALLOWED USES
Table 11-06.1 below lists the principal uses allowed within all base zoning districts. Each of the listed uses is defined in Chapter 11-12, Definitions.
1. TABLE ORGANIZATION
In Table 11-06.1, land uses and activities are classified into general “use categories” and specific “use types” based on common functional, product, or physical characteristics such as the type and amount of activity, the type of customers or residents, how goods or services are sold or delivered, and site conditions. This classification provides a systematic basis for assigning present and future land uses into appropriate zoning districts. This classification does not list every use or activity that may appropriately exist within the categories. Certain uses may be listed in one category when they may reasonably have been listed in one or more other categories. The use categories are intended as an indexing tool and are not regulatory.
2. EXPLANATION OF TABLE ABBREVIATIONS
A. Allowed Uses
“A” in a cell indicates that the use is allowed by right, without special conditions other than those imposed upon other uses by right in the district. Allowed uses are subject to all other applicable regulations of this Code.
B. Allowed Subject to Use-Specific Standards
“A*” in a cell indicates that the use is allowed by right, subject to administrative review to verify compliance with use-specific standards in this chapter. Use-specific standards are noted through a cross-reference in the last column of the table. Cross-references refer to use standards in this chapter. These standards apply in all districts unless otherwise specified.
C. Conditional Uses
(1) “C” in a cell indicates that in the respective zoning district the use is allowed only if reviewed and approved in accordance with the procedures of Section 11-03-04.6, Conditional Use Permits. Conditional Uses are subject to all other applicable regulations of this Code, including the use-specific standards in this chapter and the requirements of Chapter 11-08, Development and Design Standards.
(2) The “C” designation in Table 11-06.1 in a given district does not constitute an authorization or an assurance that such use will be permitted. Rather, each Conditional Use permit application shall be evaluated as to its probable effect on adjacent properties and surrounding areas, among other factors, and may be approved or denied as the findings indicate appropriate.
(3) (3) “C+” in a cell indicates that the use may only be approved as part of a larger mixed-use project comprised of principally allowed uses as described in Section 11-04-04.1.B.
D. Prohibited Uses
A blank cell indicates that the use is prohibited in the respective zoning district.
3. USE FOR OTHER PURPOSES PROHIBITED
Approval of a use listed in Table 11-06.1, and compliance with the applicable use-specific standards for that use, authorizes that use only. Development or use of a property for any other use not specifically allowed in Table 11-06.1 and approved under the appropriate process is prohibited.
CHAPTER 11-06: USE REGULATIONS
Section 11-06-01: Table of Allowed Uses
Subsection 4: Classification of New and Unlisted Uses
Supplement No 58 Ord-45-1, Ord-23-15, Amended; Ord-4-15, Amended)
March 2013 Boise Development Code
Page 153
4. CLASSIFICATION OF NEW AND UNLISTED USES
In order to provide for new types of land uses not listed in Table 11-06.1, a determination as to the appropriate classification of any new or unlisted form of land use shall be made. When application is made for a use category or use type that is not specifically listed in Table 11-06.1, the Director shall provide an interpretation as to the zoning classification into which such use should be placed. In making such interpretation, the Director shall consider its potential land use impacts, including but not limited to:
A. The nature of the use and whether it involves household living unit;
B. Sales;
C. Processing;
D. Type of product, storage and amount, and nature thereof;
E. Enclosed or open storage;
F. Anticipated employment;
G. Transportation requirements;
H. The amount of noise, odor, fumes, dust, toxic material, and vibration likely to be generated; and
I. General requirements for public utilities such as water and sanitary sewer.
CHAPTER 11-06: USE REGULATIONS
Section 11-06-01: Table of Allowed Uses
Subsection 5: Table of Allowed Uses
March 2013 Boise Development Code
Page 154
5. TABLE OF ALLOWED USES
Table 11-06.1: Allowed Uses
Use Category/Type
A
1
A
2
R
1A
R
1B
R
1C
R
1M
R
2
R
3
R
O
N
O
L
O
C
1
C
2
C
3
C
4
C
5 P C U H S M 1 M 2 M 4 T 1 T 2 Additional Regulations Single- and Two-family Living
Accessory Dwelling Unit
A*
A*
A*
A*
A*
A*
A*
A*
A
11-06-03.1.A
Caretaker Residence
A
A*
A*
A*
A*
A*
C
A*
A*
A
A
C
A
A
Dwelling, Single-family (including group homes)
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
C
C
A*
A*
A*
C
C
A
A
Dwelling, Duplex
A*
A*
A*
A*
A
A
C
C
A*
A*
A*
C
C
A
A
11-06-03.1.B
Enhanced Manufactured Home
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
C
C
C
C
A
A
11-06-03.1.C
Stock Manufactured Home
Manufactured Home/Manufactured Home Community
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
11-06-03.1.D Multi-family Living
Multi-family Building, 3-6 units, not to exceed 20 units per acre
C
C
C
A*
C
A
A
C
C
C
C
C
C
A
A
A
Multi-family Building, 7-20 units per acre
A
A
C
C
C
C
C
C
A
A
Multi-family Building, more than 20 units per acre, including High Rise
C
A
C
C
C
C
C
C
A
C
Planned Unit Development
PUDs
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
Group Living
Boarding or Rooming House / Bed & Breakfast
C
A
A
C
C
A*
C
C
C
A
C
C
Convalescent Home, Nursing Home
C
C
A
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
Fraternity or Sorority House
C
C
C
Halfway House
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
Public/ Institutional Uses Child and Adult Care
Adult Day Care
A*
C
A*
A*
C
C
11-06-04.1.A
CHAPTER 11-06: USE REGULATIONS
Section 11-06-01: Table of Allowed Uses
Subsection 5: Table of Allowed Uses
March 2013 Boise Development Code
Page 155
Table 11-06.1: Allowed Uses
Use Category/Type
A
1
A
2
R
1A
R
1B
R
1C
R
1M
R
2
R
3
R
O
N
O
L
O
C
1
C
2
C
3
C
4
C
5 P C U H S M 1 M 2 M 4 T 1 T 2 Additional Regulations
Child Care Home (1-6 children)
A
A*
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
11-06-04.1.B
Group Child Care Home (7-12 children)
A*
C
A*
A*
A*
A*
A*
A*
A*
A*
A*
A*
A*
A*
A*
A*
A*
A*
A*
11-06-04.1.B
Group Child Care Center (7-12 children)
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
A*
A*
A*
A*
C
C
C
A*
A*
C
C
11-06-04.1.B
Intermediate Child Care Center (13-20 children)
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
A*
C
A*
A*
C
C
C
A*
A*
C
C
11-06-04.1.B
Large Child Care Center (21+ children)
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
11-06-04.1.B
After-school Child Care in school building
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
11-06-04.1.B Communication Facility
Radio and Television Stations
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
A
A
C
C
A
Lattice/Transmission Tower
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
11-06-04.2.A
Microcell Wireless Communication Facility (WCF)
A*
A*
A*
A*
A*
A*
A*
A*
A*
A*
A*
A*
A*
A*
A*
A*
A*
A*
A*
A*
A*
A*
A*
A*
11-06-04.2.A
Monopole WCF, less than maximum height of zone district
A*
A*
C
C
C
C
C
A*
A*
A*
A*
A*
A*
A*
A*
A*
A*
A*
A*
A*
A*
A*
A*
A*
11-06-04.2.A
Monopole WCF, more than maximum height of zone district
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
11-06-04.2.A
Visually Unobtrusive/ Attached WCF
A*
A*
A*
A*
A*
A*
A*
A*
A*
A*
A*
A*
A*
A*
A*
A*
A*
A*
A*
A*
A*
A*
A*
A*
11-06-04.2.A Community Service
Cemetery
C
Club, Lodge, Social Hall
C
C
C
C
A
A
A
C
A
Government Buildings, non-industrial
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
C
Mortuary
C
C
C
C
C
C
A
A
C
A
C
Mausoleum
C
A
A
A
A
A
C
A
Recreation Center
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
Religious Institution
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
A
A
A
A
A
C
Uses Related to and Operated by a Religious Institution
C
C
C
C
C
C
Education
Library
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
A
A
A
C
A
A*
CHAPTER 11-06: USE REGULATIONS
Section 11-06-01: Table of Allowed Uses
Subsection 5: Table of Allowed Uses
March 2013 Boise Development Code
Page 156
Table 11-06.1: Allowed Uses
Use Category/Type
A
1
A
2
R
1A
R
1B
R
1C
R
1M
R
2
R
3
R
O
N
O
L
O
C
1
C
2
C
3
C
4
C
5 P C U H S M 1 M 2 M 4 T 1 T 2 Additional Regulations
School
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
A
A
C
11-06-04.3.A
Private Commercial School
C
C
C
C
C
C
C+
C
C
A
A
A
C
A
A
C
Trade or Vocational School
C
C
C
A
C
C
C
C
C
C
University
A
University – Uses within 50’ of campus boundary
C
University – Uses within 300’ of southern boundary between Denver and Capital
A*
Health Care A
Hospital
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
A
Laboratory, Medical/Dental
C
C
C
C
A
A
C
A
A
C
A
A
Medical Research Facility
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
A
C
A
A
Office, Medical
C
A
A
A
A
A
A
C
A
A
A
C
C
C
A
A
Parks, Recreation and Open Space
Forest Reserve or Recreation Area
A
A
Golf Course
A
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
11-06-04.4.A
Golf Driving Range
A
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
Park or Playground
A
A
C
C
C
C
C
C
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
Public Plaza or Open Space
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
Social Care
Food Kitchen
C
A
C
C
Shelter Home
C
C
C
C
Single Resident Occupancy Hotel
C
C
C
C
C
Transportation
Aircraft Landing Field
C
C
C
C
Bus Station
A
A
C
C
Transit Terminal, Trucking Terminal
A
A
A
C
C
Utility
Gas Fired Power Plant
C
C
Utility Facility, Minor C C A* A* A* A* A* A* A* A* A A A A C A* A A A A A
Utility Facility, Major
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
11-06-04.5.A
Public Service Poles 85 feet or under
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
CHAPTER 11-06: USE REGULATIONS
Section 11-06-01: Table of Allowed Uses
Subsection 5: Table of Allowed Uses
March 2013 Boise Development Code
Page 157
Table 11-06.1: Allowed Uses
Use Category/Type
A
1
A
2
R
1A
R
1B
R
1C
R
1M
R
2
R
3
R
O
N
O
L
O
C
1
C
2
C
3
C
4
C
5 P C U H S M 1 M 2 M 4 T 1 T 2 Additional Regulations
Public Service Poles over 85 feet
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
Utility Shop or Storage Facility C A C C A
CHAPTER 11-06: USE REGULATIONS
Section 11-06-01: Table of Allowed Uses
Subsection 5: Table of Allowed Uses
March 2013 Boise Development Code
Page 158
Table 11-06.1: Allowed Uses
Use Category/Type
A
1
A
2
R
1A
R
1B
R
1C
R
1M
R
2
R
3
R
O
N
O
L
O
C
1
C
2
C
3
C
4
C
5 P C U H S M 1 M 2 M 4 T 1 T 2 Additional Regulations Commercial Adult Uses
Bikini Bar
C
C
C
C
A*
A*
A*
11-06-05.1.A
Sexually Oriented Business
C
C
C
11-06-05.1.B Agriculture Uses
Agricultural Uses, Stables
C
A
Hog Raising, Stockyard , Feedlot
C
C
Slaughterhouse, Rendering Plant
C
C
Urban Farm
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
Animal-Related Business
Animal Daycare
C
C
C
C
A
Animal Hospital/ Clinic
C
C
C+
C
C
C
C
C
C
A
A
A
C
Boarding Kennel
C
C
C
C
C
C
A
A
C
Small Animal Grooming A A A C A Financial Service
Bank, Financial Institution (excluding drive-up)
C+
C
C
A
A
A
C
A
A
Food and Beverage Service
Coffee/Espresso Stand
A*
A*
A*
A*
A*
A*
A
Restaurant, no drive-up window C+ A A A C A A C
Tavern/ Lounge/Brew Pub/ over 300’ from Residential
C+
C
A
C
C
A
C
C
A
C
C
A
11-06-05.3.C
Tavern/Lounge/Brew Pub/ within 300’ of Residential
C
C
C
C
C
A
C
C
C
C
C
A
11-06-05.3.C Office
Office, Business or Professional
C
A
A
A
A
A
A
C
A
A
C
C
C
A
A
11-06-05.2.A Personal Services
Personal Service (1,000 sq. ft or less)
C+
A
A
A
A
A
C
A
Personal Service (greater than1,000 sq. ft.)
C
C
C
A
A
A
C
A
Laundry and Dry Cleaning Service
A
A
A
C
A
A
Massage Establishment
A
A
A
C
A
A
Photography Studio
C+
C
A
A
A
C
A
A
CHAPTER 11-06: USE REGULATIONS
Section 11-06-01: Table of Allowed Uses
Subsection 5: Table of Allowed Uses
March 2013 Boise Development Code
Page 159
Table 11-06.1: Allowed Uses
Use Category/Type
A
1
A
2
R
1A
R
1B
R
1C
R
1M
R
2
R
3
R
O
N
O
L
O
C
1
C
2
C
3
C
4
C
5 P C U H S M 1 M 2 M 4 T 1 T 2 Additional Regulations
Printing, Lithography, Publishing & Reproductions, Exclusive of Paper Manufacturing
C
C
C
A
A
C
A
A
A
A
C
A
A
Self-Service Laundry
C+
A
A
A
C
A
A
Tattoo Parlors and Body Piercing Establishments
C
A
A
C
A
A
Recreation and Entertainment
Concert Hall/Dance Hall
C
A
A
C
A
Concert Hall/Dance Hall (within 300’ of residential use or zone)
C
C
C
C
A
Firing Range, Indoor
C
A*
A*
C
Health Club
A
A
A
C
A
A
C
Indoor Recreation-Health Club or Similar Use within an Existing Building
A
A
A
C
A
A
A
A
Recreation, Commercial – Indoor
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
A
A
C
A
C
Recreation, Commercial – Outdoor
C
C
C
Social Event Center
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
A
A
A
C
A
A
C
11-06-05.3.C
Swimming Pool, Commercial
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
Swimming Lessons, Home Occupation
A*
A*
A*
A*
A*
A*
A*
Theater
C
A
A
C
A
C
Retail (Sales)
Auction Establishment
C
C
A
C
C
A
A
C
Building Materials, Hay, Grain, Bulk Garden Supply, Heavy Materials
C
A
C
C
A
A
C
Convenience Store with Gasoline Service
A*
A
A
C
C
Drive-Up Establishment
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
A
C
11-06-05.3.A
Grocery
C
A
A
A
C
A
A
Pharmacy
C+
C
C
A
A
A
C
A
A
A
Retail Store < 60,000 s.f. GFA
A
A
A
C
A
C
Retail Store > 60,000 s.f. GFA
A
A
C
A
C
CHAPTER 11-06: USE REGULATIONS
Section 11-06-01: Table of Allowed Uses
Subsection 5: Table of Allowed Uses
March 2013 Boise Development Code
Page 160
Table 11-06.1: Allowed Uses
Use Category/Type
A
1
A
2
R
1A
R
1B
R
1C
R
1M
R
2
R
3
R
O
N
O
L
O
C
1
C
2
C
3
C
4
C
5 P C U H S M 1 M 2 M 4 T 1 T 2 Additional Regulations
Shopping Center, Convenience Commercial
C+
A
A
A
C
A
A
Shopping Center, Neighborhood Commercial, less than 70,000 s.f.
C+
A
A
A
C
A
C
Shopping Center, Neighborhood Commercial greater than 70,000 s.f.
C
A
A
C
C
C
Shopping Center, Community Commercial
A
A
C
C
Shopping Center, Regional Commercial
C
C
C
C
Vehicles and Equipment
Auto Emission Van Test Site
A*
A*
A*
A*
A*
A*
A*
Automotive Sales Lot, surface
A
A
C
A
A
C
A
Battery Rebuilding
C
A
C
A
Car Wash
C
A
A
C
A
A
C
C
C
Heavy Machinery, Trailer, and Equipment Sales or Rental Lot
A
A
C
A
Motor Vehicle Repair, Minor
C
A
A
C
A
A
C
A
Motor Vehicle Repair, Major
C
A
C
A
A
C
A
Parking Lot, Commercial
C
C
C
A
A
C
C
Parking Lot, Off-Site Accessory C C C C C C C C C C A A A C
Parking Garage
C
C
C
C
A
A
C
A
C
C
Service Station
C
A
A
C
A
A
C
A
Visitor Accommodations
Hotel/Motel
C
C
C
C
A
A
C
A
C
C
Recreation Vehicle Park
C
C
C
C
Industrial Industrial Service
Battery Rebuilding Shop
C
A
C
A
Contractor Shop, Solid Fuel & Lumber
A
A
A
C
A
Laundry, Industrial
C
C
A
A
C
A
Newspaper & Printing Establishment
C
A
A
C
A
A
A
C
A
A
CHAPTER 11-06: USE REGULATIONS
Section 11-06-01: Table of Allowed Uses
Subsection 5: Table of Allowed Uses
March 2013 Boise Development Code
Page 161
Table 11-06.1: Allowed Uses
Use Category/Type
A
1
A
2
R
1A
R
1B
R
1C
R
1M
R
2
R
3
R
O
N
O
L
O
C
1
C
2
C
3
C
4
C
5 P C U H S M 1 M 2 M 4 T 1 T 2 Additional Regulations
Blacksmith Shop
A
A
C
Manufacturing and Production
Atmospheric Gas Production Plant
A
C
C
A
Brewery, Distillery, Winery
A
A
C
C
Bottling and Distribution Plant
C
C
A
A
C
A
Food Products, Dairy Products & Wholesale Bakeries
A
A
C
Lumbermill, Sawmill, Pulpmill
C
C
Tannery
C
C
C
Asphalt and concrete ready mix plant
C
A
C
C
Construction components, bricks, windows, concrete blocks
A
A
C
C
Wigs, hair products, toiletries and barbering supplies
A
A
C
A
A
Signs and other metal workings
A
A
C
A
Pharmaceuticals, cosmetics, orthopedics, prosthetic devices and medical and dental supplies
A
A
C
A
A
Architectural, drafting and artist supplies
A
A
C
A
A
Ceramics and other similar products
A
A
C
C
A
Costume jewelry, novelties, buttons, toys, miscellaneous clothing, accessories and notions
A
A
C
A
A
Mining and Extraction
Mining, Dredging, Loading & Hauling of Sand, Dirt, Gravel or Other Aggregate
C
C
C
C
C
Storage
Bulk Storage of Corrosive, Acid, Alkali, Explosive or Flammable Materials or Products
C
C
11-06-06.1.A
CHAPTER 11-06: USE REGULATIONS
Section 11-06-01: Table of Allowed Uses
Subsection 5: Table of Allowed Uses
March 2013 Boise Development Code
Page 162
Table 11-06.1: Allowed Uses
Use Category/Type
A
1
A
2
R
1A
R
1B
R
1C
R
1M
R
2
R
3
R
O
N
O
L
O
C
1
C
2
C
3
C
4
C
5 P C U H S M 1 M 2 M 4 T 1 T 2 Additional Regulations
Storage of Flammable Liquids or Gases Necessary to the Processes on the Premises
A*
A*
A*
A*
A*
Outdoor Storage
C
A*
C
C
C
C
11-06-06.1.B
Self-Service Storage
C
A
C
C
A
A
C
C
A
Wholesale Business
C
A
A
C
C
A
Warehouse and Freight Movement
Grain Elevator
C
A
C
A
C
Trucking Terminal
A
A
A
C
C
Truck Stop
A
Warehouse
A
C
A
A
A
C
A
A
Wholesale Business
A
C
A
A
C
C
A
Waste and Salvage
Composting Facility
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
11-06-06.2.A
Junkyard, Vehicle Wrecking
C
C
C
C
Recycling Drop-Off Center
A*
A*
A*
A*
A*
A*
A*
A*
A*
A*
A*
A*
A*
A*
A*
A*
A*
A*
A*
A*
11-06-06.2.B
Sanitary Landfill, Incineration
C
C
A
Accessory Uses
Accessory Structure, < 1,000 s.f.
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
A*
A*
A*
A*
A*
A*
A*
A*
A*
A
A
A*
A*
A*
A*
A*
Accessory Structure, > 1,000 s.f.
A
A*
A*
A*
A*
A*
A*
A*
A*
A*
A*
A*
A*
A*
A*
A*
A*
A*
A*
A*
A*
A*
A*
A*
Accessory Structure, > 2,500 s.f.
A*
C
A*
A*
A*
A*
A*
A*
A*
A*
A*
A*
A*
A*
A*
A*
A*
A*
A*
A*
A*
A*
A*
A*
Accessory Indoor Storage of Corrosive, Acid, Alkali, Explosive or Flammable Materials or Products
A
C
A
Accessory Outdoor Storage
C
A
C
A
A
C
C
A
Accessory Retail Sales & Service Related to the Primary Use
A
A
C
A
A
Backyard Composting
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
Beekeeping1
A
A
A
A
A
11-06-07.4.B
Administrative Home Occupation
A*
A*
A*
A*
A*
A*
A*
A*
A*
A
11-06-07.4.C(3)
Livestock & Animals
A
A
A*
A*
A*
A*
A*
A*
11-06-07.4.D
1 Beekeeping is a permitted accessory use to an Urban Farm in all districts.
CHAPTER 11-06: USE REGULATIONS
Section 11-06-01: Table of Allowed Uses
Subsection 5: Table of Allowed Uses
March 2013 Boise Development Code
Page 163
Table 11-06.1: Allowed Uses
Use Category/Type
A
1
A
2
R
1A
R
1B
R
1C
R
1M
R
2
R
3
R
O
N
O
L
O
C
1
C
2
C
3
C
4
C
5 P C U H S M 1 M 2 M 4 T 1 T 2 Additional Regulations
Recreation Vehicle Parking, Short Term
C
11-04-07.1
Uses Accessory to an Allowed Use
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
A*
A*
C
A*
A*
CHAPTER 11-06: USE REGULATIONS
Section 11-06-01: Table of Allowed Uses
Subsection 5: Table of Allowed Uses
March 2013 Boise Development Code
Page 164
Table 11-06.1: Allowed Uses
Use Category/Type
A
1
A
2
R
1A
R
1B
R
1C
R
1M
R
2
R
3
R
O
N
O
L
O
C
1
C
2
C
3
C
4
C
5 P C U H S M 1 M 2 M 4 T 1 T 2 Additional Regulations Temporary Uses
Construction Office, Temporary
A*
A*
A*
A*
A*
A*
A*
A*
A*
A*
A*
A*
A*
A*
A*
A*
A*
A*
A
A*
A*
A*
A*
A*
Sales Trailer
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
Seasonal Uses
A*
A*
A*
A*
A*
A*
A*
A*
A
A*
A*
A
A
A
A
A
A*
A*
A*
A*
A*
A*
A*
A*
Subdivision Office, Temporary
A*
A*
A*
A*
A*
A*
Temporary Parking Lots [3]
A*
A*
A*
A*
A*
A*
A*
A*
A*
A*
A*
A*
A*
A*
A*
A*
Temporary Voting Place
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
CHAPTER 11-06: USE REGULATIONS
Section 11-06-02: Use Standards, Generally
Subsection 1: Single and Two-family Living Uses
March 2013
Boise Development Code
Page 165
11-06-02. USE STANDARDS, GENERALLY
1. The follow sections are organized following the system of use categories and types in the Table of Allowed Uses. Except where otherwise stated, the use standards in this chapter are applicable in all zone districts, and apply unless a special exception is granted per Section 11-03-04.13, Exception. Unless specified, use standards are in addition to all generally applicable standards and approval criteria in this Code.
2. Use-specific standards provide additional requirements intended to mitigate the impacts of certain uses regardless of the underlying zoning district. Such standards may also allow a use to be permitted subject to conformance with the standards, rather than requiring a Conditional Use review. By making more uses permitted, but ensuring compatibility with surrounding areas and mitigating impacts through objective standards, the development review process is streamlined and made more predictable. 11-06-03. RESIDENTIAL USE STANDARDS
1. SINGLE AND TWO-FAMILY LIVING USES
A. Accessory Dwelling Unit
This section provides standards for an accessory dwelling unit to be added to a single-family dwelling. The purpose of accessory dwelling units is to provide more affordable housing; provide additional density with minimal costs and disruption to existing neighborhoods; allow individuals and smaller households to retain large houses as residences; and maintain the single-family dwelling character of the house. A house with an accessory dwelling unit can be distinguished from a duplex because its intensity of use is less, and it retains the appearance of a single-family dwelling. Accessory dwelling units are subject to specific approval criteria. The Director must make the following findings to approve an accessory dwelling unit.
(1) The accessory dwelling unit (ADU) must be not larger than ten percent of the lot area or 600 square feet, whichever is smaller, and shall not have more than one bedroom. Where practical, the ten percent size standard may be altered to accommodate logical expansions or internal conversions. Examples of this include, but are not limited to, the addition of a second floor to a detached garage or the separation of a basement as an accessory unit. Under no circumstances may the 600 square foot maximum be exceeded.
(2) The accessory dwelling unit must be created through one of the following:
(a) Internal conversion of an existing living area, basement, or attic. Conversion of a garage is not permitted unless required parking can be sited legally elsewhere on the property;
(b) An addition to the primary dwelling unit;
(c) An addition to an accessory structure such as a detached garage or shop;
(d) Construction of a new single-family detached house with an internal or detached accessory dwelling unit;
(e) Construction of a detached accessory unit; or
(f) Construction of an existing detached accessory structure.
CHAPTER 11-06: USE REGULATIONS
Section 11-06-03: Residential Use Standards
Subsection 1: Single and Two-family Living Uses
March 2013
Boise Development Code
Page 166
(3) The accessory dwelling unit must meet all of the dimensional requirements of the underlying zoning classification as well as the provisions of the International Building Code.
(4) The design of the accessory dwelling unit must be compatible with the existing neighborhood by taking into account height, bulk, and site location, and incorporating materials, colors, and a design motif that is compatible with and complements the architectural theme and style of the principle dwelling unit. The primary and the accessory dwelling units shall be designed to portray the character of a single family dwelling. Only one entrance to the structure may be located on the front building elevation of the house unless multiple entrances are already in existence.
(5) One parking space shall be provided for the accessory dwelling unit in addition to the existing minimum parking requirement for the primary dwelling. The driveway apron (driveway space within the front yard setback) may be utilized for this requirement. A waiver to the parking requirements may be granted by the Director subject to documentation that unusual circumstances of the occupancy will result in a reduced need for parking on the premises and will not negatively impact the neighborhood. The waiver and the circumstances allowing for the waiver will be documented in the deed restriction required in Section (8), below.
(6) At the time of application for an accessory unit, the applicant shall provide proof of owner occupancy of the premises.
(7) Ongoing owner occupancy of either the primary or the accessory dwelling unit is required and shall be enforced through recordation of a deed restriction to that effect with the County Recorder. (A temporary waiver of this requirement may be granted by the Director in the case of a documented need for the owner-occupant to leave the premises for up to one year due to employment, illness, or other circumstances.)
(8) Conditions of approval, as determined by the Director, shall be filed for record with the County Recorder as deed restrictions within 30 days of approval of the accessory dwelling unit. Evidence of such filing shall be submitted to the Director within 30 days of approval.
(9) Impact fees for accessory dwelling units shall be assessed at a portion of the standard single family residential fee as determined by the applicable agency.
(10) Notification of the adjacent property owners and occupants, including properties across streets and alleys, must be submitted with the application, stating the adjacent owners and occupants have been notified of the applicant’s intent to request or establish an accessory dwelling unit. Input from adjacent property owners should be considered by the applicant in the design and siting of an accessory dwelling unit in order to maintain privacy between adjacent housing units. Certified mail is an acceptable means of notifying adjacent owners and occupants.
B. Dwelling, Duplex
(1) Duplexes in the R-1A, R-1B, R-1C, and R-2 zone districts and BSN overlay zone district shall be subject to specific design criteria. The Director must make the following findings:
CHAPTER 11-06: USE REGULATIONS
Section 11-06-03: Residential Use Standards
Subsection 1: Single and Two-family Living Uses
March 2013
Boise Development Code
Page 167
(a) Site Size
The site is of sufficient size to meet all Code requirements for setbacks, parking, and open space.
(b) Floor Area Ratio
Floor area shall not exceed 55-percent of the total lot area. Enclosed garage space does not count toward floor area.
(c) Setbacks
i. Setbacks are as required by the zone except covered front porches of a minimum 5-foot depth may have a 10-foot front setback.
ii. Parking off the alley is allowed in the side and rear setbacks to within two feet of the side property lines when a solid fence is provided.
(d) Open Space
Each unit shall have a minimum of 375 square feet of private open space located in the rear yard. This open space shall have a minimum dimension of 15-feet and may include the required setbacks. Required open space shall not include driveways or parking areas. Only those areas on the lot having minimum width and length dimensions of five feet shall be used to comply with the open space standard. A minimum of 30 percent of the required open space shall consist of permeable ground surface with landscaping.
(e) Landscaped Areas
Front and street side setback areas shall be landscaped with naturally growing elements such as grass, trees, shrubs, and flowers. The use of logs, rocks, fountains, and similar accent elements may also be approved by the Director. The landscape plan must include an irrigation system. Xeriscape and low water use landscape is allowed.
Side yards, between the structure and a fenced property line, may be finished with decorative gravel, provided they are fenced and screened from the street view.
(f) Driveways
Individual driveways in front setback are vehicular access ways that are separated by other access driveways by a minimum of seven feet of landscaping. Individual driveways in the front setback shall not exceed a width of 20 feet.
(g) Right-of-Way Improvements
i. Irrigated landscaping, by agreement with the Ada County Highway District, is required in unpaved areas within the undeveloped street right-of-way. Perpendicular motor vehicle parking is prohibited within the public-right-of-way, and all motor vehicle parking is prohibited on undeveloped public right-of-way.
ii. All new dwellings shall provide a front sidewalk with curb and gutter, and, if applicable, a paved driveway apron that extends to the edge of street pavement of the roadway or alley is require; except that waivers or variations on some or all this requirement may be granted by the Director based upon site-specific conditions such as the lack of adjacent improvements and/or documented drainage problems that
CHAPTER 11-06: USE REGULATIONS
Section 11-06-03: Residential Use Standards
Subsection 1: Single and Two-family Living Uses
March 2013
Boise Development Code
Page 168
might result from the improvement of the roadway.
iii. If full right-of-way improvements are not feasible and ACHD determines that there is insufficient roadway pavement width for travel lanes with on-street parking, a non-landscaping ACHD approved shoulder shall be installed that is of the minimum width necessary to accommodate parallel parking. Landscaping shall be required to the edge of the parking shoulder.
(h) Design The design of the duplex is compatible with the existing neighborhood and adjoining properties by taking into account height, bulk, and site location. All street-facing facades shall include architectural treatments to provide visual interest. Architectural treatments used to achieve this may include, but are not limited to, dormers, bay windows, vertical windows, exterior window treatments, varying roof pitches, facade modulation, and a variety of colors, materials, and textures. Alternative approaches to façade design may include either creating the distinct appearance of two architecturally distinguishable dwelling units, or creating a more unified design that replicates the appearance of one single family home. At least 15 percent of the area of street-facing facades must be windows or doors. The calculation includes the area of all street facing windows and entrance doors that are within a 45 degree angle of the street. Garage doors are not included in the 15 percent calculation. The length of the garage wall or combination of garage walls facing the street shall not exceed 50 percent of the total length of the facade. Garages that are set back a minimum of five feet further than the street-facing wall of the dwelling unit may be up to 60 percent of the total length of the facade. Walls of side entry garages that utilize windows and other architectural means to provide visual interest are not included in this calculation. On interior lots at least one unit must have a main entrance with a door facing the street or at an angle of up to 45 degrees from the street. The main entrance shall include a covered porch that is a minimum of 25 square feet. If both of the units have an entrance facing the street, or more than one garage door is facing the street, the units must be modulated by a minimum of four feet. On corner lots each street facade shall have a main entrance with a door facing the street or at an angle of up to 45 degrees from the street. The main entrance shall include a covered porch that is a minimum of 25 square feet. Duplexes located on lots located at the corner of two local streets shall not have more than two parking spaces accessed from each street. Balconies shall be located in areas that will cause minimal interference with the privacy of neighboring properties.
CHAPTER 11-06: USE REGULATIONS
Section 11-06-03: Residential Use Standards
Subsection 1: Single and Two-family Living Uses
March 2013
Boise Development Code
Page 169
Two-story duplexes shall use one of the following methods to break up the building mass and provide visual interest to the side elevations:
A. The second story sidewalls shall have a minimum three-foot offset from the first story sidewalls. The second story shall be located furthest away from the side property lines; or
B. The building shall be set back eight feet from the interior side property line, with bay windows, pop-outs or other architectural appurtenances allowed at the five-foot setback line. In the R-1A and R-1B zone the building shall be set back 13 feet from the interior side property line, with bay windows, pop-outs, or other architectural appurtenances allowed at the ten-foot setback line.
C. If less than 1 ½ story homes exist on both sides of the duplex lot, the duplex shall meet the requirements of the substandard lot ordinance for 1-½ story construction.
Second story windows shall be designed to limit impact on the privacy of neighboring properties. This requirement does not supersede any Building Code requirements for windows for egress, natural light, etc. Duplexes on substandard original lots of record shall be subject to additional criteria per Section 11-06-03.3. One of the following must be true in the R-1A, R-1B and R-1C zones
A. The project constitutes infill;
B. Is located on a corner lot at the inside of the intersection of two local streets, with no more than two parking spaces accessed from each street; or
C. Is located on an arterial or collector street.
(2) Notification of the adjacent property owners and occupants, including properties across streets and alleys, must be submitted with the application, indicating they have been notified of the applicant’s intent to establish a duplex dwelling. Certified Mail is an acceptable means of notifying adjacent neighbors.
(3) The Director will review and make a determination of approval or denial within 15 calendar days of receipt of application and will submit the findings and conclusions, with required conditions, in writing to the applicant. A notice will be sent informing owners within 300 feet of the property of the decision of the Director and of their right to appeal the Director's decision pursuant to Section 11-03-03.9, Appeal.
Figure 11-06.1: Two-story duplex
CHAPTER 11-06: USE REGULATIONS
Section 11-06-03: Residential Use Standards
Subsection 1: Single and Two-family Living Uses
March 2013
Boise Development Code
Page 170
(4) Applications to build duplexes on contiguous lots in the R-1A, R-1B, and R-1C zones, that are planned and developed under single ownership or control, shall be reviewed by the PZC as a planned unit development.
C. Manufactured Home, Enhanced
An enhanced manufactured home use shall meet the following architectural and placement standards:
(1) Is multi-sectional and enclose a space of not less than 1,000 square feet.
(2) Is permanently affixed in accordance with the manufacturer's specifications with the running gear and towing hitch removed and set upon a foundation base having an anchoring system that is totally concealed under the structure.
(3) Is placed on a foundation base such that the finished floor area of the home is located not more than 12 inches above grade or 24 inches above grade if the home is over a basement. Graded earth shall not be closer than six inches to the siding of the home.
(4) Has a foundation fascia that is similar in appearance and durability to the masonry foundation or other foundation systems comparable with site-built dwellings and that is approved by the Director. It shall surround the entire perimeter of the structure and completely enclose the space between the siding and the finished grade.
(5) Has exterior siding and roofing that in material and appearance is similar to the exterior siding and roofing material commonly used on residential dwellings within the city or that is comparable to the predominant material used on surrounding dwellings.
(6) Has a pitched roof with a minimum pitch of 2:12 (two inches of rise to twelve inches of run).
(7) Eaves are optional with the exception that where eaves are consistent with the predominant construction of immediate surrounding dwellings, the home shall have an eave that projects a minimum of six inches along any wall that faces a street.
D. Manufactured Home Community and Mobile Home Park
(1) Improvement Requirements
(a) If the development is to be subdivided, streets shall be public and built in conformance with ACHD construction standards.
(b) Utilities shall be installed underground.
(c) Units within the community or park shall be connected to a wet line sewer and a central water facility.
(d) Public street lighting shall be designed, constructed, and dedicated to the city in accordance with the requirements of the Public Works Department.
(e) Provisions for drainage of the community or park and dwelling units therein shall be made in accordance with a drainage plan reviewed and approved by the Public Works Department.
CHAPTER 11-06: USE REGULATIONS
Section 11-06-03: Residential Use Standards
Subsection 1: Single and Two-family Living Uses
March 2013
Boise Development Code
Page 171
(f) Subdivisions shall comply with the requirements of the Chapter 11-09, Subdivision Standards, as shall conversions of approved land-lease developments to subdivisions.
(g) Screening and buffers shall be required along all perimeter property lines, except where the natural features of the land provide either a buffer or screen. The screen shall consist of continuous six-foot high fencing or landscaping, or combination thereof. Communities adjacent to arterial or collector streets shall be buffered with 30 feet of additional land area and landscaping for arterial streets, and 20 feet of additional land area and landscaping for collector streets.
(2) Dwelling Unit Design Features
To assure that manufactured homes and developments containing such homes are compatible with the existing neighborhood, it is appropriate that the city require additional design standards and features. Applicable design features include, but are not limited to, the following features:
(a) The dwelling unit has a roof pitch of two inches of rise to 12 inches of run (2:12).
(b) The dwelling unit has a foundation fascia that is similar in appearance and durability to the masonry foundation or other foundation systems comparable with site-built dwellings and approved by the Director. The foundation fascia shall surround the entire perimeter of the structure and completely enclose the space between the siding and the finished grade.
(c) The dwelling unit and attached accessory structure(s) have exterior siding and roofing that, in material and appearance is similar to the exterior siding and roofing material commonly used on residential dwellings within the city or that is comparable to the predominant material used on surrounding dwellings.
(d) The use of identical floor plans or unit designs on adjacent lots is discouraged. Variety in floor plans and unit designs is required.
(e) In the R-1M district, manufactured homes and developments containing such homes shall comply with all the design requirements of the R-1M district.
(3) Home Space or Lot Improvement Requirements
(a) Dimensions
There are no minimum dimensional requirements for lots or home spaces, however, lot and home spaces shall be shown to be large enough to accommodate the dwelling, required parking, usable private open space, area for accessory storage units, and building setbacks. In order to assure adequate lot or home space size, the application site plan shall delineate a conceptual arrangement of all city requirements within each lot or home space of the community. Provided that city code is complied with, actual placement of these features may vary from the approved conceptual arrangement, as deemed appropriate by the Director.
(b) Private Open Space
A minimum of 400 square feet of usable private open space, being 15 feet wide at its narrowest dimension, shall be provided within each lot or home space's side or rear yard area. This requirement may be reduced to no less than 200 square feet if the difference is placed in common facilities provided for the community as a whole.
CHAPTER 11-06: USE REGULATIONS
Section 11-06-03: Residential Use Standards
Subsection 2: Multi-family Living Uses
March 2013
Boise Development Code
Page 172
(c) Parking Spaces
A minimum of two off-street parking spaces per dwelling unit shall be provided within the community. Residential parking spaces shall not be located further than 600 feet from the dwelling unit. Tandem parking is allowed if provided on the lot or home space.
(d) Setback and Unit Spacing Requirements Periphery Setbacks
Along the periphery of the development, yards shall be provided as required by the regulations of the district in which the development is located. Where development already exists at the periphery, the yard setbacks shall be matched. For example, side yards shall be provided adjacent to side yards, rear yards adjacent to rear yards, and front yards opposite front yards. Internal Front and Street Side Yard
The unit shall be setback a minimum of ten feet from the street as measured from the back of sidewalk, or back of curb in cases where no sidewalks are planned. The front yard setbacks of adjacent units are required to vary by no less than three feet, and shall be noted or delineated on the approved site plan. Street side yard setbacks shall be a minimum of ten feet. Required parking
Parking shall be setback a minimum of ten feet from the back of sidewalk or back of curb in cases where no sidewalks are planned.
(e) Interior Side and Rear Yards
In order to maximize yard area utility, side and rear yard setbacks may be zero feet. A minimum separation of ten feet between dwelling units is required. Detached accessory structures shall comply with the standard setback requirements of this Code.
2. MULTI-FAMILY LIVING USES
These standards shall apply to all new multi-family development, except where specified below. They are in addition to the Citywide Design Standards and Guidelines and the Downtown Design Standards and Guidelines.
A. Density Bonus (units/acre)
The following density provisions are in addition to those contained in Table 11-04.3—Dimensional Standards for Residential Districts.
(1) Transit Incentive
Parcels adjacent to an arterial roadway with existing or planned transit service shall be eligible for higher maximum densities by Conditional Use Permit as follows:
(a) R-1A and R-1B: 8 units/acre.
(b) R-1C: 12 units/acre.
CHAPTER 11-06: USE REGULATIONS
Section 11-06-03: Residential Use Standards
Subsection 2: Multi-family Living Uses
March 2013
Boise Development Code
Page 173
(c) R-2: 20 units/acre.
B. Building Setbacks
The following setbacks shall apply to multi-family development in any zone, unless a lesser setback already applies:
(1) Minimum Front and Street Side: 15 feet (Living Space)
(2) Balconies and porches may encroach up to 5 feet into front and street side setbacks
C. Housing Types: Development Level Mix
Multi-family developments on parcels between two and four acres shall incorporate at least two housing types. Projects on more than four acres require at least three housing types. Housing types include (See Figure 1.):
(1) Small-lot single-family
(2) Duplex
(3) Triplex
(4) Four-plex
(5) Townhome
(6) Apartment (5 or more units)
(7) An alternative housing type as approved by the Director.
(8) A distinct building model may be provided as a substitute for one of the required housing types. A distinct building model can be easily distinguished from others through the use of at least two of the following:
(a) A variation in length and footprint of 30 percent or more
(b) A distinct variation in color and materials
(c) A distinct variation in floor plans
CHAPTER 11-06: USE REGULATIONS
Section 11-06-03: Residential Use Standards
Subsection 2: Multi-family Living Uses
March 2013
Boise Development Code
Page 174
Figure 1—Representative housing types.
CHAPTER 11-06: USE REGULATIONS
Section 11-06-03: Residential Use Standards
Subsection 2: Multi-family Living Uses
March 2013
Boise Development Code
Page 175
D. Housing Types: Block Level Mix
No one housing type shall occupy more than 80 percent of any block face or street frontage exceeding 500 feet in length. Single-family dwellings are exempt from this requirement.
E. Transition Standards-Height and Building Mass
Multi-family development adjacent to single-family residential (either existing homes or vacant single-family zoning districts) shall:
(1) Concentrate tallest buildings or tallest portions of buildings along street frontages or, away from adjacent single-family homes.
(2) Provide gradual decreases in building height so that new structures are comparable in scale to adjacent single-family. Comparable scale means new structures do not exceed the height of adjacent dwellings by more than one story or 12 feet (within 15 feet of a shared lot line).
(3) These standards do not apply when:
(a) The adjacent property is designated High Density, Commercial, or Office on the Land Use Map of Blueprint Boise;
(b) Portions of an adjacent parcel are occupied by more than two dwelling units;
(c) The adjacent property is occupied by a non-conforming use; or
(d) The property is identified as “Significant New Development/ Redevelopment” on the Areas of Stability and Change Map of Blueprint Boise.
F. Parking Credits and Reductions
Parking credits and reductions for multi-family development may be granted by the Director as follows:
(1) On-Street Parking
The minimum parking requirement shall be reduced by one space for each on-street space located immediately adjacent to the development parcel.
(2) Transit-Supportive Development
The minimum parking required for developments within 1,320 feet of an existing or planned transit line shall be reduced by ten percent.
(3) Vertical Mixed-Use Development
The minimum parking required for multi-family development incorporated as part of a vertical mixed-use development shall be reduced by ten percent.
Figure 2—Block level mix of housing types.
CHAPTER 11-06: USE REGULATIONS
Section 11-06-03: Residential Use Standards
Subsection 2: Multi-family Living Uses
March 2013
Boise Development Code
Page 176
(4) Affordable Housing
The minimum parking required for multi-family development shall be reduced by ten percent for each structure where at least 80 percent of the units meet the definition of affordable housing provided in Section 11-01-10.8.
(5) Podium or Structured Parking
The minimum parking required where at least 60 percent of required spaces are in tuck-under garages, podium, or a multi-level structure shall be reduced by 25 percent.
(6) Enclosed, Secure Bicycle Parking
The minimum parking required shall be reduced by ten percent if fully enclosed, covered, secure bicycle parking is provided that exceeds the number required in 11-07-03.3.B by at least 50 percent. The minimum required bicycle spaces shall remain accessible to the public.
(7) Maximum Reduction Allowed
Total reductions to the minimum off-street parking requirements of Section 11-07-03 of the Boise Development Code shall not exceed 30 percent.
G. Within the R-3 district, a multi-family use is allowed by right, subject to the applicable standards of this Code, within in a single structure.
(1) Development of two or more multi-family structures per lot or of more than 20 units per acre must be submitted as a planned development conditional use application. In reviewing such application, the PZC must establish findings of fact as detailed in Section 11-03-04(6), for conditional uses and Section 11-03-04(7) for planned unit developments. In addition, the use shall comply with the following standards:
(a) The minimum usable open space or recreational space requirement shall be equal to 30 percent of the land area occupied by residential structures. For the purpose of this section, usable open space or recreational space shall include landscaped areas, court yards, balconies, patios, sun decks, pedestrian walkways, playground areas, swimming pools, and all other exterior or interior recreational areas. Such areas must be readily accessible to the occupants of the building. Usable open space or recreational space shall not include driveways, parking areas, or loading areas. The open space or recreational space requirement may be reduced for projects that abut open space or recreational facilities;
(b) Building and site design shall provide for a transition into the surrounding neighborhood to ensure compatibility. Factors to be considered are setbacks, building height, building materials, bulk, roof design, parking area locations, landscaped area locations, and other factors necessary to ensure adequate transition;
(c) The pedestrian circulation system shall be integrated into the surrounding neighborhood and shall provide connections from dwellings to parking areas, open space, or recreational facilities and any shared facilities. Sidewalks shall be of adequate width to accommodate the expected pedestrian traffic in high use areas;
(d) Natural features, views, and other potential site amenities should be retained and incorporated into the design;
CHAPTER 11-06: USE REGULATIONS
Section 11-06-03: Residential Use Standards
Subsection 2: Multi-family Living Uses
March 2013
Boise Development Code
Page 177
(e) Principal buildings connected by a breezeway, covered hallway, or similar protected walkway shall be treated as separate buildings on separate zoning lots for setback or spacing purposes.
(f) Surface parking shall be designed to avoid large uninterrupted parking areas. Parking areas and dwellings shall be located to minimize walking distances. The PZC may require that all or any portion of the on-site parking be provided below grade (under building or plaza areas) as a means of increasing the size of usable open space, reducing the paved surface area, and improving the overall design and appearance.
(2) In the R-1M District, multiple dwellings in a single building are allowed only in townhouse or row house design, with one dwelling per lot and with the dwellings attached at the common lot line.
H. High Rise
In the Multiple Family (R-3), Limited Office (L-O), and Commercial (C-1, C-2, and C-3) zoning districts in the vicinity of Boise State University, the minimum lot area, maximum density, and maximum height limits for multiple family dwellings may be altered to allow for High Rise Multi-family Buildings if authorized by a conditional use permit subject to the following conditions and restrictions.
(1) Density increases may be granted in the area generally described as an area of land located in the Northeast Quarter of Section 16, East half of Section 9, South half of Section 10, Northwest Quarter of Section 14, North half of Section 15 Township 3 North, Range 2 East of the Boise Meridian, Ada County, Idaho, more particularly described as follows: Beginning at the center line of South Division Street and West Beacon Street; thence westerly along the center line of West Beacon Street to center line of West Boise Avenue; thence northwesterly along West Boise Avenue to a point approximately 150.00 feet, more or less, northwesterly of the prolongation of the northwesterly right-of-way line of South Martha Street; thence South 29°52'00" West, 121.00 feet, more or less, to a point separating the R-3D and R-1C Zoning District; thence North 68°07'00" West, 284½ feet, more or less, to a point separating the R-3D and R-1C Zoning District; thence North 72°10'00" West, 109.00 feet, more or less, to the prolongation of center line of vacated South First Street; thence southwesterly along the center line of said vacated South First Street to the center line of South Federal Way; thence northwesterly along the center line of South Federal Way to the South Capital Boulevard and West Crescent Rim Drive intersection; thence northwesterly along the center line of West Crescent Rim Drive to a point 215.00, more or less, Northwesterly of the prolongation of South Ruby Street, said point being on the Northerly Section line of Section 16, Township 3 North, Range 2 East of the Boise Meridian, Ada County, Idaho and the southerly boundary of Ann Morrison Park; thence easterly, northeasterly, northwesterly along the meandering westerly boundary line of Ann Morrison Park to the south shore line of the Boise River; thence southeasterly along the south shore line of the Boise River to the prolongation of center line of South Division Street; thence southerly along the prolongation and center line of South Division Street to the center line of West Beacon Street, the Point of Beginning.
CHAPTER 11-06: USE REGULATIONS
Section 11-06-03: Residential Use Standards
Subsection 3: Substandard Original Lots of Record
March 2013
Boise Development Code
Page 178
(2) New construction in neighborhoods determined by the HPC to be historically sensitive must be architecturally compatible with the adjacent and surrounding neighborhood.
(3) Sites within districts designated on the National Register of Historic Places or on sites that have been designated by Boise City as City Historic Districts, landmarks, or properties shall be reviewed by the HPC prior to any granting of a density increase.
(4) The maximum density granted by a density increase shall not exceed one dwelling unit per 500 square feet of lot area.
(5) The minimum average lot width shall be 60 feet, except that corner lots shall be at least 70 feet and shall provide a minimum street frontage of not less than 30 feet.
(6) The floor area ratio of all buildings, structures, and required off-street parking area, excluding below grade parking, shall not be a higher number than 1.5.
(7) No building or structure shall have a height in excess of 45 feet.
3. SUBSTANDARD ORIGINAL LOTS OF RECORD
Any substandard original lots of record, as defined in this Code, may be utilized for a permitted use if all other requirements of this Code are met. Residential development of substandard original lots of record is subject to Section 11-07-02.1.A of this Code.
A. Purpose and Intent
To ensure that new development is compatible in character and scale with established housing.
B. Applicability
(1) Lots in the R-1A, R-1B, or A zones, having a lot area of less than 5,000 square feet or a width of less than 50 feet, or in the case of a corner lot, a lot area of less than 7,000 square feet or a width of less than 70 feet; and
(2) All substandard lots of record in the R-1C, R-2, R-3, R-O, N-O, L-O, C-1, C-2, and C-3 districts.
(3) The Historic Preservation Commission may modify the regulations for substandard lots in order to issue a certificate of appropriateness.
(4) These standards apply to all new dwellings and remodels of existing dwellings.
(5) They do not apply to lots that are part of a planned unit development and they do not take precedence over any note recorded on a subdivision plat.
C. General Provisions
(1) Minimum Lot Dimensions
a. A minimum lot width of for a single-family residence is 25-feet for interior lots and 35-feet for corner lots when alley access is available.
b. A minimum lot width for a single-family residence without alley access is 37.5.
c. A minimum lot width for a duplex is 36-feet for interior lots, 46-feet for corner lots and a minimum lot size of 2,000 square feet per dwelling is required when alley access is available.
CHAPTER 11-06: USE REGULATIONS
Section 11-06-03: Residential Use Standards
Subsection 3: Substandard Original Lots of Record
March 2013
Boise Development Code
Page 179
(2) Design Review
A development containing three or fewer dwelling units on up to three contiguous substandard original lots of record shall be subject to minor design review per Section 11-03-04.12.B(2). Four or more dwelling units and units with front loading garages shall require design review by the DRC as provided for in Section 11-03-04.12.B(2) and shall also comply with the standards and guidelines in this Section.
(3) Application Requirements
Prior to application submittal all new applications or modifications to existing applications must hold a neighborhood meeting in conformance with Section 11-03-04.12.B(2).
D. Development Standards
(1) Setbacks
(a) Front
The front yard setback for livable space and porches shall be within five feet of the average of the front yard setbacks of adjoining properties. However, in no case shall the setback be less than ten feet or more than 20 feet. The front minimum and maximum setback for parking is 20 feet. Maximum setbacks are required in order to provide a visual and physical relationship to the street and retain room for an open back yard area. Lots developed simultaneously shall provide varying setbacks.
Side
Interior side setbacks shall be as per the zone and street side yard setbacks shall be 15 feet for livable space and 20 feet for parking that takes access from a public street or 15 feet for parking that takes access to the alley, unless one of the following is applied: Common Lot Line Attached Units
When the building is located on a common lot line, the remaining side yard setback shall be per the zone.
Detached Units on Contiguous Lots
When two or more single family units are proposed on contiguous 25-foot lots, the interior side yard setbacks may be reduced to three feet interior to the development, provided the setbacks exterior to the development adhere to the setbacks required by the zone.
Figure 11-06.2: Common lot line attached units
CHAPTER 11-06: USE REGULATIONS
Section 11-06-03: Residential Use Standards
Subsection 3: Substandard Original Lots of Record
March 2013
Boise Development Code
Page 180
Two-story Attached Buildings in the R-1C Zone
Two-story attached buildings in the R-1C zone shall have a minimum setback of five feet for the first story and a minimum of eight feet for the second story from the interior side property line, with bay windows, pop-outs or other architectural appurtenances allowed at the five-foot setback line. All other zones must meet their side setback requirements. (See also Section 11-06-03.1.B, Duplex.)
Garage
A single story detached garage no larger than 500 square feet, accessed from an alley, may have a three-foot interior side setback. The minimum exterior dimensions for a two car garage shall be 19 feet by 20 feet.
(b) Rear
Rear yard setback shall be as required by the zoning district in which the substandard lot is situated.
(2) Building Height
Building height (to the ridgeline) shall not exceed the width of the lot or the maximum height allowed by the zone, whichever is most restrictive.
(3) Building Size
Residential floor area shall not exceed 55 percent of the effective lot area on lots.
Figure 11-06.3: Detached units on continuous lots
Figure 11-06.4: Two-story attached units on contiguous lots
CHAPTER 11-06: USE REGULATIONS
Section 11-06-03: Residential Use Standards
Subsection 3: Substandard Original Lots of Record
March 2013
Boise Development Code
Page 181
(4) Private Open Space
All lots must provide a minimum of 375 square feet of private open space in the rear yard. This open space must be configured as a minimum of 15 feet by 25 feet and can include the required setbacks. A minimum of 10 feet by 15 feet of that space shall be open to the sky. Covered rear porches are allowed to be calculated as part of the private open space area.
(5) Right-of-way Improvement
(a) All new dwellings (excluding remodels) shall provide a 5-foot concrete sidewalk with curb and gutter, and, if applicable, a paved driveway apron that extends to the edge of street pavement of the roadway or alley will also be required; except that waivers or variations on some or all of this requirement may be granted by the Director based upon site-specific conditions such as the lack of adjacent improvements and/or documented drainage problems that might result from the improvement of the roadway.
(b) Dirt or gravel strips in the front yard or undeveloped street right-of-way shall not be permitted. Irrigated landscaping shall be provided in these areas through license agreements with ACHD. Bonding for landscape improvements may be allowed based on weather related constraints. If ACHD denies the necessary license agreement, the requirement for landscaping shall be waived.
(c) If full right-of-way improvement are not feasible and ACHD determines that there is insufficient roadway pavement width for travel lanes with on-street parking, a non-landscaped, ACHD approved shoulder shall be installed that is of the minimum width necessary to accommodate parallel parking. Landscaping shall be required to the edge of the parking shoulder.
(d) All right-of-way improvements, license agreements, and/or bonding shall be completed prior to issuance of a Residential Certificate of Occupancy permit for the structure.
(6) Landscaping Standards
A landscape plan shall be required for each new development. All areas not developed with structures, driveways, parking lots, private streets, pathways, patios, and similar useable areas shall be landscaped.
(a) The landscaping should accomplish the following objectives: Shading of parking areas and walkways; Ground cover consisting of predominantly live planted materials; Provision of useable hardscape features (such as pavers, planters, stonework, decks, etc.) may be allowed up to 25 percent; Erosion control; and Attractive streetscapes and common areas.
(b) Plastic or other artificial materials are not allowed.
(c) Xeriscape plans that are consistent with Public Works standards shall be considered acceptable.
(d) The landscape plan shall include an irrigation system.
CHAPTER 11-06: USE REGULATIONS
Section 11-06-03: Residential Use Standards
Subsection 3: Substandard Original Lots of Record
March 2013
Boise Development Code
Page 182
(7) Parking
(a) Each dwelling shall be provided with two off-street parking spaces.
(b) Vehicular access and parking shall be provided according to the following standards: If alley access is available, all access shall be taken from the alley. Two spaces shall be provided with 22 feet of backup space as per Table 11-07.03, Minimum Standards for Parking Lot Design. If alley access is not available a two car attached garage shall be provided. The design shall include varied rooflines, dormers within the roofline or other architectural treatments that will avoid the appearance of garage domination. There shall be a setback of 20 feet to the face of the garage. Driveways for a two car attached garage may not exceed 20 feet in width. The use of ten-foot wide shared driveway providing access to rear yard garages attached with a common wall on the property line is allowed and encouraged for contiguous lots of 35 feet in width or greater.
(8) Alternative Building Arrangements
(a) Attached Units
Attaching single family units in multiples of two or three on a common lot line is encouraged as a means of creating more substantial structures that will be imitative of standard width single-family homes. Such units remain subject to the general design criteria stated herein and do not require a planned unit development application.
(b) Zero Lot Line Option
If multiple single-family detached units are to be constructed on contiguous lots, the applicant may request zero lot line development provided that the full required setback from adjacent non-project lots can be adhered to. Such units remain subject to the general design criteria stated in subsection 5, below, and do not require a planned unit development application and may be approved by design review per Section 11-06-03.1.B, Design Review.
(c) Additional Requirements for Attached Units Attached buildings shall be constructed to comply with townhouse construction standards per the Building Code. The applicant or builder shall obtain the Legal Department’s approval of easement agreement(s) for the use and maintenance of common facilities such as driveways, parking sites, and common party walls. The Legal Department must approve easement agreements within ten calendar days of submission. Any revised easement agreement shall be considered a new submission. Said agreement shall be recorded in the official records of Ada County prior to submission of plans for a building permit. Adjustments to lot lines and reduction in the number of lots within the same parcel are subject to review and approval pursuant to all applicable city subdivision and zoning regulations. The applicant shall obtain approval from the city and record any lot line adjustments or reduction in lots with the County Recorder prior to submission for a building permit.
CHAPTER 11-06: USE REGULATIONS
Section 11-06-03: Residential Use Standards
Subsection 3: Substandard Original Lots of Record
March 2013
Boise Development Code
Page 183
E. Design Guidelines
In addition to the development standards above, the general design guidelines below shall also apply to developments on substandard lots of record. Design review shall take into account the location and design of adjacent buildings, landscaping and right-of-way improvements, and shall apply the following criteria as appropriate:
(1) Number of Stories
(a) Single story and one and one-half story structures ae the preferred height for all homes on substandard lots of record.
(b) Full-length two- story buildings are allowed only when both adjacent properties are developed with full two-story structures.
(c) Exceptions
a. One and a one-half story structures with a daylight basement that is sunk into the ground a minimum of four feet and the building height is a maximum of 18-feet to the midline of the roof.
Figure 11-06.5: Full-length two-story building
Figure 11-06.6: One and one-half story structure with basement
CHAPTER 11-06: USE REGULATIONS
Section 11-06-03: Residential Use Standards
Subsection 3: Substandard Original Lots of Record
March 2013
Boise Development Code
Page 184
b. One and a one-half story structures with the second story contained within a pitched roofline located within a front gable and the building height is a maximum of 18-feet to the midline of the roof. The exterior second floor wall height shall be no greater than 2-feet six inches in height and any dormers on the side of the structure shall be no greater than 8-feet in width.
c. Partial two-story structures may be allowed when they do not adversely impact the adjoining properties. The circumstances to be considered shall include the size and height of the adjacent dwelling units, excessive shading of adjacent units, privacy impacts on adjacent yards, and the mass, height, window placement, and design of the building. Examples may include:
i. The second story is contained within a pitched roofline located within a front gable and the building height is a maximum of 18-feet to the midline of the roof. The exterior second floor wall height shall be no greater than 2-feet six-inches in height. A maximum of two dormers may be located on each side of the structure and shall be no greater than 8-feet in width or:
Figure 11-06.7: One and one-half story structure within a pitched roofline
Figure 11-06.8: Partial two-story structure within a pitched roofline with side dormers
CHAPTER 11-06: USE REGULATIONS
Section 11-06-03: Residential Use Standards
Subsection 3: Substandard Original Lots of Record
March 2013
Boise Development Code
Page 185
ii. The second story is contained within a pitched roofline located within a side gable and the building height is a maximum of 25-feet to the peak of the roof and 18-feet to the midline of the roof. Any dormers on the front or rear of the structure shall be no greater than 10-feet in width or:
iii. The second story setbacks are increased by a minimum of three feet beyond the minimum front, side and rear setbacks required for the zone.
Figure 11-06.9: Partial two-story structure within a pitched roofline with front and rear dormers
Figure 11-06.10: Partial two-story structure with additional setbacks
CHAPTER 11-06: USE REGULATIONS
Section 11-06-03: Residential Use Standards
Subsection 3: Substandard Original Lots of Record
March 2013
Boise Development Code
Page 186
(2) Orientation
All buildings shall be oriented towards a public street, except when buildings cannot be oriented to the street due to inadequate street frontage. In this case, buildings should be oriented towards a private street or lane conforming to city standards.
(3) Front Facade Design Requirements
(a) Homes should have a front door that faces the street. When a unit is built on a corner lot, the main entrance shall have the door facing the dominant street.
(b) A prominent front porch at least six feet in depth and with at least 25 percent of the front face facade comprised of windows may be considered in lieu of a street-facing front door. For homes with front-loaded garages, a garage door shall not count toward window/opening requirements. The garage door shall also have design elements such as: panels, windows, trim features, cross members, or other features as determined appropriate by design review.
(c) Non-attached dwelling units should provide a facade design that differs from the facade design on adjacent units; however, articulated designs may repeat on non-contiguous lots. Required facade elements shall, in addition to complying with design guideline in (1), 0 and (3), above, include a minimum of two of the following: multi-paned windows, varied roof lines, bay windows, wainscot, covered front door, or other elements as approved by design review that create a unique facade.
(d) Attached units should provide modulation and architectural design features to prevent flat facade wall planes.
(e) Building design should incorporate materials such as brick, stone, stucco, tile, and wood for 35 percent of the facade and second story elements. The presence of such materials on nearby homes should be reviewed as a guide for appropriate materials to be used on the new dwelling.
(f) Rain gutters shall be provided on the side elevations of all structure to aid in site drainage. Gutters shall direct water to the front or rear of the lot.
(4) Driveways
Where front yard driveways are permitted for access to a single garage, the driveway may be designed with two concrete wheel strips or grass pavers separated by vegetation.
F. Waivers
The applicant may request a waiver from one or more of the standards listed above. All requests for waivers shall be heard by the DRC. The waiver shall not be considered a right or special privilege but may be granted to an application that can meet the following:
(1) Granting of the waiver will not be in conflict with the intent of this ordinance and shall not negatively impact the existing neighborhood and shall enhance the overall design quality of the project; and
(2) There is an exceptional circumstance relating to the design or configuration of the property, which is not generally applicable to other properties or otherwise anticipated by the standards in the district; and
(3) Granting of such relief will not be materially detrimental to the public health, safety or welfare, or injurious to the property, improvements or the quiet enjoyment of the surrounding properties and neighborhood.
CHAPTER 11-06: USE REGULATIONS
Section 11-06-04: Public/Institutional Use Standards
Subsection 1: Child and Adult Care Uses
March 2013
Boise Development Code
Page 187
11-06-04. PUBLIC/INSTITUTIONAL USE STANDARDS
1. CHILD AND ADULT CARE USES
A. Adult Day Care
An adult day care use shall:
(1) Provide adequate access for physically disabled patrons of the facility.
(2) If located on an arterial or collector street, provide for an on-site patron pick-up area designed to prevent vehicles from backing onto the street (backing into an alley is permissible).
(3) Meet the occupancy requirements of the Fire Department.
(4) Obtained all required licenses from the city or the State of Idaho.
B. Child Care
A Child Care Use, including the uses Child Care Home, Group Child Care Home, Child Care Center, Intermediate Child Care Center, and Large Child Care Center, shall comply with the standards in this Section. Notification to the adjacent property owners and occupants, including properties across streets and alleys, must be submitted with the application, stating they have been notified of the applicant’s intent to operate a child care facility on site. Certified mail is an acceptable means of notifying adjacent neighbors.
(1) Minimum Criteria for all Child Care Uses
Every child care use shall meet the following standards:
(a) Provides a minimum outdoor play area of 100 square feet per child on-site. This area requirement may be waived or modified if appropriate open space with connecting public sidewalks or paths are located near the facility and that open space can be used by the children as a play area; or the program of the facility is such that the size of a group of children using the play area at any one time conforms to the 100 square feet per child criteria.
(b) Provides a minimum of 35 square feet of indoor gross floor area per child.
(c) Secures and maintains a child care license from Boise City and the State of Idaho.
(d) Complies with the regulations where applicable by law or jurisdiction of the Fire Department and the health inspector.
(e) Provides adequate lot size for parking, child pick-up area, play area, screening and setbacks. In the case of a Child Care Home, the Director shall determine needed improvements.
(2) Additional Criteria for a Child Care Home
(a) The use shall not change the structural character of the dwelling.
(b) A maximum of one employee is allowed.
(3) Additional Criteria for Child Care Use by Type
In addition to the applicable criteria above, a child care use shall be subject to additional standards as indicated in Table 11-06.2.
CHAPTER 11-06: USE REGULATIONS
Section 11-06-04: Public/Institutional Use Standards
Subsection 1: Child and Adult Care Uses
March 2013
Boise Development Code
Page 188
Table 11-06.2: Additional Criteria for Child Care Uses by Type Criteria Child Care Home (1-6 Children) Group Child Care Home (7-12 Children) Child Care Center (7-12 Children) Intermediate Child Care Center (13-20 Children) Large Child Care Center (21 or more Children)
The use shall provide for an on-site child pick-up area designed to ease the flow of traffic and to prevent vehicles from backing onto the roadway (backing in an alley is permissible).
Applicable if located on a collector or arterial street
Applicable if located on a collector or arterial street
Applicable
Applicable
Applicable
Allowable signage shall be non-illuminated and as indicated. The applicant's proposal for signage should be submitted and considered during the review process.
One 12 sq. ft. attached sign
One 12 sq. ft. attached sign
One 12 sq. ft. attached sign
One 20 sq. ft. attached sign
As allowed by applicable zoning district
Minimum parking to be provided shall be as indicated.
1 off-street space per employee.
1 off-street space per employee
1 off-street space per employee.
1 off-street space per 10 children, with a minimum of 2 spaces, except in a parking reduction district, and then as indicated for the district.
Facility location shall be as indicated.
In the operator's principal residence, and must be incidental to the primary use of the dwelling as a residence.
In the operator’s principal residence, and must be incidental to the primary use of the dwelling as a residence
On the edge of a neighborhood and not in the center.
On the edge of a neighborhood and not in the center.
On a collector or arterial street; or if for school age children, within 300' of the school grounds; or in a public assembly structure.
(4) Discretionary Conditions for Approval
The Director may condition approval of a child care use on the following conditions to protect adjacent properties from adverse impacts or to protect the health, safety, and welfare of the children:
(a) Fencing or landscape screening of the facility to protect adjacent properties from activities of the facility, or to protect the children from adverse activities such as traffic on arterial or collector streets or intersections, or to screen adjacent properties;
(b) Additional setback from any property line to play areas to protect adjacent properties or to protect children from busy streets, irrigation ditches, animal pastures, and other similar conflicts; or
(c) Any other conditions deemed necessary by the Director to protect the health, safety, and welfare of the children or to protect adjacent property owners from adverse impacts.
CHAPTER 11-06: USE REGULATIONS
Section 11-06-04: Public/Institutional Use Standards
Subsection 2: Communication Uses
March 2013
Boise Development Code
Page 189
2. COMMUNICATION USES
A. Wireless Communication Facilities
This Chapter establishes standards for the placement of wireless communication facilities (WCF’s) in all zoning districts. The intent is to minimize potential adverse impacts by regulating the height, location of WCF’s while recognizing that co-location is the preferred option. The placement of all new WCF’s and the expansion or alteration of any existing WCF’s shall be subject to this ordinance.
(1) Required Documentation
(a) A report from a licensed professional engineer describing the tower height and design. The report shall include the following: a cross section of the tower; elevations that document the height above grade for all potential mounting positions for co-located antennae; and the minimum separation distances between antennae. The report also must include a description of the tower's capacity regarding the number and type of antennae that it can accommodate and what precautions the applicant will take to avoid interference with established public safety telecommunications. This report must be stamped by the structural engineer.
(b) A letter of intent committing the applicant/owner and successors to allow the shared use of the tower.
(c) A propagation study showing the location of existing facilities within the coverage area, and radio frequency modeling providing evidence as to why the WCF is needed at the chosen location.
(d) A written analysis demonstrating the proposed site is the most appropriate within the immediate area. The analysis shall include the following: Description of the surrounding area, including topography; Natural and manmade impediments, if any, that would obstruct existing wireless telephone transmissions; Physical site constraints, if any, that would preclude construction of a wireless communications facility on another site; Technical limitations of the system that limit siting options; and A detailed explanation as to why co-location is not possible on buildings or antennas in the proposed coverage area.
(2) A permit is required for the installation of new WCF’s and for the expansion or alteration of existing WCFs. The permit requirements are identified in Table 11-06.3, below.
CHAPTER 11-06: USE REGULATIONS
Section 11-06-04: Public/Institutional Use Standards
Subsection 2: Communication Uses
March 2013
Boise Development Code
Page 190
Table 11-06.3: Wireless Communication Facilities - Allowed, Conditional and Prohibited Uses by Zoning District A = Allowed, A* = Administrative Approval, C = Conditional Use ZONE MICROCELL FACILITIES VISUALLY UNOBTRUSIVE/ ATTACHED FACILITIES MONOPOLE LESS THAN MAX. HEIGHT OF BASE ZONE MONOPOLE MORE THAN MAX HEIGHT OF BASE ZONE LATTICE TOWER R-1A
A*
A*
C
R-1B
A*
A*
C
R-1C
A*
A*
C
R-2
A*
A*
C
R-3
A*
A*
A*
C
C R-O
A*
A*
A*
C
C L-O
A*
A*
A*
C
C N-O
A*
A*
A*
C
C C-1
A*
A*
A*
C
C C-2
A*
A*
A*
C
C C-3
A*
A*
A*
C
C C-4
A*
A*
A*
C
C C-5
A*
A*
A*
C
C H-S
A*
A*
A*
C
C M-1
A*
A*
A*
C
C M-2
A*
A*
A*
C
C M-4
A*
A*
A*
C
C T-1
A*
A*
A*
C
C T-2
A*
A*
A*
C
C PC
A*
A*
A*
C
C A
A*
A*
A*
C
C U
A*
A*
A*
C
C
(3) Site Development Standards
The following shall apply to applications for non-co-location WCF’s in all zone districts. Site development standards shall not apply to WCFs located on buildings.
(a) Setbacks
Support tower structures that do not exceed the height limit of the zone must meet setback, landscaping and screening requirements of the zone. Support tower structures which exceed the height limit of the zone shall be set back from all property lines as required by that zone or one foot for every ten feet of total tower height, whichever is greater setback. When a WCF is located within 300 feet of residential zoning or uses, the minimum distance from the telecommunications tower base to the nearest existing residential structure or building setback line shall not be less than the height of the tower.
(b) Separation
No closer than 500’ to another WCF.
(c) Height
The height measurement of a WCF shall include the height of the structure including antenna attachments. Structures exceeding the height limitations of the zone may only be allowed by Conditional Use Permit as indicated in Table 1 of this code.
CHAPTER 11-06: USE REGULATIONS
Section 11-06-04: Public/Institutional Use Standards
Subsection 2: Communication Uses
March 2013
Boise Development Code
Page 191
(d) Equipment Facility
All equipment shelters, cabinets, or other on ground ancillary equipment shall meet set back requirements.
(e) Screening and Landscaping
Tower facilities shall include a landscape buffer. The buffer shall consist of a landscape strip at least four feet wide outside the perimeter of the compound. A minimum of 50 percent of the plant materials shall be of an evergreen variety. In locations where the visual impact of the facility is minimal, the landscaping requirement may be reduced or waived by the Planning Director.
(f) Color and Placement
To the greatest extent possible, materials, colors, textures, screening and landscaping shall be used that blend the tower facilities to the natural setting and the built environment. Any antennas and supporting electrical and mechanical equipment installed on a structure other than a tower shall use colors that are similar to the supporting structure so as to make the antenna and related equipment as unobtrusive as possible.
(g) Lighting and Security
Unless required by the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) or the Federal Communications Commission (FCC), transmission structures shall not be lighted. Transmitter equipment shelters may use security lighting which is compatible with the surrounding neighborhood and confined to the boundaries of the site. Where a WCF is required to meet FAA paint or lighting regulations, the distance between the WCF and any residential zoning district or use or any historic district, shall not be less than ¼ mile.
(h) Advertising
No advertising or display shall be located on any antenna or antennae support structures.
(i) Discontinuation of Use
Any WCF that is no longer in use shall be reported immediately by the service provider to the Planning Director. Discontinued facilities shall be removed within 6 months and the site restored to its pre-existing condition.
(j) WCF’s are prohibited within the Boise River greenbelt setback.
(k) Lattice towers and monopoles that exceed the base zone height limit are prohibited within 100 feet of these gateway streets. Capitol Boulevard Vista Avenue from I-84 to Capitol Boulevard Broadway Avenue from I-84 to Warm Springs Avenue State Street from the State Capitol to State Highway 55 Myrtle Street Front Street Federal Way from Capitol Boulevard to Bergeson Street Warm Springs Avenue Park Center Boulevard
CHAPTER 11-06: USE REGULATIONS
Section 11-06-04: Public/Institutional Use Standards
Subsection 2: Communication Uses
March 2013
Boise Development Code
Page 192
(4) Administrative Review
WCF’s (including any supporting structures and appurtenances) which are installed to meet the following standards are deemed “Not Visually Obtrusive” and shall require a zoning certificate. They may also require building, electrical or other construction permits as well as Design Review approval. Installations which are considered to be “not visually obtrusive” include:
(a) Antennae located entirely within approved signage. May include antenna placed within the sign face or attached to a support structure so long as the design is such that the antennae is effectively unnoticeable. Such antennae may not be placed on a non-conforming sign.
(b) Flush mounted, color coordinated panels on existing buildings where equipment is not visible above the roof line. All equipment shelters, cabinets or other accessory structures shall be located within the building utilized for the antennae, or on the ground located outside of any required setbacks, required landscaping or parking spaces.
(c) Antennae built into architectural features or which appear to be architectural features themselves, added to existing structures (such as chimneys, cupolas, dormers, bell towers, steeples, water tanks, stadium lights, utility poles, and other similar features) where the zoning height limit for such architectural features is not exceeded.
(d) Co-location on existing facilities where the height of the existing antennae tower or pole does not increase over the maximum height of the base zone.
(e) Installations which are located far from any prospective viewer and in such a way as to have a backdrop of terrain which obscures the antennae as to make it visibly unobtrusive and effectively unnoticeable.
(f) Antennas that appear to be natural features indigenous to the site and which are located in proximity to the features they are imitating so that they blend in and do not stand out visually.
(g) Installations may not create adverse noise from generators or other accessory equipment.
(h) Installations may not create access or grading problems.
(5) “Microcell” Wireless Communications Facilities
“Microcell” wireless communications facilities provide communications coverage to a geographically limited and specifically defined area (e.g. a busy street intersection, an individual building or a topographically constrained area). Such facilities are integrated with standard cellular technology (i.e. a macro cell) to provide wireless communication services to the public. The installation of such facilities shall require only administrative level review if all of the following criteria are met (otherwise a Conditional Use Permit shall be required):
(a) No new antenna tower is erected (microcell facilities may be located on existing poles, towers, buildings, etc. in compliance with this subsection).
(b) No antenna shall be located within 30 inches of any space occupied by or available to the public.
(c) No antenna shall exceed six square feet in area.
CHAPTER 11-06: USE REGULATIONS
Section 11-06-04: Public/Institutional Use Standards
Subsection 3: Education Uses
March 2013
Boise Development Code
Page 193
(d) The equipment shelter associated with a microcell site may not exceed 100 square feet in floor area or six square feet in area.
(e) The antenna (e) may be mounted on a roof only if the height of the antenna (e) at the highest point does not exceed the horizontal distance from the antenna to the edge of the rooftop.
3. EDUCATION USES
A. Public School Facilities
When considering a conditional use permit application for a public school facility, the commission shall ensure that the Idaho Transportation Department, the appropriate local highway jurisdiction, or both, have reviewed the application and reported on the following issues as appropriate: the land use master plan; school bus plan; access safety; pedestrian plan; crossing guard plan; barriers between highways and school; location of school zone; need for flashing beacon; need for traffic control signal; anticipated future improvements; speed on adjacent highways; traffic volumes on adjacent highways; effect upon the highway’s level of service; need for acceleration or deceleration lanes; internal traffic circulation; anticipated development of surrounding undeveloped parcels; zoning in the vicinity; access control of adjacent highways; required striping and signing modifications; funding of highway improvements to accommodate development; proposed highway projects in the vicinity; and any other issues as may be considered appropriate to the particular application.
4. PARKS AND RECREATION USES
A. Golf Club House
A Golf Club House shall be located more than 300 feet from a residence, unless a closer location is approved by a zoning certificate or conditional use permit.
5. UTILITY USES
A. Utility Facility, Major
(1) Public service poles, towers, or similar installations are of a height of 85 feet or less may be allowed in a residential district, including the replacement of existing facilities.
(2) Public service poles, towers, or similar installations of a height of 85 feet or greater must be approved by conditional use permit. An approval shall consider all generally applicable approval criteria for a conditional use permit, and the following standards. The pole or tower locations and heights shall:
(a) Not interfere with airport height restrictions;
(b) Minimize disturbance to views from established residential areas;
(c) Minimize disturbance to or interference with view of city, state, or federally registered historic structures;
(d) Not obstruct clear vision triangles or otherwise threaten motorist or pedestrian safety;
(e) Minimize conflict with existing uses;
(f) Be within route corridors already established or use by rail, automobile traffic arterials, or electrical transmission; and
CHAPTER 11-06: USE REGULATIONS
Section 11-06-05: Commercial Use Standards
Subsection 1: Adult Uses
March 2013
Boise Development Code
Page 194
(g) Be within route corridors that provide for a satisfactory level of energy efficient transmission of the product (electrical energy or other signals); or
(h) Be the best available alternative placements and heights, even though they do not comply perfectly with all the above findings. 11-06-05. COMMERCIAL USE STANDARDS
1. ADULT USES
It is the intention of the City that the provisions of this Section be construed, enforced, and interpreted in such a manner as will cause the least possible interference with any affected rights of speech, due process, equal protection, or other fundamental right. This Code and each section and provision thereof are hereby declared to be independent divisions and subdivisions and, not withstanding any other evidence of legislative intent, it is hereby declared to be the controlling legislative intent that if any provisions of this chapter, or the application thereof to any person or circumstance is held to be invalid, the remaining sections or provisions and the application of such sections or provisions to any person, business, or circumstances other than those to which it is held invalid, shall not be affected thereby, and it is hereby declared that such sections and provisions would have been passed independently of such section or provision so known to be invalid.
A. Bikini Bar
(1) Standards
A bikini bar use shall comply with the following standards:
(a) It is located at least 300 feet from any residential use or zone.
(b) It is at least 1,000 feet from any public or parochial school or day care licensed by the Boise City, and from any public park or playground; any religious institution; or any other bikini bar.
(2) Procedures
The procedures for sexually oriented businesses in 11-06-05.1.B(3), below, shall apply to bikini bars.
B. Sexually Oriented Business
(1) Purpose
(a) The purpose of these regulations is to allow the reasonable location of a sexually oriented business within the city in a manner that will protect property values, neighborhoods, and residents from the potential adverse secondary effects of sexually oriented businesses while providing to those who desire to patronize sexually oriented businesses such opportunity in appropriate areas within the city. It is not the intent of this Code to suppress any speech activities protected by the First Amendment of the United States Constitution, but to impose content-neutral regulations that address the adverse secondary effects a sexually oriented business may have on adjoining properties and the immediate neighborhood.
(b) It has been determined, and reflected in the land use studies of various US cities, that businesses that have as their primary purpose the selling, renting, or showing of sexually explicit materials have negative secondary impacts upon surrounding businesses and residences. The experience in other US cities is that the location of a sexually oriented business significantly increases the incidence of crimes, especially sex offenses, including rape, indecent exposure, lewd and lascivious behavior, and child molestation.
CHAPTER 11-06: USE REGULATIONS
Section 11-06-05: Commercial Use Standards
Subsection 1: Adult Uses
March 2013
Boise Development Code
Page 195
(c) It has been determined, and reflected in the land use studies of various US cities, that the operation of sexually oriented businesses in business districts that are immediately adjacent to and that serve residential neighborhoods has a deleterious effect on both the business and the residential segments of the neighborhood, causing blight and down-grading property values.
(d) It is the intent of these regulations to allow sexually oriented businesses to exist within the city in various dispersed locations rather than to allow them to concentrate in any one business area. It is further the purpose of these regulations to require separation requirements between sexually oriented businesses and residential uses, churches, parks, and educational institutions in an effort to buffer these uses from the secondary impacts created by sexually oriented business activity.
(2) Criteria
In lieu of the generally applicable conditional use permit criteria, a sexually oriented business shall be subject to the following standards:
(a) It shall not be located within 1000 feet of a public or parochial school or daycare as defined and licensed by Boise City; a public park or playground; a bar or tavern or other premises serving alcohol; religious institution; or a sexually oriented business;
(b) It shall not be located on a lot or parcel that is within 500 feet of a residential use or zone;
(c) Distance shall be measured in a straight line from property line closest to the property line of the nearest school, park, playground, religious institution or other sexually oriented business. These standards shall apply regardless of the political jurisdiction in which schools, parks, or churches or other adult businesses are located;
(d) The sign package and exterior building design must be submitted with the conditional use application for review by the PZC. Advertisements, displays, or other promotional materials shall not be shown or exhibited so as to be visible to the public from the exterior of the building; No advertising signs, billboards, displays, advertisements, or other promotional materials depicting specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities or displaying instruments, devices, or paraphernalia designed for use in connection with specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities shall be shown or exhibited so as to be visible to the public from the exterior of the building;
(e) Lobby and entrance areas should be designed so as to minimize obstruction of sidewalks during operating hours and shall be oriented and consistent with other commercial activities in the area;
(f) All building openings, entries, windows, and the like, shall be located, covered, or screened in such a manner as to prevent a view into the interior, so that personnel, instruments, devices, paraphernalia, and body parts thereof, that are associated in any manner with specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities, cannot be viewed from streets, sidewalks, and adjacent private properties;
CHAPTER 11-06: USE REGULATIONS
Section 11-06-05: Commercial Use Standards
Subsection 1: Adult Uses
March 2013
Boise Development Code
Page 196
(g) No loudspeakers or sound equipment shall be used for such businesses that can be discerned by the public outside the building;
(h) The disposal of garbage and trash containing sexually explicit materials must be disposed of in a manner that prevents minors from having access to the material; and
(i) For purposes of this Code, the above conditions and standards shall be applicable in the following circumstances: The opening or commencement of any sexually oriented business as a new business. The conversion of an existing business or any part of any existing business to any of the sexually oriented businesses regulated herein. The addition or expansion of any business to include any of the sexually oriented businesses regulated herein. The voluntary relocation of any such business.
(j) Hours of operation are from 4:00 p.m. to 2:00 a.m. One security staff person is required for each 20 required parking spaces or fraction thereof. The hours of operation shall be visibly posted on all entrances and exits.
(k) On-site security must be present during all hours of operation.
(l) These provisions shall not be construed as permitting any use or act that is otherwise prohibited or made punishable by law.
(m) No sexually oriented materials or performances shall be disseminated, performed for, by, or upon minors. Signs prohibiting minors upon premises shall be visibly posted on all entrances and exits.
(n) All areas of a sexually oriented business shall be illuminated at a minimum of 20 foot-candles, normally maintained and evenly distributed at ground level. Except, adult motels shall only be required to be illuminated at a minimum of 20 foot-candles in public areas, and, adult theaters and cabarets shall only be required to be illuminated at a minimum of five foot-candles . During performances, adult theaters and cabarets may reduce the lighting to be a minimum of 1¼ foot-candles.
(o) An adult motion picture show or adult arcade shall limit the maximum number of image producing devices to the maximum occupancy load permitted in any room or partitioned portion of a room in which an image producing device is located.
(3) Procedures
For general Public Hearing Procedures see Section 11-03-03.6, Public Hearing.
(a) Neighborhood Meeting Notification
For applications for sexually oriented businesses and bikini bars, the applicant shall notify and invite to the neighborhood meeting all residents and property owners within 1,000 feet of the exterior boundary of the application parcel and the registered neighborhood association. The notice of this meeting may be mailed or hand-delivered to the recipient. If mailed, the notice shall be postmarked a minimum of seven calendar days prior to the meeting date. If hand-delivered, the applicant must deliver the notice a minimum of five days prior to the meeting date.
CHAPTER 11-06: USE REGULATIONS
Section 11-06-05: Commercial Use Standards
Subsection 2: Office Uses
March 2013
Boise Development Code
Page 197
(b) Hearing Notification
For sexually oriented businesses and bikini bars, mailed notice shall be provided to all property owners, purchasers of record, and residents within 1,000 feet of the exterior boundaries of the application parcel and the registered neighborhood association. Also, any school, daycare, church, or registered neighborhood association within 2,000 feet of the application parcel shall be notified of applications for sexually oriented businesses and bikini bars.
(c) Timing of Hearings
A public hearing for an application for a sexually oriented business or bikini bar, regardless complexity shall be held no later than 44 calendar days after acceptance of a complete application. If no decision is made within 45 days after hearing, then the request for a sexually oriented business or bikini bar will be deemed approved.
(d) Deferrals
Unless the applicant agrees to a deferral, applications for sexually oriented businesses and bikini bars must be decided within 45 days following the public hearing. Failure of the PZC to decide such application within 45 days following the hearing shall result in its approval.
(e) Appeals
The Council shall hold a hearing within 45 days following the filing of an appeal to a decision of the PZC on an application for a sexually oriented business or bikini bar. If the applicant has not requested a deferral, a decision as to whether or not a conditional use is approved must be made within 45 days from initial hearing date for cases involving a sexually oriented business or bikini bar. Failure of the Council to make a decision within 45 days shall be deemed as an approval for a sexually oriented business or bikini bar. Council shall issue a temporary conditional use permit on the occasion where they had previously approved an application and it was then appealed to the District Court by an appellant that is not the applicant.
2. OFFICE USES
A. Offices, Business and Professional
(1) Within all R-1, R-2, and R-3 zoning districts, professional and executive offices are allowed on a lot or parcel where the side of such lot or parcel abuts a commercial or industrial zone. Such uses are not allowed on properties separated from a commercial or industrial zone by an alley or street. All transitional office uses shall be subject to design review.
(2) Within the NNE overlay district, in the R-3 base zoning district, new office construction is prohibited on lots larger than 2,500 square feet, except on parcels demonstrated to have been vacant on or before the effective date of the NNE overlay district ordinance, or when provided by means of the adaptive reuse of an existing structure.
(3) Professional, administrative, and business offices are conditional uses in the M-1 and M-2 districts and are subject to the following standards:
CHAPTER 11-06: USE REGULATIONS
Section 11-06-05: Commercial Use Standards
Subsection 3: Retail Uses
March 2013
Boise Development Code
Page 198
(a) Amenities (which may include but are not limited to visual screening, orientation, and placement of buildings, parking, and access areas) shall be provided for the office to buffer the impact of any existing or future conflicting land uses; and
(b) The lot or parcel occupied by such offices shall abut a public right-of-way that separates such lot or parcel from residential or office zones or uses; or
(c) The use of the subject property for such offices will not encroach upon or conflict with existing industrial development or future industrial uses that may reasonably be expected to develop.
3. RETAIL USES
A. Drive-Up Establishment
(1) Administrative Approvals
Drive-up establishments are subject to the following standards:
(a) Design and operation of the establishment is substantially in compliance with general requirements of this Section;
(b) Site traffic circulation is not disrupted by increased vehicular congestion, blockage, or rerouting caused by the establishment;
(c) The number of drive-up lanes is limited to allow for adequate on-site circulation of pedestrians and vehicles; and
(d) The minimum number of parking spaces required for all uses of the site, upon which the drive-up window establishment is placed, must be maintained.
(2) Approvals by the Planning and Zoning Commission
(a) General Requirements The location shall not cause an increase of commercial traffic in nearby residential neighborhoods, or cause significant adverse impacts in the vicinity. Drive-up aisles should be located behind the building and circulation should provide for pedestrian access to and from the establishment’s entrance. Waiting lane(s) are of sufficient length to accommodate average monthly peak volumes; Lights are designed and located to prevent glare on adjoining properties. Screening of lights may be required as a secondary measure of mitigation. Landscaping should screen drive-up aisles from the public right-of-way and minimize the visual impact of vehicular lights, readerboard signs, and directional signs; Drive-up lanes shall be setback at least ten feet from residentially zoned or used property. Landscape and sound abatement walls may be required when appropriate. Communication systems shall not exceed 55 decibels at any property line adjoining or across the alley from residential zones or uses.
CHAPTER 11-06: USE REGULATIONS
Section 11-06-05: Commercial Use Standards
Subsection 3: Retail Uses
March 2013
Boise Development Code
Page 199
(b) Hours of Operation
The PZC may limit the hours of operation of a drive-up window establishment.
(c) Additional Requirements in the C-1 District
In C-1 districts, a 200-foot setback from residential use or zone is required for the drive through window or lane where the primary use of the window is food service. The 200-foot setback shall be measured from any part of the window or drive through lane to the nearest lot or parcel used or zoned for a residence.
(d) Additional Requirements in the C-5 District
Drive-up windows in the C-5 district shall be subject to the following standards and provisions. The drive-up window and all stacking and escape lanes shall be located within a structure. The drive-up window facility shall be secondary to the principal uses of the structure in which the drive-up facility is located. The following additional design requirements shall apply:
A. All lanes used for ingress, stacking, service, and egress shall be integrated safely and effectively with circulation and parking within the structure.
B. No additional curb cuts shall be allowed to provide access for drive-up facilities within an existing or new structure. Existing curb cuts, however, may be relocated.
C. Traffic associated with the drive-up facility shall not inhibit safe access and exiting from parking spaces or the structure’s entrances or exits. Where it is essential that the drive-up facility have its own ingress to and/or egress from the structure, the ingress and egress shall be limited to a single lane where it intersects a public street and sidewalk. The location and design of the drive-up facility shall minimize blank walls on street-facing exteriors of the building and disruption of existing or potential retail and other active ground floor uses. Drive-up windows in the C-5 district are not subject to general requirements in paragraph vi of subsection 2(a), above. All entrance and exit points that may be utilized for the drive-up facility shall incorporate the following minimum safety features:
A. There shall be a visible pedestrian warning where walkways intersect entrance and exit points.
B. An approved auditory warning device and an approved non-auditory device shall be installed on both sides of all exit points. The devices may be combined into one device and shall flash and produce an auditory sound to warn against exiting vehicles.
(e) Additional Requirements in the HS District
In the HS district, drive-up windows may be allowed only for health-services related uses, such as pharmacies.
B. Shopping Center in the C-1 District
Groupings and shopping centers exceeding 100,000 square feet gross floor area are prohibited. Any grouping exceeding 70,000 square feet requires conditional use approval. On sites greater
CHAPTER 11-06: USE REGULATIONS
Section 11-06-06: Industrial Use Standards
Subsection 1: Storage Uses
March 2013
Boise Development Code
Page 200
than six and ½ acres, groupings of nonresidential buildings are limited to a floor area ratio (FAR) of .35.
C. Taverns, Lounges, Concert Halls/ Dance Halls and Tobacco Bars
In order to approve a conditional use permit for a Bar, Tavern, Lounge, Concert Halls/Dance Hall, or Retail Tobacco Business, the Commission must determine that the following conditions are met:
(1) Such business shall not be located within a radius of 300 feet of any building within which public school activities are conducted.
(2) Such business shall not be located within a radius of 150 feet of any hospital or any room within which a duly organized and established religion conducts regular religious or worship services.
(3) No amplification device shall be used such that the sound:
(a) Is plainly audible within any place of residence, or,
(b) Is plainly audible on a street at a distance of 100 feet or more from the amplification device.
(4) Establishments shall remain closed between 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. Closing times shall be clearly posted on all entrances and exits. 11-06-06. INDUSTRIAL USE STANDARDS
1. STORAGE USES
A. Bulk Storage of Corrosive, Acid, Alkali, Explosive, or Flammable Materials
Bulk storage of corrosive, acid, alkali, explosive, or flammable materials shall be screened from public view of any public right-of-way and shall be subject to such precautions as may be required by the Director and the Boise Fire Department.
B. Outdoor Storage
(1) Where outdoor storage is allowed as an accessory or a primary use, it shall not include corrosive, acid, alkali, flammable, or explosive materials except as specifically indicated in this Code.
(2) Outdoor storage, whether a primary or accessory use, shall be screened from view of any public right-of way with a solid or opaque fence or similar materials acceptable to the Director.
2. WASTE AND SALVAGE USES
A. Composting Facility
Any composting facility shall submit a site and operational plan with their application for a conditional use permit. That plan shall demonstrate compliance with the following requirements.
(1) Composting piles or windrows shall be constructed to be no larger than can be managed in a nuisance-free manner by the proposed equipment and composting technology;
(2) Additional area shall be provided at no less than 15 percent of size of the active composting pile or windrow area for staging, curing, and storage;
CHAPTER 11-06: USE REGULATIONS
Section 11-06-06: Industrial Use Standards
Subsection 2: Waste and Salvage Uses
March 2013
Boise Development Code
Page 201
(3) A minimum 50-foot setback shall be maintained from the property boundary or public right-of-way to any active processing area of the facility including any area used for storage, active composting, and curing;
(4) A minimum 200-foot buffer zone between the active composting pile or windrow and any existing adjacent residentially zoned or occupied property shall be maintained;
(5) Compliance with all applicable state or federal laws, regulations, or standards pertaining to water quality, air quality, and solid waste management shall be required;
(6) No composting facility shall be allowed in a floodplain or floodway;
(7) Surface slope of one to five grade shall be required for any composting facility;
(8) Adequate fencing, barriers or screening shall be required for all composting facilities;
(9) Public access shall be limited to those times when an attendant is on duty and during limited operating hours;
(10) Adequate space shall be provided between the piles or windrows to allow access to vehicles, including firefighting equipment;
(11) All organic materials received at the composting facility shall be removed from any containers unless the containers are of a biodegradable type in which case the container shall be opened before composting; and
(12) A permanent sign must be posted and maintained at the composting facility showing the nature of the project, facility name, address and telephone number of operator, operating hours, materials that may be received by the facility, and the phrase, "NO DUMPING OF GARBAGE, TRASH, OR RUBBISH ALLOWED.”
B. Drop-Off Recycling Center
Drop-off recycling containers are allowed in commercial, industrial, and office zones, and at schools, churches, and multiple-family developments in all zones. A zoning certificate is required from the Director for each new recycling container site, and shall be issued upon proper application at no cost to the applicant. Drop-off recycling collection sites shall comply with the following standards:
(1) Containers do not interfere with required access or parking;
(2) Containers will be kept in a state of good repair and emptied on a regular basis to prevent overflow;
(3) All containers are clearly marked as to the materials to be deposited in them; and
(4) Non-compostable residues shall be disposed or processed at a permitted solid waste disposal facility in accordance with local, state, and federal laws, regulations and standards.
CHAPTER 11-06: USE REGULATIONS
Section 11-06-07: Accessory Uses and Structures
Subsection 1: Purpose
March 2013
Boise Development Code
Page 202
11-06-07. ACCESSORY USES AND S TRUCTURE S
1. PURPOSE
This section authorizes the establishment of accessory uses that are incidental and customarily subordinate
to principal uses. An accessory use is “incidental and customarily subordinate” to a principal use if it
complies with the general standards set forth in this Section.
2. APPROVAL OF ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES
Commonly allowed accessory uses are set forth in Table 11-06.1, however, this list is not inclusive. All
principal uses allowed in a zoning district shall be deemed to include those accessory uses, structures, and
activities typically associated with the use, unless specifically prohibited in this Code. No accessory use may
be established prior to establishment of the principal use with which such accessory use is associated.
3. GENERAL STANDARDS FOR ACCESSORY USES
All accessory uses and structures shall comply with the following general standards:
A. Subordinate to Principal Use
No accessory building shall be used unless the main building is also being used. The accessory use
or structure shall be conducted and/or located on the same lot(s) as the principal use. The principal
use and the accessory use shall be under the same ownership and shall utilize the same utility
meter, with the exception of an approved accessory dwelling unit.
B. Location and Setbacks
(1) No detached accessory building or structure shall occupy any area in front of the
main building, unless approved by the PZC as a conditional use. However, on lots
that have factory built housing or topographical or other physical constraints, the
Director may approve a detached accessory building or structure in front of the
main building.
(2) Regardless of their size, detached accessory
buildings shall not encroach into required
street side or front yard areas.
(3) Accessory structures such as decks and patios
that are one foot or less in height as measured
from the property’s finished grade, may
occupy any yard area.
(4) Open post patio/shade covers, pergolas, and
similar structures under 250 feet in area
and less than 15 feet in height and attached
to the home, may have rear yard setbacks of
9 feet. Interior side yard setbacks shall be per
the zone. For corner lots, a minimum 15-foot
street-side yard setback is required. Structures that use these reduced setbacks
may not occupy more than 50% of the lot’s rear yard widths.
(5) In-ground pools that are one foot or less in height, as measured from the
property’s finished grade, may occupy any rear or interior side yard area,
provided a minimum three-foot setback is maintained from the pool apron or
splashguard. Hot tubs, diving boards, decks, and other features that are more
than one foot above grade shall be located outside of setbacks.
Figure 11-06.8: Pool setbacks
CHAPTER 11-06: USE REGULATIONS
Section 11-06-07: Accessory Uses and Structures
Subsection 4: Additional Standards for Specific Accessory Uses
March 2013
Boise Development Code
Page 203
(6) In all residential zones garages and carports opening onto a side street must have a minimum distance between the opening of such garage or carport and the side street lot line of not less than 20 feet.
(7) Detached accessory structures with six feet of separation from other structures may utilize the following setback reductions:
(a) Detached accessory structures under 120 square feet in area and under seven feet in height (from grade to the top of the wall under the roof) are permitted in any yard area except in front of the main building and in required street side and front yard areas.
(b) Detached accessory structures that are over 120 square feet, but less than or equal to 500 square feet of area and that are less than 14 feet in height, may have reduced interior side yard setbacks of three feet and rear yard setbacks of nine feet.
(c) Accessory buildings that use these reduced setbacks may not occupy more than 50 percent of the lot’s rear or side yard widths.
(d) Alley-Loaded Accessory Parking Structures Alley-loaded parking and parking structures shall provide a back up area of at least 22 feet. This back up area may be within the alley and/or the lot but not within an accessory structure. A minimum five-foot paved apron is required regardless of alley width. For side entry alley-loaded garages the back up area shall be provided for on the lot. Detached accessory structures that are under 1,000 square feet in area and under 22 feet in height may be built to the rear or side lot line abutting an alley. Accessory structures over 1,000 square feet in area or over 22 feet in height shall comply with the setback requirements of the zone.
(8) Residential Accessory Buildings More than 1,000 Square Feet in Area or 22 feet in Height
A zoning certificate is required for accessory structures over 1,000 square feet in area or 22 feet in height, subject to the following:
(a) No commercial use shall take place within the building;
(b) The square footage shall not exceed the floor area of the principal building;
(c) The building shall be architecturally compatible with the primary building
(d) The building shall be compatible with neighboring properties in mass, and design
4. ADDITIONAL STANDARDS FOR SPECIFIC ACCESSORY USES
Unless specified, standards for accessory uses are in addition to all applicable standards and approval criteria in this Code.
A. Tower and Gable Structures
No tower, gable, spire, or similar structure shall be used for sleeping or eating quarters, nor for any commercial purposes other than as incidental to the primary use.
CHAPTER 11-06: USE REGULATIONS
Section 11-06-07: Accessory Uses and Structures
Subsection 4: Additional Standards for Specific Accessory Uses
March 2013
Boise Development Code
Page 204
B. Beekeeping
The purpose of these regulations is to ensure sound beekeeping practices and thereby avoid problems that might be associated with the keeping of bees in an urban setting.
(1) Standards
Beekeeping standards shall be as follows:
(a) Noxious Insects Prohibited
The keeping of wasps, hornets, Africanized bees (Apis mellifera scutellata) and other noxious insects is prohibited.
(b) Density of Hives & Colonies
There is no minimum parcel size for beekeeping. However, the maximum density is 3 colonies per 1/4 acre. Higher densities may be permitted by conditional use permit.
(c) Nucleus Colonies
For every 2 colonies authorized above, one additional nucleus colony is allowed.
(d) Hives
Colonies shall be kept in hives with removable frames.
(e) Flyway Barriers
For colonies located within 25 feet of a property boundary, a flyway barrier at least six feet in height consisting of a solid wall, fence or dense hedge parallel to the property line and extending ten feet beyond the apiary in each direction is required
(f) Setbacks and Placement
Hives shall be located at least 20 feet from front property lines and 3 feet from other property lines. The back of the hive shall be oriented to adjoining properties.
(g) Water Source
A constant supply of fresh water is required. It shall be readily accessible to the bees and to allow them to access water by landing on a hard surface. A water supply is not required during winter and other inactive months.
(h) Maintenance
Hives not being actively maintained shall be removed. Colonies must be maintained so as to not interfere with the quiet enjoyment of surrounding properties.
(i) Queens
Where a colony exhibits unusually aggressive characteristics the colony shall be destroyed or re-queened.
(j) Compliance with State Statutes
Beekeeping shall comply with all applicable state laws.
(k) Contact Information
Contact information for a responsible party shall be posted at apiaries on vacant property.
CHAPTER 11-06: USE REGULATIONS
Section 11-06-07: Accessory Uses and Structures
Subsection 4: Additional Standards for Specific Accessory Uses
March 2013
Boise Development Code
Page 205
C. Home Occupation
(1) Procedure for Approval of Use
(a) Notification to the adjacent property owners and occupants, including properties across streets and alleys, must be submitted with the application, stating the adjacent property owners and occupants have been notified of the applicant’s intent to operate a home occupation on site. Certified mail is an acceptable means of notifying adjacent neighbors.
(b) More than one home occupation may be approved for the same property address provided that the combined activities and uses of the home occupations do not exceed the approval criteria as set forth herein. For example, the aggregate total of floor space devoted to one or more occupations at a given address may not exceed 500 square feet.
(c) Home occupations may not be approved for some uses including, but not limited to, escort services, taxidermies, palm reading or other fortune telling businesses, and other such uses that are prohibited by the Boise City Code or are in violation of the purpose statement of this Code, as determined by the Director.
(2) Criteria for Allowed Home Occupations
A home occupation such as hair salons, graphic arts, desktop publishing, offices and instruction of small classes are allowed without application but must meet all of the following criteria.
(a) The use is clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the lot or parcel for dwelling purposes.
(b) The use is conducted entirely within a dwelling or accessory structure and the aggregate of all space within any or all buildings devoted to one or more home occupations shall not exceed 500 square feet in floor area. Outdoor storage of building materials and supplies is prohibited.
(c) The owner/operator of the home occupation shall reside on the premises and shall not employ others to work in the home.
(d) Required off-street parking spaces for the residence must be maintained.
(e) Deliveries and pickups shall be limited to two per day between the hours of 8:00 am and 6:00 pm, Monday through Friday.
(f) Instruction in music, crafts and dance shall be limited to one student at a time with a maximum of eight per day. To exceed this limit requires an Administrative Home Occupation.
(g) Salons shall be limited to one chair or nail table, commonly referred to as a station.
(h) Any materials used or any item produced or repaired on the premises shall not be displayed or stored so as to be visible from the exterior of the building.
(i) Only items produced on the premises may be offered for retail sale, except that items incidental to the home occupation may be sold (e.g. hair products may be sold at a salon).
(j) One two square foot sign is allowed. It must be attached flat against the building and may not be illuminated.
CHAPTER 11-06: USE REGULATIONS
Section 11-06-07: Accessory Uses and Structures
Subsection 4: Additional Standards for Specific Accessory Uses
March 2013
Boise Development Code
Page 206
(3) Criteria for Administrative Home Occupations
Administrative home occupations require Planning Director approval to ensure they will not be a detriment to the character and livability of the neighborhood. Examples include group instruction or counseling and home based contractors. Administrative home occupations are subject to allowed home occupation criteria and the following:
(a) One vehicle, in addition to that used by an employee, may be used with a home occupation subject to the following: Commercial vehicles are prohibited. (See definitions) An off-street parking space is required and may be provided on a driveway apron. Construction trailers must be stored outside of setbacks on improved surfaces and may not be visible a street. Outdoor storage of building materials and supplies is prohibited.
(b) Instruction in such activities as swimming, yoga and dance shall be limited to a maximum of five students per class. Conditions may be added to limit hours.
(c) Internal or external changes that would make the dwelling appear less residential are prohibited. Examples include construction of parking lots, paving of required setbacks and adding commercial-like exterior lighting.
(4) Prohibited Home Occupations
The following occupations are prohibited:
(a) Occupations which involve highly combustible materials.
(b) Occupations where the dimensions, power rating, or weight of equipment and tools used exceed that of normal household equipment and tools.
(c) Occupations that cause abnormal automotive or pedestrian traffic or that are objectionable due to unsightliness, odor, dust, smoke, noise, glare, heat, vibration or similar disturbances.
(d) Retail stores.
(e) Dispatch centers where employees meet at the dwelling unit and are sent to other locations
(f) Occupations that would detract from the residential character of the neighborhood.
D. Livestock and Animals
(1) Purpose
To define livestock and pets and establish standards for their keeping and care; that will maintain neighborhood compatibility and protect the health, safety, and welfare of the general public.
(2) Livestock
Livestock are animals kept outside the home in enclosures such as pens, barns or corrals. The term includes cattle, llamas, mules, swine, sheep, goats, rabbits, poultry, domestic birds and any other grazing or foraging animal except those defined as pets.
CHAPTER 11-06: USE REGULATIONS
Section 11-06-07: Accessory Uses and Structures
Subsection 4: Additional Standards for Specific Accessory Uses
March 2013
Boise Development Code
Page 207
(3) Pet
Pets generally are animals that may be kept indoors, though pets may also be kept outdoors. Pets are dogs, cats, up to six chickens (excluding roosters), four ducks, six rabbits or other small animals or poultry as determined by the Planning Director. The keeping of pets must comply with the performance standards in Section 11-06-07.4.D(7)(f).
(4) Commercial Livestock Uses
The keeping of livestock for sale or the sale of livestock products (such as milk) requires compliance with the standards in this ordinance and a conditional use permit.
(5) Animal Unit
(a) An animal unit is: One – horse, mule, cow, llama; Four – sheep, goats, or swine; Six – geese; Ten – rabbits; or, Twelve – chickens, ducks.
(b) The Planning Director may determine a unit number for animals not listed.
(6) Livestock as Legal Nonconforming Uses
Nonconforming status shall be in accordance with Chapter 11-011, Nonconformance. Nonconforming status shall be lost if the livestock are absent from the property for a continuous period of two years.
(7) Standards
(a) A minimum of one acre is required to keep livestock. For poultry and rabbits the minimum area is one half acre.
(b) With the exception of poultry and rabbits, a minimum contiguous area of one half acre (exclusive of structures) shall be dedicated to the keeping of the livestock. For poultry and rabbits, the minimum area is one quarter acre.
(c) Livestock shall be kept within fences, corrals, barns, or pens.
(d) Livestock enclosures must comply with setback requirements.
(e) The maximum density is two animal units per acre of area set aside for the keeping of livestock. For example, if one half of a one acre lot is set aside for the keeping of livestock one animal unit is allowed. (See exceptions listed in ‘8’ below.) Maximum density shall not apply to offspring under nine months of age, nor shall it apply to pets.
(f) Livestock shall be kept so as to not cause adverse impacts on neighboring properties. This includes, but is not limited to, such impacts as odor, noise, drainage, erosion, and insects. The presence of such impacts can constitute a public nuisance that the City may cause to be abated.
(g) Structures housing pets, as defined in Section 11-06-07.4D(3), shall be located a minimum of 10 feet from any building used or capable of being used for human habitation on adjacent lots.
CHAPTER 11-06: USE REGULATIONS
Section 11-06-07: Accessory Uses and Structures
Subsection 4: Additional Standards for Specific Accessory Uses
March 2013
Boise Development Code
Page 208
(h) It shall be unlawful to keep any animal listed in B.C.C. Section 6-07-06 under the auspices of this Section.
(8) Exceptions to Minimum Area
(a) Livestock may be kept on less than one acre when allowed by subdivision covenants or duly adopted overlay districts. If animal density is not addressed therein, the density requirements of this ordinance shall apply.
(b) Livestock may be kept on less than one acre for educational purposes, such as 4H or FFA, though the maximum animal density shall not be exceeded.
(c) Horses that are regularly ridden and exercised off-site may exceed the standard animal unit density. One horse is allowed for every 14,500 sq. ft. of contiguous set aside area.
E. Urban Farm Standards
(1) Setbacks
There are no setback requirements for garden plants. Accessory structures, fencing, and other miscellaneous improvements are subject to the dimensional standards of the zone.
(2) Maintenance
Dead plants, produce, and trash not to be used for composting or other garden functions shall be removed from the site in a timely manner.
(3) Equipment
The use of mechanical equipment is generally limited to that typically associated with home gardening. Larger equipment may be used on a limited basis for seasonal activities such as soil preparation or clean-up in the fall. The use of mechanical equipment is limited to daylight hours
(4) Clear Vision Triangle
Plantings shall not obstruct any clear vision triangle. Plantings in the public right-of-way require a license agreement from ACHD.
(5) Water Conservation
Drip irrigation and other methods to conserve water are encouraged.
(6) Chemicals and Fertilizers
Chemicals, fertilizers or other toxic materials may not drain onto adjacent properties, into waterways, or onto public rights of way. Chemicals and other flammable materials must be disposed of in accordance with Federal and State requirements. If stored on site, they must be kept in a locked structure when unattended.
(7) Contact Information
On vacant parcels, a non-illuminated sign displaying the name and contact information for the individual or agency responsible for the garden shall be provided. This sign shall not exceed 6’ in height or 32 square feet in background area.
(8) Lighting
No overhead lighting is allowed.
(9) Historic Districts
Urban farms located in a designated Historic Overlay District require a Certificate of Appropriateness.
CHAPTER 11-06: USE REGULATIONS
Section 11-06-08: Temporary Uses
Subsection 1: Purpose
March 2013
Boise Development Code
Page 209
(10) Produce Distribution
The pick-up and delivery of produce for the purpose of distribution to gardeners or those who have purchased shares of locally grown produce is allowed during daylight hours. Such activities shall not be considered retail sales.
(11) Retail Sales
Retail sales may be allowed at urban farms upon approval of a Zoning Certificate. In addition to the standards listed above, the following criteria apply:
(a) Sales shall be limited primarily to produce grown on the premises. Other items that have been grown or raised within the City’s Area of Impact may also be sold. These items may not exceed 25 percent of total product on display.
(b) Display areas shall adhere to the setbacks of the zone and be located as close to the front property line as feasible.
(c) Installation of new overhead lighting is prohibited.
(d) Applications shall include signatures of residents of adjacent properties, including those across streets and alleys, indicating they have been notified of the intent to conduct retail sales. The list shall include the address of any residents unwilling to sign.
(e) In Residential and Open Space zones: The area dedicated to the sale, display and storage of produce shall not exceed 500 square feet. Sales are limited to the hours of 8:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m. Installation of new on-site parking to support retail sales is prohibited.
(12) Review
(a) A decision to approve or deny will be made within 15 days of receipt of a complete application. If approved, notice will be sent informing owners and residents within three-hundred feet of the decision and their right to appeal.
(b) Conditions may be imposed to protect adjacent properties from adverse impacts.
(c) These standards may be exceeded with approval of a Conditional Use Permit. 11-06-08. TEMPORARY USES
1. PURPOSE
This section authorizes the establishment of temporary uses subject to a zoning certificate.
2. APPLICABILITY
A. Types of temporary uses and structures that may be approved under the temporary use approval process include:
(1) Temporary buildings;
(2) Temporary display and sale of merchandise;
(3) Model homes, trailers, activities, and/or uses incidental to the construction of a building or group of buildings on the same or adjacent premises;
CHAPTER 11-06: USE REGULATIONS
Section 11-06-08: Temporary Uses
Subsection 3: General Standards for Temporary Uses
March 2013
Boise Development Code
Page 210
(4) Seasonal uses (e.g., fireworks stands, Christmas tree lots, and produce stands); and
(5) Other uses that clearly are not associated with a holiday, the growing season, or a construction project may be considered for approval by the Director.
B. Uses that may not be considered for temporary approval include:
(1) Uses that require PZC approval.
(2) Structures or uses that are intended to be placed upon unimproved property, other than seasonal uses or uses incidental to construction.
3. GENERAL STANDARDS FOR TEMPORARY USES
A temporary use may be approved provided that the use complies with the following standards:
A. Compliance with this Code and Other Law
The use shall be conducted in compliance with regulations administered and enforced by other city, state and federal agencies.
B. Location
The temporary use shall allow for placement of a temporary structure, vehicle, sign, etc. outside of any vision triangle, required setback, required parking stall (except as permitted for temporary, outdoor display sale of merchandise), service drive area, dedicated trash dumpster location, sidewalk, or any other position on a lot that may interfere with vehicular or pedestrian circulation, or the normal functions of other uses on the property, or be potentially hazardous to the public.
C. Duration
Depending on the nature of the use, and with the exception of produce stands, a temporary use certificate shall not exceed 180 (consecutive) days. Produce stands may be approved annually.
D. Requirements for Seasonal Temporary Uses
Seasonal uses require approval from the City Clerk’s Office.
March 2013 Boise Development Code
Page 211
CHAPTER 11-07: DEVELOPMENT AND DESIDEVELOPMENT AND DESIGN GN STANDARDSSTANDARDS 11-07-01. PURPOSE
This chapter includes standards for developing property or establishing new uses of property within the City of Boise, to ensure the protection of the health, welfare, safety, and quality of life for local citizens, visitors, and business owners. These provisions address the physical relationship between development and adjacent properties, public streets, neighborhoods, and the natural environment, in order to implement the vision and goals of the Comprehensive Plan. 11-07-02. LOTS
1. LOT LAYOUT
A. Access to Public Street
No building shall be constructed or erected upon any parcel not abutting a public street, or having a permanent access easement to a public street that was of record prior to the effective date of this Code. The minimum street frontage is 30 feet and the minimum lot width is 30.
B. Clear Vision Triangle
Clear vision triangle shall be kept free of visual barriers including vegetation (except deciduous trees pruned at least eight feet in height above the sidewalk and 14 feet above the roadway), walls, signs, vehicles, solid fences, or other sight obstructions exceeding three feet in height.
C. Common Driveways
The Director may issue a zoning certificate for common driveways subject to the following requirements:
(1) The common driveway benefits the design of the development and reduces the number of public street accesses.
(2) The common driveway provides access to no less than two and no more than six lots, each occupied with one single family or townhouse dwelling unit.
(3) The maximum length is 150 feet, and the minimum width
is 20 feet. "No parking" signs shall be placed on the common driveway.
Figure 11
Figure 11--0077..11: Clear Vision Triangle : Clear Vision Triangle
Figure 11
Figure 11--0077..22: : Common DrCommon Drivewaysiveways
CHAPTER 11-07: Development and Design Standards
Section 11-07-03: Off-street Parking and Loading Standards
Subsection 2: Construction Over Platted Lot Lines
March 2013
Boise Development Code
Page 212
(4) A five-foot wide landscaped area is required between the common driveway and lots that do not utilize the common driveway.
(5) The minimum street frontage requirement of each flag lot served by the common driveway is five feet.
(6) Lots that abut a common driveway shall take access from the common driveway and not the public right-of-way.
(7) A perpetual ingress/egress access easement and an agreement for maintenance for the paved driveway and any required landscaping shall be recorded prior to issuance of building permits.
(8) Required off-street parking shall be set back a minimum of 20 feet from the edge of the common driveway.
(9) In the case of a subdivision plat, the common driveway and utilities shall be constructed concurrently with all other public improvements.
2. CONSTRUCTION OVER PLATTED LOT LINES
Construction over platted lot lines of multiple whole lots in any zoning district is allowed provided that:
A. Prior to issuance of a building permit, a copy of a recorded notice of buildable parcel and a copy of a recorded deed describing by metes and bounds the entirety of the platted lots shall be submitted to the Director.
B. Platted or recorded easements must be vacated prior to construction of a structure within the easement area, or as may be required by the easement holder. 11-07-03. OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING STANDARDS
1. GENERAL PARKING STANDARDS
This chapter establishes standards for motor vehicle and bicycle parking, on-site circulation, loading areas and parking lot design.
A. Vehicle Parking Standards
(1) Required off-street parking facilities shall be used for vehicle parking only. Automobile sales, storage, and other uses are prohibited with the exception of temporary and/or seasonal uses which are subject to administrative approval.
(2) Required parking spaces shall not be assigned and shall be available on a first come, first served basis, unless otherwise approved by the Commission. In such cases, the number of parking spaces shall be increased by 20 percent of the number of assigned spaces. The number of required parking spaces is based on the primary use of the site. Any fraction will be rounded up.
(3) The Planning Director shall determine the required parking for uses not listed in Table 11.07-1.
CHAPTER 11-07: Development and Design Standards
Section 11-07-03: Off-street Parking and Loading Standards
Subsection 1: General parking standards
March 2013
Boise Development Code
Page 213
(4) The number of off-street parking spaces shall not exceed 1.75 times that required in Table 11.07.1 if the required number is 20 or less; and 1.5 times the amount where more than 20 parking spaces are required. Parking maximums do not apply to single-family residential uses.
(5) Structured parking shall be exempt from the parking maximum requirements.
CHAPTER 11-07: Development and Design Standards
Section 11-07-03: Off-street Parking and Loading Standards
Subsection 2: Table of Off-street Parking Requirements
March 2013
Boise Development Code
Page 214
2. TABLE OF OFF-STREET PARKING REQUIREMENTS
Table 11-07.1 Off-Street Parking Requirements GFA = Gross floor area Land Use Unit of Measure General P-1 District P-2 District P-3 District Residential Uses Household Living
Accessory Dwelling Unit
Per accessory dwelling unit
1.0
*
*
*
Caretaker Residence
*
*
*
*
*
Dwelling, Single-family
Per dwelling unit
2.0
0
1.0
2.0
Dwelling, Duplex
Per dwelling unit
2.0
0
1.0
2.0
Manufactured Home
*
*
*
*
*
Manufactured Home Community
*
*
*
*
*
Mobile Home Park
Per lot
1.33
0
1.33
1.33
Multi-Family Dwellings*
Per dwelling unit
Studio/Efficiency Unit
0.75
0
0.8
1.0
One Bedroom Unit
1.0
0
0.8
1.0
Two Bedroom Unit
1.25
0
0.8
1.0
Three or more
1.5
0
0.8
1.0
Guest Parking
Per 10 dwelling units
1.0
0
0.8
1.0
*Refer to section 11-06—3.2 for parking reductions for multi-family dwellings.
Group Living
Boarding or Rooming House
Per room
1
0
0.56
0.8
Convalescent Home, Nursing Home
Per bed
0.25
0
0.20
0.25
Dormitory, University-Owned Housing
Per resident
0.33
0
0.18
0.26
Fraternity or Sorority House
Per resident
1.0
0
0.5
0.75
Group Home
Per dwelling unit
2.0
0
1.0
2.0
Halfway House
Per resident
1.0 per 4 residents
*
0.5 per every 4 occupants
0.75 per every 4 occupants
Shelter Home
*
*
*
*
*
Retirement Center
Per dwelling unit
0.5
0
0.25
0.5 Public/Institutional Uses Child and Adult Care
Adult Day Care
*
*
*
*
*
Child Care Home (1-6 children)
*
*
*
*
*
Group Child Care Home (7-12 children)
Per 10 children
1.0
0
1.0
1.0
Group Child Care Center (7-12 children)
Per 10 children
1.0 and minimum of 2 total
0
1.0
1.0
Intermediate Child Care Center (13-20 children)
Per 10 children
1.0 and minimum of 2 total
0
1.0
1.0
Large Child Care Center (21+ children)
Per 10 children
1.0
0
1.0
1.0
After-school Child Care in school building
*
*
*
*
* Communication Facility
Broadcasting or Recording Studio
*
*
*
*
*
CHAPTER 11-07: Development and Design Standards
Section 11-07-03: Off-street Parking and Loading Standards
Subsection 2: Table of Off-street Parking Requirements
March 2013
Boise Development Code
Page 215
Table 11-07.1 Off-Street Parking Requirements GFA = Gross floor area Land Use Unit of Measure General P-1 District P-2 District P-3 District
Lattice Tower WCF
*
*
*
*
*
Microcell Wireless Communication Facility (WCF)
*
*
*
*
*
Monopole WCF, less than maximum height of zone district
*
*
*
*
*
Monopole WCF, more than maximum height of zone district
*
*
*
*
*
Transmission Tower
*
*
*
*
*
Visually Unobtrusive/ Attached WCF
*
*
*
*
* Community Service
Cemetery
*
*
*
*
*
Club, Lodge, Social Hall
Per 250 s.f. GFA
1.0
0
1.0
1.0
Government Buildings, non-industrial
*
*
*
*
*
Mortuary
*
*
*
*
*
Mausoleum
*
*
*
*
*
Recreation Center
Per 100 s.f. GFA
1.0
0
1.0
1.0
Religious Institution
Per seat
0.20
0
0.16
0.20
Uses Related to and Operated by a Religious Institution
*
*
*
*
* Education
Auditorium, Stadium, or Lecture Hall seating more than 500 people
*
*
*
*
*
College or University Classroom
Per full-time student
0.3 and 0.8 per faculty
0
0.3 and 0.8 per faculty
0.3 and 0.8 per faculty
Library/Museum
Per 400 s.f. GFA
1.0
*
1.0
1.0
Grade, Elementary, Middle, Junior High School
Per classroom
1.0 and 1 per employee
0
1.0
1.0
High School
Per classroom
7.0 and 1 per employee
0
1.0
1.0
Private Commercial School
Per 3 students
1.0
0
1.0
1.0
Student Union
*
*
*
*
*
Trade or Vocational School
Per 3 classroom seats
1.0
0
1.0
1.0 Health Care
Hospital, Sanatorium
Per bed
1.0
0
0.66
0.8
Laboratory, Medical/Dental
*
*
*
*
*
Medical Research Facility
*
*
*
*
*
Office, Medical
Per 300 s.f.
1.0
0
0.66 1st floor; 0.25 other floors
0.8 1st floor; 0.5 other floors
Optician
Per 200 s.f.
1.0
0
0.66 1st floor, 0.25 other floors
0.66 1st floor, 0.25 other floors
Out-Patient Services
*
*
*
*
*
CHAPTER 11-07: Development and Design Standards
Section 11-07-03: Off-street Parking and Loading Standards
Subsection 2: Table of Off-street Parking Requirements
March 2013
Boise Development Code
Page 216
Table 11-07.1 Off-Street Parking Requirements GFA = Gross floor area Land Use Unit of Measure General P-1 District P-2 District P-3 District Parks, Recreation and Open Space
Forest Reserve or Recreation Area
*
*
*
*
*
Golf Clubhouse
*
*
*
*
*
Golf Course
Per hole
4 and 1 per 3 seats of restaurant and bar area
*
4 and 1 per 3 seats of restaurant and bar area
4 and 1 per 3 seats of restaurant and bar area
Golf Driving Range
*
*
*
*
*
Park or Playground
*
*
*
*
*
Public Plaza
*
*
*
*
* Social Care
Food Kitchen
*
*
*
*
*
Mission
*
*
*
*
*
Single Resident Occupancy Hotel
*
*
*
*
* Transportation
Aircraft Landing Field
*
*
*
*
*
Bus Station
*
*
*
*
*
Transit Terminal, Trucking Terminal
*
*
*
*
* Utility
Gas Fired Power Plant
*
*
*
*
*
Utility Facility, Minor
*
*
*
*
*
Utility Facility, Major
*
*
*
*
*
Utility Shop or Storage Facility
*
*
*
*
* Commercial Adult Uses
Bikini Bar
Per 3 seat
1
0
0.25
0.33
Sexually Oriented Business
Per 3 seat
1
0
0.25
0.33 Agriculture Uses
Agricultural Uses, Stables
*
*
*
*
*
Hog Raising, Stockyard , Feedlot
*
*
*
*
*
Slaughterhouse, Rendering Plant
*
*
*
*
* Animal-Related Business
Animal Daycare
*
*
*
*
*
Animal Hospital
*
*
*
*
*
Boarding Kennel
*
*
*
*
*
Small Animal Grooming
*
*
*
*
*
Veterinary Clinic
Per 300 s.f.
1.0
0
0.66 1st floor; 0.25 other floors
0.8 1st floor; 0.5 other floors Financial Service
Bank, Financial Institution (excluding drive-up)
Per 300 s.f.
1.0
*
0.33
0.5 Food and Beverage Service
Coffee/Espresso Stand
*
*
*
*
*
Restaurant, no drive-up window
Per 3 seats
1
0
0.25
0.33
Tavern/ Lounge
Per 3 seats
1
0
0.25
0.33
Brew Pub
Per 3 seats
1
0
0.25
0.33 Office
Office, Business or Professional < 1,000 s.f.
Per 300 s.f.
1.0
0
0.66 1st floor; 0.25 other floors
0.8 1st floor; 0.5 other floors
CHAPTER 11-07: Development and Design Standards
Section 11-07-03: Off-street Parking and Loading Standards
Subsection 2: Table of Off-street Parking Requirements
March 2013
Boise Development Code
Page 217
Table 11-07.1 Off-Street Parking Requirements GFA = Gross floor area Land Use Unit of Measure General P-1 District P-2 District P-3 District
Office, Business or Professional > 1,000 s.f.
Per 300 s.f.
1.0
0
0.66 1st floor; 0.25 other floors
0.8 1st floor; 0.5 other floors
University Office or Laboratory
Per 300 s.f.
1.0
0
0.66 1st floor; 0.25 other floors
0.8 1st floor; 0.5 other floors Personal Services
Personal Service, Barber Shop, Studios, Massage Parlor, Beauty Salon
Per 300 s.f. GFA
1.0
*
0.5
0.8
Laundry and Dry Cleaning Service
Per 300 s.f. GFA
1.0
*
0.5
0.8
Photography Studio
Per 300 s.f. GFA
1.0
*
0.5
0.8
Printing, Lithography, Publishing & Reproductions, Exclusive of Paper Manufacturing
Per 300 s.f. GFA
1.0
*
0.5
0.8
Self-Service Laundry
Per 300 s.f. GFA
1.0
*
0.5
0.8 Recreation and Entertainment
Bowling Alley
Per lane and per seat in restaurant/bar area
4 per lane and 1 per 3 seats
*
1 per lane and 1 per 7 seats for restaurant/bar area
2 per lane and 1 per 5 seats for restaurant/bar area
Firing Range, Indoor
*
*
*
*
*
Health Club
Per 250 s.f. GFA
1.0
0
1.0
1.0
Recreation, Commercial – Indoor
Per 100 s.f. GFA
1.0
0
0.33
0.66
Recreation, Commercial – Outdoor
Per acre
20
*
10
15
Private Amusement Park, Ball Park, Race Track, Stadium or other Similar Establishment
Per seat
0.25
0
0.125
0.167
Recreation Center
Per 100 s.f. GFA
1.0
0
1.0
1.0
Social Center
Per 100 s.f. GFA
1.0
0
1.0
1.0
Swimming Pool, Commercial
*
*
*
*
*
Swimming Lessons, Private Pool
*
*
*
*
*
Theater
Per seat
0.25
0
0.14
0.2
Theater, Drive-In
*
*
*
*
* Retail (Sales)
Auction Establishment
*
*
*
*
*
Bookstore, University
*
*
*
*
*
Building Materials, Hay, Grain, Bulk Garden Supply, Heavy Materials
Per 600 s.f. GFA
1.0
0
0.5
0.75
Convenience Store with Gasoline Service
*
*
*
*
*
Drive-Up Window
*
*
*
*
*
Grocery
Per 300 s.f. GFA
1.0
0
0.33
0.5
Pharmacy
Per 300 s.f. GFA
1.0
0
0.33
0.5
Retail Store, Local Serving
Per 300 s.f. GFA
1.0
0
0.33
0.5
Retail Store < 60,000 s.f. GFA
Per 300 s.f. GFA
1.0
0
0.33
0.5
Retail Store > 60,000 s.f. GFA
Per 300 s.f. GFA
1.0
0
0.33
0.5
Seed and Garden Supply
Per 600 s.f. GFA
1.0
0
0.5
0.75
CHAPTER 11-07: Development and Design Standards
Section 11-07-03: Off-street Parking and Loading Standards
Subsection 2: Table of Off-street Parking Requirements
March 2013
Boise Development Code
Page 218
Table 11-07.1 Off-Street Parking Requirements GFA = Gross floor area Land Use Unit of Measure General P-1 District P-2 District P-3 District
Shopping Center, Convenience Commercial
Per 300 s.f. GFA
1.0
0
0.33
0.5
Shopping Center, Neighborhood Commercial, < 70,000 s.f.
Per 300 s.f. GFA
1.0
0
0.33
0.5
Shopping Center, Neighborhood Commercial > 70,000 s.f.
Per 300 s.f. GFA
1.0
0
0.33
0.5
Shopping Center, Community Commercial
Per 300 s.f. GFA
1.0
0
0.33
0.5
Shopping Center, Regional Commercial
Per 300 s.f. GFA
1.0
0
0.33
0.5 Vehicles and Equipment
Auto Emission Van Test Site
*
*
*
*
*
Automotive Sales Lot, surfaced
Per 600 s.f. GFA
1.0
0
0.5
0.75
Battery Rebuilding
*
*
*
*
*
Car Wash
*
*
*
*
*
Heavy Machinery, Trailer, and Equipment Sales or Rental Lot
Per 600 s.f. GFA
1.0
0
0.5
0.75
Motor Vehicle Repair, Minor
Per 500 s.f. GFA
1.0
0
0.5
0.75
Motor Vehicle Repair, Major
Per 900 s.f. GFA
1.0
0
0.5
0.75
Parking Lot, Commercial
*
*
*
*
*
Parking Lot, University
*
*
*
*
*
Parking Lot, Off-Site Accessory
*
*
*
*
*
Parking Garage
*
*
*
*
*
Service Station
Per 300 s.f. GFA
1.0
0
0.33
0.5 Visitor Accommodations
Bed & Breakfast
*
*
*
*
*
Hotel/Motel
Per Room
1.0
0
0.56
0.8
Recreation Vehicle Park
*
*
*
*
*
Recreation Vehicle Parking, Short Term
*
*
*
*
* Industrial Industrial Service
Construction Business
*
*
*
*
*
Contractor Shop, Solid Fuel & Lumber
*
*
*
*
*
Laundry, Industrial
*
*
*
*
*
Newspaper & Printing Establishment
*
*
*
*
* Manufacturing and Production
Atmospheric Gas Production Plant
Per 750 s.f. GFA
1.0
0
0.5
0.75
Gas Production Plant
Per 750 s.f. GFA
1.0
0
0.5
0.75
Brewery, Distillery, Winery
Per 750 s.f. GFA
1.0
0
0.5
0.75
Food Products, Dairy Products & Wholesale Bakeries
Per 750 s.f. GFA
1.0
0
0.5
0.75
Heavy Manufacturing, General
Per 750 s.f. GFA
1.0
0
0.5
0.75
Light Manufacturing, General
Per 750 s.f. GFA
1.0
0
0.5
0.75
Lumbermill, Sawmill, Pulpmill
Per 750 s.f. GFA
1.0
0
0.5
0.75
Tannery
Per 750 s.f. GFA
1.0
0
0.5
0.75
CHAPTER 11-07: Development and Design Standards
Section 11-07-03: Off-street Parking and Loading Standards
Subsection 2: Table of Off-street Parking Requirements
March 2013
Boise Development Code
Page 219
Table 11-07.1 Off-Street Parking Requirements GFA = Gross floor area Land Use Unit of Measure General P-1 District P-2 District P-3 District Mining and Extraction
Mining, Dredging, Loading & Hauling of Sand, Dirt, Gravel or Other Aggregate
*
*
*
*
*
Rock Crushing, Extractive Uses
*
*
*
*
*
CHAPTER 11-07: Development and Design Standards
Section 11-07-03: Off-street Parking and Loading Standards
Subsection 2: Table of Off-street Parking Requirements
March 2013
Boise Development Code
Page 220
Table 11-07.1 Off-Street Parking Requirements GFA = Gross floor area Land Use Unit of Measure General P-1 District P-2 District P-3 District Storage
Bulk Storage of Corrosive, Acid, Alkali, Explosive or Flammable Materials or Products
*
*
*
*
*
Storage of Flammable Liquids or Gases Necessary to the Processes on the Premises
*
*
*
*
*
Outdoor Storage
*
*
*
*
*
Self-Service Storage
Per facility
4
*
2
3
Storage Building, Wholesale Business, Self-Service Storage
*
*
*
*
* Warehouse and Freight Movement
Grain Elevator
*
*
*
*
*
Trucking Terminal
*
*
*
*
*
Truck Stop
*
*
*
*
*
Warehouse
Per 2,000 s.f. GFA
1.0
0
0.5
0.75
Wholesale Business
Per 2,000 s.f. GFA
1.0
0
0.5
0.75 Waste and Salvage
Composting Facility
*
*
*
*
*
Junkyard, Vehicle Wrecking
*
*
*
*
*
Recycling Drop-Off Center
*
*
*
*
*
Sanitary Landfill, Incineration
*
*
*
*
* Accessory Uses
Accessory Uses to Allowed Dwellings
*
*
*
*
*
Accessory Uses, < 1,000 s.f.
*
*
*
*
*
Accessory Uses, > 1,000 s.f.
*
*
*
*
*
Accessory Uses, > 2,500 s.f.
*
*
*
*
*
Accessory Indoor Storage of Corrosive, Acid, Alkali, Explosive or Flammable Materials or Products
*
*
*
*
*
Accessory Outdoor Storage
*
*
*
*
*
Accessory Retail Sales & Service Related to the Primary Use
*
*
*
*
*
Backyard Composting
*
*
*
*
*
Bee Keeping
*
*
*
*
*
Golf Club Accessory Building
*
*
*
*
*
Home Occupation
*
*
*
*
*
Livestock & Pets
*
*
*
*
*
Uses Accessory to an Allowed Use
*
*
*
*
* Temporary Uses
Construction Office, Temporary Dwellings
*
*
*
*
*
Construction Office, Temporary
*
*
*
*
*
Construction Office, Temporary Dwellings
*
*
*
*
*
Sales Trailer
*
*
*
*
*
Seasonal Uses
*
*
*
*
*
Subdivision Office, Temporary
*
*
*
*
*
CHAPTER 11-07: Development and Design Standards
Section 11-07-03: Off-street Parking and Loading Standards
Subsection 3: Additional Parking Standards
March 2013
Boise Development Code
Page 221
Table 11-07.1 Off-Street Parking Requirements GFA = Gross floor area Land Use Unit of Measure General P-1 District P-2 District P-3 District
Temporary Display and Sale of Merchandise
*
*
*
*
*
Temporary Parking Lots
*
*
*
*
*
Temporary Voting Place
*
*
*
*
*
NOTE:
* The Director shall determine the parking space requirements, which shall be as for a use that has similar traffic-generating characteristics.
3. ADDITIONAL PARKING STANDARDS
A. Required Loading Facilities
Loading spaces shall be provided for commercial and industrial buildings as indicated and defined in this Section.
(1) Quantity
The quantity of loading spaces required shall be as indicated in Table 11-07.2.
Loading spaces are not required for buildings under 20,000 square feet in gross floor area.
Table 11-07.2 Number and Type of Loading Space Required for any Commercial or Industrial Building Gross Floor Area (Square Feet) Quantity
20,000 – 50,000
1
50,001 +
2
(2) Definitions and Standards
(a) Loading areas must comply with setback and landscape requirements. Loading areas shall not be orientated toward residential uses or zones and shall not be permitted along the front of a building.
(b) Loading spaces shall be not less than 35 feet in length, 10 feet in width and have 13 feet of vertical clearance. Loading areas shall be clearing posted or marked.
(c) For buildings greater than 20,000 square feet and located within the C-5 zone, applicants shall submit a plan for the provision of loading spaces. This plan may include an onsite loading area or an alley. Loading within a public street right-of-way is discouraged.
(3) The PZC, DRC, or HPC may modify the requirements of this section if it is demonstrated that the site cannot accommodate these requirements and that alternative loading methods or facilities can be provided in a manner compatible with surrounding uses.
B. Required Bicycle Parking
(1) One bicycle parking space within an approved rack shall be required for each 10 required automobile parking spaces. Any fraction will be rounded up. If more than 10 bicycle parking spaces are required, 25 percent of the required bicycle parking spaces shall be covered. For multi-family residential, one space is required per dwelling unit.
CHAPTER 11-07: Development and Design Standards
Section 11-07-03: Off-street Parking and Loading Standards
Subsection 3: Additional Parking Standards
March 2013
Boise Development Code
Page 222
(2) Bicycle parking spaces shall be a minimum of 6 feet long and 2.5 feet wide and have an overhead clearance of 7 feet if covered. A 4-foot wide aisle is required between rows of bicycle parking spaces or nearby walls. Stationary racks shall be located on improved non-permeable surfaces and anchored to the ground.
(3) Spaces shall be located within 50 feet from the main entrance of the building.
C. Motorcycle Parking
(1) Motorcycle parking spaces shall be at least 4 feet wide and 10 feet deep and must be clearly posted or marked.
(2) For every 4 motorcycle spaces provided, the number of standard vehicle spaces may be reduced by one.
(3) A minimum of 10 feet of backup space shall be provided.
D. Common Facilities for Joint or Mixed Uses
Shared use of off-street parking facilities may be approved by the Director subject to the standards of this section.
(1) Location
The distance from the main entrance to the parking shall not exceed the following:
(a) 600 feet for patrons
(b) 1,500 feet for employees
(2) Joint Use
(a) An application for the joint use of parking facilities shall include: A detailed site plan identifying the proposed parking space counts and distance to the parking using traditional walking patterns. The location of a sign on the premises indicating the location to the additional parking. A parking study demonstrating sufficient off-street parking for all uses. A joint parking agreement in a form to be recorded for off-street parking facilities.
(b) Maximum distance from main entrance to parking: 600 feet for patrons; 1,500 feet for employee parking.
(3) Reduction or Increase of Parking Requirements
Parking requirements as indicated in Table 11-07.1, Off-Street Parking Requirements, may be reduced or increased as follows:
(a) Parking Reductions and Waivers to Exceed the Parking Maximums for Residential Uses: Up to 10 percent of the required parking may be reduced or exceeded by the Planning Director through an administrative approval. A reduction or waiver to exceed the parking maximums of greater than 10 percent requires a conditional use permit.
CHAPTER 11-07: Development and Design Standards
Section 11-07-03: Off-street Parking and Loading Standards
Subsection 4: General Design Standards
March 2013
Boise Development Code
Page 223
(b) Parking Reductions and Waivers to Exceed the Parking Maximums for Office, Commercial and Industrial Uses:
When the building size is 5,000 square feet or less, the Planning Director may authorize the parking reduction or grant a waiver to exceed the parking maximum. Otherwise, a conditional use permit is required.
(c) Application Requirements for Parking Reduction A parking study documenting a reduced need for parking List and schedule of major parking events. A detailed site plan and parking space count. A description of available public transit services. A description of available on-street parking.
(4) Findings to Exceed Parking Maximums
(a) The additional parking spaces are required to reduce adverse impacts to the surrounding neighborhood; and
(b) The additional parking is required due to unique characteristics of the use.
(c) The additional parking does not harm the site circulation or pedestrian access.
(d) The additional parking does not increase pedestrian travel distance to the building.
(e) The additional parking does not cause a conflict between pedestrians and vehicles Acceptable means to demonstrate adequate pedestrian access may include:
A. Placement of buildings and building entrances near the street or near other main pedestrian routes.
B. Clearly demarcating pedestrian pathways both through and around parking lots so drive aisle crossings are minimized.
C. Addition of landscape between parking facilities and pedestrian paths.
4. GENERAL DESIGN STANDARDS
A. Dimensional Standards
(1) Dimensional Standards for Parking Lots Table 11-07.3: Minimum Standards for Parking Lot Design Parking Angle A Stall Width B Curb Length Per Car C Stall Depth D Driveway Width E For Standard Vehicles
0°
9 ft.- 0 in.
23 ft.- 0 in.
9 ft.- 0 in.
12 ft.- 0 in.
30°
9 ft.- 0 in.
18 ft.- 0 in.
17 ft.- 8 in.
12 ft.- 0 in.
45°
9 ft.- 0 in.
12 ft.- 9 in.
20 ft.- 5 in.
13 ft.- 0 in.
60°
9 ft.- 0 in.
10 ft.- 5 in.
21 ft.- 10 in.
16 ft.- 0 in.
90°
9 ft.- 0 in.
9 ft.- 0 in.
20 ft.- 0 in.
22 ft.- 0 in.
CHAPTER 11-07: Development and Design Standards
Section 11-07-03: Off-street Parking and Loading Standards
Subsection 4: General Design Standards
March 2013
Boise Development Code
Page 224
Table 11-07.3: Minimum Standards for Parking Lot Design Parking Angle A Stall Width B Curb Length Per Car C Stall Depth D Driveway Width E For Compact Vehicles
0°
7 ft.- 6 in.
14 ft.- 0 in.
7 ft.- 6 in.
12 ft.- 0 in.
30°
7 ft.- 6 in.
12 ft.- 6 in.
14 ft.- 6 in.
12 ft.- 0 in.
45°
7 ft.- 6 in.
10 ft.- 6 in.
16 ft.- 0 in.
13 ft.- 0 in.
60°
7 ft.- 6 in.
8 ft.- 9 in.
16 ft.- 9 in.
16 ft.- 0 in.
90°
7 ft.- 6 in.
7 ft.- 6 in.
15 ft.- 0 in.
22 ft.- 0 in.
(2) Dimensional Standards for Indoor Parking Structures
(a) Spaces within parking structures shall be 8.5 feet wide and 18 feet deep.
(b) Drive aisle dimensions shall be consistent with commercial parking lots.
(c) Structural columns may encroach up to 6 inches into parking spaces.
(3) Compact Spaces
(a) A maximum of 40 percent of the total spaces provided may be designed, designated, and used for compact size vehicles. The dimensional standards for compact vehicle spaces and driveways are indicated in Table 11-07.3, Minimum Standards for Parking Lot Design.
(b) Compact spaces shall be clearly marked as such on the pavement or curb.
(4) Tandem Parking
The Director may allow tandem parking for indoor parking or single-family residential upon determination that the following are true:
(a) The tandem parking does not have a negative impact on adjacent properties; and
(b) Tandem parking is required because of physical limitations of the site; and
(c) The standard parking design(s) would have a negative impact on the functional and/or aesthetic value of the site.
B. Location for Parking Lots and Parking Structures
Rear or side street setback areas may not be used for off-street parking or loading areas, except rear setback areas may be used where lots are alley loaded. Side yards that do not abut a street may be utilized for off-street parking; provided that a minimum five-foot wide landscape area be constructed and maintained along the adjoining property line. For detached single family residential uses in the A-1, A-2, R-1A, R-1B, R-1C, R-1M, R-2, and R-3 districts, a minimum 3-foot wide landscape area is required.
C. Parking Area Design
(1) Parking in Required Yards
Public or private parking areas and parking spaces shall not be permitted in any required yard of any residential district, except as follows:
(a) Except for working vehicles in daily use parked on driveways, in front of homes, vehicles shall not be parked on:
CHAPTER 11-07: Development and Design Standards
Section 11-07-03: Off-street Parking and Loading Standards
Subsection 4: General Design Standards
March 2013
Boise Development Code
Page 225
Required yard areas; (except for in structures that comply with setback requirements; Unimproved parking areas (except per 3 (b) below; or Other areas not designed for vehicle parking.
(b) Trailers, camp trailers, boats, boat trailers, recreational vehicles, and all other vehicles not in daily use are restricted from parking in the front and street side yard setbacks or unimproved parking areas.
(c) Alley-loaded parking and parking structures may encroach into rear or interior side setbacks per the zone.
(d) Open air public or private parking areas and service drives in a residential use district shall be permitted in side yards that do not abut a street, provided that a minimum five-foot wide landscaping and screening area be constructed and maintained adjacent to the adjoining property line as provided for in Section 11-07-05.5, Screening. For detached single family residential uses in the R-1A, R-1B, R-1C, R-2, and R-3 districts, a three-foot wide landscaping and screening area is required.
(e) No commercial vehicle or trailer shall be parked, stored, or otherwise left unattended at any place in a residential district whether on public or private property for over two hours except while engaged in construction or any other permitted activity.
(2) Third-party Auto Sales Prohibited
With the exception of auto sales lots in commercial districts, it shall be unlawful to maintain or place vehicles on a property of another for the purpose of sale.
(3) Driveways
(a) All driveways shall extend into the site in a perpendicular manner. The Director may approve exceptions provided the driveway: Is for access to a garage or parking area and shall not have a negative impact on adjacent properties; and Is required because of physical limitations of the site; or Will enhance the aesthetics of the site (including preserving trees); or Is required for safety reasons such as preventing vehicles from backing into a street.
(b) All parking areas, driveways, and other vehicular access for single family or two-family residential uses, may consist of wheel strips, pavers, or other hard surface material approved by the Director. Gravel surfacing is allowed for non-required parking spaces and driveways outside front and side street setbacks. Other residential uses are subject to standards in accordance with subsection (6), Surfacing, below.
(c) Driveways for single-family or two-family residential uses shall be a minimum of nine feet in width. For the purpose of this section, individual driveways are those vehicular access ways separated from any other by a minimum of five feet of landscaping or similar material not designed to accommodate vehicles. Driveways or service drives for other residential uses are subject to Section 11-07-04.3.
CHAPTER 11-07: Development and Design Standards
Section 11-07-03: Off-street Parking and Loading Standards
Subsection 4: General Design Standards
March 2013
Boise Development Code
Page 226
(d) Driveways are permitted in the front and street side setbacks in accordance with Section 11-07-04.3.B, Service Drives.
(e) For single family residential uses, individual driveways in the front or street side setback shall not exceed a width of 33 feet within the setback. For the purpose of this section, individual driveways are those vehicular access ways separated from any other vehicular access way by a minimum of five feet of landscaping or similar material not designed to accommodate vehicles. More restrictive standards shall prevail where applicable.
(f) Residential driveways shall be setback at least 50 feet from an intersection of public streets as depicted in Figure 11-07.4. Under unusual circumstances, the Director may waive this requirement.
(g) Parking on substandard lots of record is regulated by Section 11-06-03.3.D(7) of this Code.
(4) Residential Garages
(a) 22’ of back up space is required measured from the back of the parking stall to the far side of the alley.
(b) Street access is prohibited when alley access is available, except where there is an existing curb cut on a corner lot, or as may be approved by the Planning Director for other areas based on findings that such access will not be detrimental to the function and appearance of the affected block frontage and sidewalk system.
(5) Lighting
Lights in public or private parking area or vehicle sales area may not shine directly on adjacent residential land uses.
(6) Surfacing
(a) Driveways and parking areas must be built with a non-permeable material such as concrete or asphalt. Appropriate alternative may be approved by the Director.
(b) Gravel Surface Exception A gravel surface may be utilized within industrial zones for enclosed storage yards or grounds maintenance areas. The storage and
Figure 11
Figure 11--07.07.22: Service Drive Setback: Service Drive Setback
CHAPTER 11-07: Development and Design Standards
Section 11-07-03: Off-street Parking and Loading Standards
Subsection 5: Accessible Parking Spaces
March 2013
Boise Development Code
Page 227
maintenance areas must be located behind the building and be enclosed
by a 6 foot high sight obscuring fence.
Use of gravel parking must be approved by the Boise City Fire
Department and the Boise City Public Works Department to ensure
compliance with best management practices.
(7) Bumper Overhang
Parking stall length may be reduced to 18 feet when the adjacent sidewalk or landscaping
is increased by two feet over the minimum requirement. The minimum width for a sidewalk
adjacent to a bumper overhang is 6 feet and the minimum width for a landscape strip
adjacent to a bumper overhang is 7 feet
5. ACCESSIBLE PARKING SPACES
This section applies only to the quantity, dimensional standards, and location of accessible parking spaces.
A. Compliance with ADA and IBC standards is required. Accessible spaces
are required according to the following table. For every six or fraction
of six accessible parking spaces, at least one shall be a van-accessible
parking space.
B. Quantity
(1) The required number of accessible spaces shall be as follows:
Table 11-07.5 Required Number of Accessible Parking Spaces
Total Parking Spaces in Lot Minimum Number of Accessible Spaces
1-25 1
26-50 2
51-75 3
76-100 4
101-150 5
151-200 6
201-300 7
301-400 8
401-500 9
501-1,000 2% of the Spaces Provided
1,001 and Over 20 plus 1 for each 100 over 1,000
Figure 11-07.3: Access aisle at passenger loading zone
CHAPTER 11-07: Development and Design Standards
Section 11-07-03: Off-street Parking and Loading Standards
Subsection 6: Temporary Parking Lots
March 2013
Boise Development Code
Page 228
(2) Exceptions
(a) At facilities providing medical care and other services for persons with mobility
impairments, are required to provide additional accessible spaces:Outpatient
facilities shall provide accessible spaces equal to 10 percent of the total number
of required parking spaces.
Facilities that provide services for individuals with mobility impairments
shall provide accessible spaces that are equal to 20 percent of the
number of required parking.
(b) Valet parking facilities shall provide a passenger loading zone located on an
accessible route to the entrance of the facility.
(c) Accessible parking spaces shall not contain slopes in excess of two percent and
may not be accessed via steps or from adjoining pedestrian walkway.
(d) Accessible spaces shall be located closest to main entrance. When there are
multiple buildings or main entrances, accessible spaces shall be distributed
equally.
(e) Accessible spaces shall be clearly marked as reserved spaces.
C. Dimensions
(1) Length
All accessible spaces shall be a minimum of 20 feet in length.
(2) Width
All accessible spaces shall be a minimum of eight feet in width plus a five-foot wide
adjacent access aisle.
(3) Van Accessible
One in every eight accessible spaces, but not less than one, shall have an adjacent access
aisle eight feet in width and shall be designated as "Van Accessible."
6. TEMPORARY PARKING LOTS
Temporary parking lots are prohibited in the R-1, R-2, N-O zones and the CD, C, HD overlays.
A. Approval Criteria
Temporary lots may be permitted for up to 2 years if the following approval criteria are met:
Figure 11-07.4: Accessible parking space dimensions
CHAPTER 11-07: Development and Design Standards
Section 11-07-04: Connectivity
Subsection 1: Public Roads
March 2013
Boise Development Code
Page 229
(1) Use of the land for parking is consistent with the Boise City Comprehensive Plan for the area.
(2) A minimum of 20 feet width of direct access to the parking lot from a public road right-of-way is provided.
(3) The parking lot shall be compatible with surrounding uses.
(4) Existing mature landscaping shall not be displaced by the parking lot.
(5) A detailed grading and drainage plan shall be submitted for review and approval by the ACHD and the Public Works Department before a building permit is issued.
B. Minimum Standards
All temporary parking lots shall meet the following minimum standards:
(1) Gravel surfacing with a written maintenance plan for dust control measures for the parking lot and access road.
(2) Site obscuring fencing and landscaping alongside and rear property lines that coincide with a residential use. Landscaping is required along street frontages.
(3) Wheel stops marking all parking spaces.
(4) A landscaped area of five percent of the total lot area.
(5) A temporary irrigation system adequate to maintain the temporary landscaping in a healthy condition.
C. Procedure
(1) Plans for a temporary parking lot shall be submitted for review and approval by the Director as an administrative-level design review and shall include provisions for removal of the lot upon expiration of the permit. A bond for 110 percent of the cost of removing the temporary parking lot shall be required.
(2) Three one-year extensions of the permit may be granted by the Director providing the lot is in compliance with the requirements of the permit. 11-07-04. CONNECTIVITY
1. PUBLIC ROADS
[Reserved]
2. PRIVATE ROADS
[Reserved]
3. INTERNAL SITE CIRCULATION
A. Ingress and Egress
(1) Access driveways providing reasonable access to required private or public parking areas including garages may extend through the front or street side setback in a perpendicular manner provided they comply with Section 11-07-04.3.B, below.
CHAPTER 11-07: Development and Design Standards
Section 11-07-04: Connectivity
Subsection 3: Internal Site Circulation
March 2013
Boise Development Code
Page 230
(2) Driveways that extend through the setback in other than a perpendicular manner may be approved due to physical limitations of the site or for aesthetic or safety purposes. The Director may approve driveways upon a determination that the following:
(a) The driveway is required to enhance the aesthetics of the site such as preserving existing trees; or
(b) The driveway is required for safety reasons such as avoiding backing into a busy street or a street with limited motorist visibility.
(3) Driveways that are not approved by the Director require a variance from the PZC or Hearing Examiner.
B. Service Drives
(1) Standards
(a) Service drives may not land lock adjacent property or interfere with the continuity of public streets.
(b) Service drives must not encourage or promote pass through between public or private streets.
(c) Service drives shall intersect a street at a 90 degree angle, unless otherwise approved by the Ada County Highway District.
(d) Drive through lanes shall be at least ten feet in width.
(e) One way service drives shall be at least ten feet in width.
(f) Two-way service drives shall be at least twenty feet in width.
(g) The width of a service drive at the intersection of a street shall be twenty feet.
(h) The width of a service drive between building appurtenances such as carport overhangs shall be at least twenty four feet.
(2) Widths
(a) Drive through lanes and associated escape lanes shall each be a minimum of ten feet wide.
(b) A driveway for a single-family dwelling and for a two-family dwelling may be a minimum of nine feet wide.
(c) One-way service drives without parking on either side shall be a minimum of ten feet wide. Two-way service drives without parking on either side shall be a minimum of 20 feet wide.
(d) Garages shall be setback 20 feet or greater, or between three and eight feet from the edge of the service drive. The combined width of the service drive and the garage setback shall be a minimum of 28 feet.
CHAPTER 11-07: Development and Design Standards
Section 11-07-04: Connectivity
Subsection 3: Internal Site Circulation
March 2013
Boise Development Code
Page 231
(e) Except at the intersection of a service drive and public road, the service drive
shall be narrowed to 20 feet where occupied by a crosswalk.
(f) 24 feet of clear width shall be maintained between building appurtenances, such
as carport overhangs, that border service drives.
(g) Service drives shall comply with Fire Department standards before the service
drive is used as a fire access drive.
(3) Grade
Maximum grade for service drives shall be ten percent unless a steeper grade is
specifically approved by the City Engineer and the Fire Chief. A maximum grade of two
percent, unless specifically approved by the ACHD and City Engineer, shall be required
for the initial 80 feet from the intersecting curb to provide a landing at the junction of the
service drive and the public right-of-way.
0
Figure11-07.5: Garage setback from service drive
Figure 11-07.6: Service drive width
CHAPTER 11-07: Development and Design Standards
Section 11-07-04: Connectivity
Subsection 4: Pedestrian Access
March 2013
Boise Development Code
Page 232
(4) Drives that Serve More Than 40 Dwelling Units
Service drives that serve more than 40 dwelling units will be designed based upon the standards of this Code and by a traffic plan prepared by a traffic engineer, submitted to and approved by the Director and the Public Works Department for the interior roadway and parking system. The required transportation plan shall include the following information:
(a) The adequacy of approach streets and highways to accommodate development traffic;
(b) The need to expand or modify existing facilities; the locations and design of development driveways; and
(c) Provisions for pedestrian and bicycle facilities that address the following: consideration for service/emergency vehicular movement; safety for vehicular and pedestrian traffic; livability of the residential environment; economy of land use, construction and maintenance; and a recommended street layout and dimensional standards. This requirement may be waived when it can be shown by the applicant that no section of on-site roadway will exceed 240 vehicles per day.
C. Minimize Driveways
As a means to improve traffic safety and to improve the visual quality of an area, the number of driveway intersections with public or private roadway in residential projects shall be minimized. Use of parking courts, alleys, and common driveways is strongly encouraged.
4. PEDESTRIAN ACCESS
The development shall provide sidewalks and crosswalks that link transit stations, parking areas, buildings, open spaces, and adjacent pathways. Sidewalks shall be at least four feet wide, sited and illuminated to provide safe passage and observation of the pathway route. Sidewalk crossings of service drives shall be provided and clearly distinguished from the service drive.
5. MICRO-PATHS
A. Purpose
To encourage non-motorized forms of travel, and to provide safe, convenient, and aesthetic alternative travel routes to common destinations such as schools, parks, and shopping centers.
B. General Provisions
(1) Micro-paths shall be utilized
(a) where there are no sidewalks for safe and direct pedestrian access to the common destinations identified above;
(b) to connect with a regional path system; or
(c) to provide pedestrian connections from an internal to an external street.
(2) The following factors will be considered in the location of any micro path:
(a) the utility and need for a given path;
CHAPTER 11-07: Development and Design Standards
Section 11-07-04: Connectivity
Subsection 5: Micro-paths
March 2013
Boise Development Code
Page 233
(b) impacts to existing neighborhoods;
(c) pathway design as it relates to both crime prevention and function; and
(d) the responsibilities of ownership, maintenance, and liability.
C. Location
(1) The city shall require the creation and maintenance of micro-paths (except in cases where it is shown to be inappropriate) that provide access to the following facilities when adjacent to the new development:
(a) Existing or proposed schools
(b) Existing or proposed public parks,
(c) Neighborhoods,
(d) Shopping areas,
(e) Public land,
(f) Transportation or other community facilities,
(g) Adopted pathway elements of the Boise Metro Plan including but not limited to: Ridge-to-Rivers Pathway Plan, the Parks Comprehensive Plan and the Downtown Plan,
(h) Vacant parcels, held either publicly or privately, that could provide future neighborhood connection(s) to the above noted sites, and
(i) In similar cases, where deemed appropriate.
(2) In addition, micro-paths may be required to connect sites other than those noted above:
(a) When there is evidence that a pedestrian/cyclist would otherwise be forced to travel along a roadway that may be hazardous for non-motorized forms of travel, in order to reach the desired destination; or
(b) When the pedestrian/cyclist would otherwise have to travel a distance of more than one-half mile alongside a local or collector roadway in order to reach the desired destination.
D. Design
While the city may exercise considerable discretion in determining the design of micro-paths, the following minimum standards should be followed:
(1) The paved portion of the micro-pathway may range from seven to ten feet in width. Generally, micro-paths that receive high use will be wider. Barriers may be placed at the terminal ends of paths to restrict use by motor vehicles while allowing use by bicycles, wheel chairs, and other modes of travel.
(2) A five-foot wide landscaped area/building and fence setback, as measured from both edges of the paved micro-path, shall be required, and will be owned by either the abutting property owner(s) or a home owners association unless accepted by a public entity. For safety purposes, planting material in this area is limited to three feet in height. The landscape, fence, and building regulations for this area shall be indicated by a note on the plat.
CHAPTER 11-07: Development and Design Standards
Section 11-07-05: Landscaping, Fences, Walls, and Screening
Subsection 1: Purpose and Intent
March 2013
Boise Development Code
Page 234
(3) In order to design for crime prevention the following design standards will be followed:
(a) Fencing that provides better visibility from adjacent homes or buildings. If solid fencing is used, it may not exceed four feet in height.
(b) Lighting may be required by Department of Public Works, and shall be owned and maintained by the city.
(c) The use of corners and curves in the design of micro-paths is discouraged.
(d) The placement of micro-paths that link high use public areas such as shopping malls with neighborhoods will be subject to review and recommendation by the Police Department.
(4) Micro-pathway standards in foothill projects may be varied to take into consideration topography, soils, and drainage. Typically in areas of steep slopes these trails should not be paved unless erosion is evident, may curve to follow the contour, may be narrow to limit disturbance, may take advantage of existing landscape features, and would not require lighting.
E. Site Development Standards
With the exception of single-family subdivisions, development proposals shall be in substantial compliance with the following requirements:
(1) Lighting and sidewalks shall be designed to encourage pedestrian access and security.
(2) Pathways shall have convenient connections within the development core and between surrounding neighborhoods and parking facilities.
(3) Safe, secure, and convenient bicycle storage areas will be provided and storage/rack facilities shall comply with standards adopted by the Boise Parks and Recreation Department.
(4) Pedestrian and bicycle circulation within the project shall be designed to minimize conflicts and hazards with motor vehicles.
F. Responsibility
The following provisions are intended to provide guidance to those entities that are responsible for construction, maintenance, and/or liability for a micro-path.
(1) No Clear Responsible Entity
Micro-paths for which there is no clear responsible entity may be reserved for future use by granting an easement to the city. If no entity accepts responsibility for the micro-pathway within the period of time specified in the easement, then the full use of the property will revert to the property owner and the easement shall terminate. 11-07-05. LANDSCAPING, FENCES, WALLS, AND SCREENING
1. PURPOSE AND INTENT
The purpose of this section is to establish requirements for the design, installation and maintenance of landscapes that contribute ecologically and aesthetically to the growth and economic prosperity of the City; that achieve healthy, attractive and safe environments according to recognized design and urban forestry principles; that encourage water conservation; storm water integration; and that conserve, protect and promote the natural identity and environment of the City.
CHAPTER 11-07: Development and Design Standards
Section 11-07-05: Landscaping, Fences, Walls, and Screening
Subsection 2: Landscaping
March 2013
Boise Development Code
Page 235
2. LANDSCAPING
A. Landscaping Plan
(1) Landscape Plan Preparation
All landscape plans shall be prepared by an architect, landscape architect, landscape designer working as a professional in this field or qualified nurseryman.
(2) Applicability
A landscape plan is required for all commercial, industrial, office, substandard lot, and multi-family developments, alterations and additions to buildings or parking lots, or changes in use. The landscape plan may be required as part of an application for a Design Review, Conditional Use, Variance, Zoning Certificate or Certificate of Appropriateness.
(3) Adopted Streetscape Plans
Where streetscape standards have been adopted by the City of Boise for the streets bordering a project site, and there is a difference between the adopted streetscape standards and the requirements of this section, the adopted streetscape standards shall govern the streetscape elements of the project.
(4) Uses / Buildings
(a) New Development
All new developments shall provide landscaping in accordance with the requirements of this section.
(b) Expansions and Alterations to Existing Buildings
The requirements of this section shall apply to the expansion and alteration of existing buildings when the project increases 50 percent or more in gross square footage.
(c) Change of Use
The requirements of this section shall not be imposed unless one or more of the following circumstances apply: An expansion or alteration to the building/lot is being proposed as per Subsection (b) or (c) above; or The property never complied (or no longer complies) with the ordinance requirements in existence at the time of approval or conditions of approval at the time of construction.
(5) Existing Parking Lots
(a) Re-striping or Re-surfacing
Replace and repair the existing landscaping to previous approval standards.
(b) 0-25 Percent Expansion or Replacement of the Parking Lot
Replace and repair the existing landscaping to previous approval standards.
(c) 26-50 Percent Expansion or Replacement of the Parking Lot
Replace and repair the existing landscaping to previous approval standards and provide perimeter landscaping.
(d) 51 – 100 Percent Expansion or Replacement of the Parking Lot
Comply with all requirements of this section.
CHAPTER 11-07: Development and Design Standards
Section 11-07-05: Landscaping, Fences, Walls, and Screening
Subsection 2: Landscaping
March 2013
Boise Development Code
Page 236
(6) Waivers
If the location of existing buildings or other structures prevents conformance with the requirements of Sections 11-07-05.2.A(4) and/or 11-07-05.2.A(5), or its implementation would create non-conformity of parking standards or other special circumstances, the Planning Director may grant a waiver based on the following findings:
(a) That the requirements of Sections 11-07-05.2.A(4) and/or 11-07-05.2.A(5) are not feasible due to existing development or circumstances regarding the property;
(b) That granting a waiver will not have a detrimental effect on adjacent properties; and
(c) That granting a waiver will not be in conflict with past approvals that required landscape improvements. A letter requesting a waiver and reasons therefore, shall be submitted at the time of application. Decisions of the Planning Director may be appealed to the Planning and Zoning Commission within 10 calendar days from the date of the decision in accordance with Chapter 3 of this Code.
(7) Alternative Compliance
(a) Purpose
To provide for alternative means to meet the intended purposes of the landscape requirements when explicit compliance is not feasible or the alternative means are superior to what is required.
(b) Process General
The applicant shall request alternative compliance in conjunction with the submittal of a Conditional Use Permit or Design Review application or upon the determination that the development does not comply with the specific provisions of this title. The request will be considered by the same approval body as the base application. The request shall specify:
A. The specific requirements that are proposed to be modified;
B. The reasons for the modification; and
C. A demonstration of how the alternative means for compliance meets the requirements’ intended purpose. Stormwater Swales
Stormwater swales within front setbacks can be approved at staff level provided that the landscape plans approved by the applicable approval body are not changed substantially and comply with Section 11-07-05.2.G(2). A landscape plan with swale construction details which incorporate the landscape design shall be submitted for the staff level review.
(c) Standard
The proposed alternative means for compliance with the specific requirements shall demonstrate that the alternative provides an equal or superior means of meeting the intent and purpose of the regulation.
(d) Required Findings
In order to grant approval for an alternative compliance, the director shall determine the following:
CHAPTER 11-07: Development and Design Standards
Section 11-07-05: Landscaping, Fences, Walls, and Screening
Subsection 2: Landscaping
March 2013
Boise Development Code
Page 237
Strict adherence or application of the requirements is not feasible because one of the following conditions exist:
A. Topography, soil, vegetation, or other site conditions are such that full compliance is impossible or impractical;
B. The site involves space limitations or an unusually shaped lot;
C. Safety considerations;
D. Other regulatory agencies or departments having jurisdiction are requiring design standards that conflict with the requirements of this section;
E. The proposed design includes innovative design features based on “new urbanism,” “neotraditional design,” or other site designs that promote walkable and mixed use neighborhoods; or
F. Environmental quality benefits; The alternative compliance provides an equal or superior means for meeting the requirements; and The alternative means will not be detrimental to the public welfare or adversely affect the uses and character of surrounding properties.
B. Minimum Design Standards and Requirements
(1) Approved Plant Material
(a) The publication titled Tree Selection Guide by the Community Forestry Unit of the Boise Parks & Recreation Department (latest edition) is hereby adopted as the list of approved and recommended trees for on-site planting.
(b) The Stormwater Plant Materials Resource Guide published by the Boise City Public Works Department is recommended for plant selection, establishment and maintenance for storm water facilities.
(c) New plant varieties are being produced every year and other species not listed in the above publications or species which are more disease resistant, pest resistant, or drought tolerant may also be considered.
(2) Prohibited Plant Material
The plants listed under “Trees not permitted for Rights-of-Way Property Planting” in the Tree Selection Guide are prohibited from being planted along any street or within any parking lot regulated by this section.
(3) Minimum Plant Sizes Table 11-07.6 Minimum Plant Sizes Type of Plant Size
Shade/Ornamental Trees
2 inch caliper
Evergreen Trees
6 foot height
Woody Shrubs
2 gallon
Perennials
1 gallon
(4) Tree Species Mix
When five or more trees are to be planted to meet the requirements of any portion of this section, a mix of species shall be provided as per the table below:
CHAPTER 11-07: Development and Design Standards
Section 11-07-05: Landscaping, Fences, Walls, and Screening
Subsection 2: Landscaping
March 2013
Boise Development Code
Page 238
Table 11-07.7 Tree Species Mix Required Number of Trees Minimum Number of Species
5-10
2
11-30
3
31-50
4
50+
5
Note: When the total number of trees is greater than 10, one species cannot amount to more than 40% of the total.
(5) Tree Spacing
For design flexibility, trees may be grouped together or spaced evenly as desired. However, trees shall be spaced no closer than 80 percent of the average mature width of the trees, as demonstrated in the following examples:
(6) Mulch
Organic mulch such as bark or soil aid shall be applied to all planting areas, except that rock mulch may be permitted as part of the approved landscape plan. Planting areas utilizing rock mulch shall have 50 percent of the ground surface covered by vegetation at plant maturity. Natural colors shall be used and patterning of the materials is prohibited. Use of mulch as the only ground cover in required planting areas is prohibited. Impermeable plastic weed barrier under the mulch is prohibited.
(7) Curbing
All planting areas that border driveways, parking lots and other vehicle use areas shall be protected by curbing, wheel stops or other protective devices. Such devices shall be a minimum of 30 inches from all tree trunks to prevent cars from damaging tree trunks.
(8) Utilities
The following standards apply to the planting of trees near existing utilities and to trenching for new utilities near existing trees:
(a) Overhead Utilities
Only approved Class I trees in the Tree Selection Guide may be planted under or within ten lateral feet of any overhead utility wires.
Figure 11-07.7: Tree spacing
CHAPTER 11-07: Development and Design Standards
Section 11-07-05: Landscaping, Fences, Walls, and Screening
Subsection 2: Landscaping
March 2013
Boise Development Code
Page 239
(b) Underground Utilities
All trees shall be planted outside of any utility easement, unless written approval is obtained from the applicable agency. All trees shall be planted outside of any easement that contains a City sewer main, unless written approval is obtained from the City Engineer. If any utility easement precludes trees required by this section, the width of the required buffer shall be increased to accommodate the required trees.
(c) Trenching
New underground utilities shall be located outside of the dripline of existing trees if trenched, or be tunneled a minimum of three feet below existing grade within the tree's dripline. The guiding principle is that no root two inches or larger shall be cut. Note: This requirement is for placement of new utilities and does not affect the City’s or the Utility’s ability to access existing utilities for repair, replacement and maintenance.
(9) Berms
Berm slopes shall not exceed 3:1 (horizontal: vertical). Slopes shall not exceed 4:1 on areas which require mowing.
(10) Water Efficiency
The landscape plan shall provide for water efficient landscaping as follows:
(a) Lawn Areas
Where appropriate and on sites where other landscape options can be incorporated, large expanses of mown lawn, such as Kentucky Bluegrass, are discouraged due to its high water consumption. Lawn should not be treated as a fill-in material but rather as a functional or aesthetic element of the landscape. Mown lawn should not be used in median strips, parking strips, or other difficult areas to irrigate less than six feet in width. Areas of lawn larger than 15,000 square feet shall have soil moisture sensors that are properly installed and adjusted.
(b) Plant Selection and Location
Plants should be placed based on adaptability to regional and micro climatic conditions, i.e., shade, sun, wind, etc. Plants having similar water needs should be grouped together in distinct hydrazones, and spaced to minimize watering needs while maximizing growth and spread of plants. The use of native and other low-water-use plants is encouraged.
C. Irrigation
(1) Irrigation Required
All landscape areas requiring irrigation shall be served with an automatic underground irrigation system. Areas of landscaping which will not require supplemental watering after initial establishment are not required to have permanent irrigation.
(2) Irrigation Water
Use of non-potable irrigation water is required when determined to be available and adequate. Year round water availability is also required by connecting to potable water or an on-site well as a secondary source.
CHAPTER 11-07: Development and Design Standards
Section 11-07-05: Landscaping, Fences, Walls, and Screening
Subsection 2: Landscaping
March 2013
Boise Development Code
Page 240
D. Perimeter Buffers
(1) Street Buffers
(a) Applicability
Landscape street buffers shall be required for all multi-family residential, office, commercial and industrial developments. Street buffers shall not be required in the C-5 (Central Business) zone in circumstances where a landscape buffer would prevent the placement of a proposed building at the allowed zero foot front or street side setbacks. For single family subdivisions, buffers shall be as required by Chapter 11-09, Subdivision Standards.
(b) Size and Location
Landscape buffer widths along streets shall be based on the required setbacks of the underlying zone. All required buffers shall be located outside any street right-of-way and shall be maintained by the property owner. All street buffers shall be measured from the property line (after dedication of any right-of-way) and not from the sidewalk or curb. Subdivisions shall comply with Chapter 11-09, Subdivision Standards.
(c) Street Trees
All required landscape street buffers shall be planted with trees and shrubs, lawn or other vegetative groundcover, with a minimum density of one tree per 40 lineal feet. If this calculation results in a fraction of .5 or greater, round up to an additional tree. Class I trees are discouraged within street buffers except where justified. Clustering is allowed, however, trees shall be spaced no closer than 80 percent of the average mature width of the trees.
(d) Conifers Along Streets
Coniferous trees are allowed along streets only within planting areas 20 feet or greater in width.
(e) Tree Wells
Tree wells shall be a minimum of 36 square feet in size.
(f) Parkways & Detached Sidewalks
Parkway widths shall be six feet for Class II trees with ACHD approved root barriers, eight feet for Class II trees without root barriers, and ten feet for Class I and III trees as measured from the inside of the sidewalk to the inside of the curb.
(2) Side and Rear Perimeter Buffers
(a) Applicability
Side and rear landscape buffers shall be required for all residential, office, commercial and industrial developments. For single family subdivisions, buffers shall be as required by Chapter 11-09, Subdivision Standards.
(b) Size and Location
Landscape buffer widths shall be based on the required setbacks of the underlying zone. Single family residential subdivisions shall comply with Chapter 11-09, Subdivision Standards. All required side and rear buffers shall be located within the property and shall be maintained by the property owner.
CHAPTER 11-07: Development and Design Standards
Section 11-07-05: Landscaping, Fences, Walls, and Screening
Subsection 2: Landscaping
March 2013
Boise Development Code
Page 241
(c) Parking Lot/Vehicular Use Area Buffers
If an interior side or rear lot line is adjacent to a parking lot or other vehicular use area, such as, but not limited to, vehicle sales areas, truck and bus parking areas and driveways the following standards shall apply. Landscaping
The perimeter landscape strip shall be planted with one tree per 40 lineal feet. If this calculation results in a fraction of .5 or greater, round up to an additional tree. Species shall be selected from the Boise City Tree Selection Guide. Clustering is allowed, however, trees shall be spaced no closer than 80 percent of the average mature width of the trees. Exceptions
Where two properties have a shared access and parking agreement that has been approved by the city, the above requirements may be waived.
(3) Buffers Between Different Land Uses
(a) Applicability
Land use buffers shall be required along contiguous property lines between residential uses and dissimilar uses such as industrial, commercial, and office. The buffers are required along the entire contiguous property line. This section shall not apply to mixed use projects on contiguous properties.
(b) Size
The minimum buffer width between land uses is based on the required setbacks of the underlying zone.
(c) Buffer Materials
The materials within the required buffer between incompatible land uses are regulated as follows: Mix of Materials
All buffer areas shall be comprised of, but not limited to, a mix of evergreen and deciduous trees, shrubs, lawn, or other vegetative groundcover. Fences, walls and berms may also be incorporated into the buffer area. Barrier Effectiveness
The required buffer area shall result in an effective barrier within five years of installation and be maintained such that 60 percent or more of the vertical surface is closed and prevents the passage of vision through it. Clustering is allowed, however, trees shall be spaced no closer than 80 percent of the average mature width of the trees. Buffer Walls
Where existing or proposed adjacent land uses cannot be adequately buffered with plant material(s), the City may require inclusion of a wall, fence, or other type of screen that mitigates noise and/or unsightly uses. If a wall or fence at least six feet tall is provided, the planting requirement may be reduced to at least one tree per 40 lineal feet, plus shrubs, lawn, or other vegetative groundcover, in lieu of the requirements of subsection (b). Clustering is allowed, however, trees shall be spaced no closer than 80 percent of the average mature width of the trees.
CHAPTER 11-07: Development and Design Standards
Section 11-07-05: Landscaping, Fences, Walls, and Screening
Subsection 2: Landscaping
March 2013
Boise Development Code
Page 242
Chain-link Fencing
Chain-link fencing does not qualify as a screening material; therefore the buffer must still be landscaped as per subsection (b), even if a chain-link fence is provided. Pedestrian Access
Landscaping and screens shall not eliminate pedestrian access between commercial and residential districts.
E. Parking Lots (Interior)
Interior parking lot landscaping shall be required in any parking lot with 12 spaces or more, including vehicle sales lots.
(1) Planter Size
Landscape planters shall be a minimum of 8 feet in width for Class I & II trees and ten feet in width for Class III trees. Required parking lot planters shall be the length of the adjacent parking space. Dimensions are measured inside curbs.
(2) Parking Lot Layout
No linear grouping of parking spaces shall exceed ten in a row, without an internal planter island. Interior landscaping shall be used to delineate and guide major traffic movement within the parking area. Terminal planters shall be provided at the ends of rows of parking to protect parked vehicles and confine moving traffic to aisles and driveways. Interior landscape planters shall be spaced as evenly as feasible to reduce the visual impact of long rows of parked cars.
(3) Trees Required
Each interior planter that serves a single row of parking spaces shall be landscaped with at least one tree and shall be covered with low shrubs or other vegetative groundcover. Each interior planter that serves a double row of parking spaces shall have at least two trees and shall be covered with low shrubs or other vegetative groundcover. Deciduous shade trees must be pruned to a minimum height of eight feet above the adjacent parking areas. Evergreen trees are prohibited in interior planters.
(4) Lights Prohibited
Light poles and fixtures shall be located outside of landscape planters which contain trees as required by this section.
(5) Industrial Exclusion
Industrial parking, storage, and loading areas are specifically excluded from the interior landscape requirements, but shall meet all perimeter and right of way landscape and screening requirements.
F. Preservation of Existing Trees
(1) Landscape Plan
All existing trees four inch caliper and greater shall be shown on the landscape plan. Indicate whether each tree is to be retained or removed and include an assessment by an approved Arborist of the health of the trees. Include on the plan a description of how existing trees to be retained are to be protected during construction.
CHAPTER 11-07: Development and Design Standards
Section 11-07-05: Landscaping, Fences, Walls, and Screening
Subsection 2: Landscaping
March 2013
Boise Development Code
Page 243
(2) Protection During Construction
Existing trees that are retained shall be protected from damage to bark, branches, and roots during construction. Protection fences around existing trees are required for the duration of construction.
(3) Construction within the Dripline of Existing Trees
Specific requirements for construction within the dripline of existing trees are as follows:
(a) Paving
Impervious surfaces may be allowed at a distance from the trunk of a retained tree equal to the diameter of the tree trunk plus five feet.
(b) Grade Changes
Grade changes are discouraged within the dripline of existing trees and are subject to recommendation by the City Forester or an approved Arborist.
(c) Utilities
New underground utilities to be placed within the dripline of existing trees shall be installed as per Subsection 11-07-05.2.B(8)(c) of this section.
(4) Mitigation Trees
Healthy desirable trees four inch caliper or greater that are removed shall be replaced with an equal replacement of the total caliper inches lost either on site or off-site per recommendation of the City Forester. Example: two 10-inch caliper trees removed may be mitigated with four 5-inch caliper trees, five 4-inch caliper trees, or seven 3-inch caliper trees.
(5) Required Landscaping
Existing trees that are retained or relocated on site may count toward the required landscaping.
(6) Incentives
The Planning Director may allow up to a ten percent reduction of the required parking spaces to save healthy desirable trees.
G. Stormwater Integration
(1) Purpose
The City encourages the incorporation of vegetated, well-designed stormwater filtration swales into landscape areas where topography and hydrologic features allow. Such integrated site designs can improve water quality and provide a natural, effective form of flood and water pollution control. Landscape areas which incorporate stormwater swales shall generally be above and beyond the landscaping required by this section.
(2) Design Guidelines
Below are requirements for designing a landscape area that integrate stormwater facilities. The Planning & Zoning and Public Works Departments should be involved in the initial design and determining the appropriateness of any site. Additional information regarding stormwater system design is provided in the publications titled Boise Stormwater Design Manual and Stormwater Plant Materials Resource Guide, which are available from Boise City Public Works.
CHAPTER 11-07: Development and Design Standards
Section 11-07-05: Landscaping, Fences, Walls, and Screening
Subsection 2: Landscaping
March 2013
Boise Development Code
Page 244
(a) Street Buffers
Except in industrial areas, swales shall not be located in required landscape buffers along streets. However, swales located along streets within required landscape buffers may be approved through the Alternative Compliance process at staff level provided that the landscape plans are not changed substantially from the previous approval and comply with this section. Swales located within street buffers shall meet the following standards: Swales shall not exceed twelve inches in storage depth; Swales shall be separated from back of sidewalk by a minimum of two feet; Street trees shall be provided as required by this section; Rapid sand infiltration windows shall be integrated for timely drainage of stormwater; and No infiltration basins are allowed.
(b) Perimeter Buffers
Swales located within required buffers in side and rear yards shall meet the following standards: Swales shall not exceed 18 inches in storage depth; Trees shall be provided as required by this section; and Rapid sand infiltration windows shall be integrated for timely drainage of stormwater.
(c) Gravel, rock, or cobble on the surface of swales shall not exceed 20 percent of the surface area of the bottom of the swale. Cobble may be incorporated into required landscape areas if designed as a dry creek bed or other design feature.
(d) Stormwater swales shall be vegetated with appropriate plant materials. Plant materials shall be a species that are able to withstand the anticipated changes in soil wetness and moisture levels. Examples of appropriate plants materials include, but are not limited to:
Figure 11-07.8: Swales
CHAPTER 11-07: Development and Design Standards
Section 11-07-05: Landscaping, Fences, Walls, and Screening
Subsection 2: Landscaping
March 2013
Boise Development Code
Page 245
Trees
River Birch (Betula nigra), American Hornbeam (Carpinus caroliniana), Green Ash (Fraxinus pennsylvanica), Sweetgum (Liquidambar styraciflua), Sycamore (Platanus occidentalis) and Mountain Alder (Alnus tenuifolia) Shrubs
Red Osier Dogwood (Cornus sericea), Serviceberry (Amelanchier alnifolia), Rhododendrons (Rhododendron sp.), American Cranberry Bush (Viburnum trilobum), Golden Currant (Ribes aureum) and Drummond Willow (Salix drummondiana) Groundcovers
Sedges (Carex sp.), Spike Rush (Eleocharus acicularis), Maiden Grass (Miscanthus sp.), and Fountain Grass (Pennisetum sp.)
(e) Organic mulch shall not be used adjacent to the flow path. Plant material shall be installed adjacent to the flow path and infiltration area to aid in capturing sediment and reducing clogging.
(f) Open water ponds and holding areas with a permanent water level are not permitted in required landscape or buffer areas, except along Interstate-84. However, ponds that are aesthetically designed with special grading and vegetative features may be approved as provided for through Alternative Compliance.
(g) Slopes shall not exceed 3:1 (horizontal: vertical).
H. Arterial and Collector Street Buffering
Landscaped buffer areas shall be provided where single family residential lots are adjacent to collector or arterial streets.
(1) Perimeter Landscape Buffer
(a) The buffer shall be located outside of any planned future right-of-way.
(b) The width of the buffer along arterial streets shall be a minimum of 30 feet. Along collector streets it shall be a minimum of 20 feet.
(c) The buffer area may be located within the lot provided that: The depth of the lot is a minimum of 130 feet; and In cases where the side lot line runs along an arterial or collector, the width of the lot is a minimum of 80 feet.
(d) Fences and walls shall not be placed in buffer areas.
(2) Frontage Road
(a) Frontage roads, as permitted by the ACHD, and separated from a collector or arterial street by a ten foot wide landscaped median, may be permitted.
(b) The landscaped median shall be planted with trees and shrubs that at maturity will form a solid screen at least six feet high and a continuous tree canopy.
CHAPTER 11-07: Development and Design Standards
Section 11-07-05: Landscaping, Fences, Walls, and Screening
Subsection 2: Landscaping
March 2013
Boise Development Code
Page 246
I. Installation
(1) Certificate of Completion
Before issuance of the final certificate of occupancy, the author of the landscape plan shall submit to the City certification that the landscaping has been installed in compliance with the approved plans.
(2) Installation Schedule
All required landscaping, irrigation systems and site features shall be installed according to the approved landscape plan prior to issuance of a final certificate of occupancy.
(3) Extension of Time for Installation
Upon recommendation of the director, a temporary certificate of occupancy may be issued for a specified time period, not to exceed 180 days when:
(a) Due to weather or other circumstances, the landscaping or other required site amenities cannot be completed; and
(b) The applicant has provided surety to the City for the required improvements.
J. Landscape Maintenance
(1) Applicability
The requirement for landscape maintenance applies in all districts where landscaping has been required.
(2) Standards
(a) The property owner is responsible for the maintenance of all landscaping and screening devices required by this section.
(b) Topping any street tree required by this section is prohibited. For trees not within street right-of-way, alternative pruning techniques to achieve specific horticultural or aesthetic effects may be used if approved by Boise City Forestry. Examples include pleached allee, pleached bosque, espalier, and pollarded canopy.
(c) Tree grates shall be widened to accommodate the growing tree trunk and prevent girdling of any trees planted in tree wells within sidewalks or other public right of way.
(d) Plant materials that exhibit evidence of insect pests, disease, and/or damage shall be appropriately treated to correct the problem. Dead plant materials shall be replaced.
(e) All landscaping required by this subsection may be subject to periodic inspections by City officials to determine compliance or to investigate.
CHAPTER 11-07: Development and Design Standards
Section 11-07-05: Landscaping, Fences, Walls, and Screening
Subsection 3: Fences
March 2013
Boise Development Code
Page 247
3. FENCES
A. General Provisions
(1) In historic districts, a Certificate of Appropriateness is required for fences made
with any material other than dog-eared cedar.
(2) Electric fences are prohibited.
(3) Barbed wire is permitted in commercial and industrial zones only as the top section of a security fence. Barbed wire must be located at least 72 inches above grade.
(4) Walls, lattices, and screens shall be considered to be fences.
(5) Boxes, sheet metal, old or decayed wood, broken masonry blocks, or other unsightly materials may not be used for fencing.
B. Allowed Fences
(1) In residential and office districts maximum fence heights are as follows:
(a) Solid fences to a height of 36 inches or open-vision fences to height of 4 feet may be built within the front yard setback. Fences to a height of 72 inches may be built outside the front yard setback.
(b) Fences, walls, or plantings on or within the clear vision triangle shall be limited to 36 inches in height.
(2) Any variance from the above requirements shall be considered per Section 11-03-04.14, Variance.
(3) If a fence is to be erected upon and within public right-of-way, approval must also be obtained from the ACHD.
(4) Concrete and masonry walls of any height and fences over six feet tall must also be approved by the Building Department.
(5) The fence must be built entirely upon the property on which it was permitted for unless agreements are made with the adjoining property owners. These agreements need not be submitted with the application. However, the permit shall become void if the applicant fails to procure them.
(6) All fences shall be maintained and kept structurally sound so as to not endanger life, property or become a nuisance.
(7) One ornamental gate/entryway in a front or street side setback may be allowed to exceed the fence height limits, provided the gate/entryway and does not exceed eight feet in height by six feet in width, and is not located within a clear vision triangle.
Figure
Figure 1111--07.907.9: : Fence dimensions Fence dimensions
8'-0"MAX.4'-0"MAX.6'-0"MAX.
CHAPTER 11-07: Development and Design Standards
Section 11-07-05: Landscaping, Fences, Walls, and Screening
Subsection 4: Retaining Walls
March 2013
Boise Development Code
Page 248
(8) Fences adjacent to micro-paths shall comply with Section 11-07-04.5.D(3).
4. RETAINING WALLS
The following shall apply to retaining walls located within setbacks:
(1) Individual retaining walls may not exceed three feet in height when located within
a front setback or clear vision triangle. Individual retaining walls may not exceed
six feet in height when located within any other setback.
(2) Walls must be separated by a minimum distance of five feet in order to be
considered as separate walls.
(3) Multiple walls with a combined height that exceeds the height allowed in the
setback may be approved through the Category 1 Hillside permit process when
in compliance with the following conditions:
(a) The additional height is necessary and appropriate because of the size,
configuration, topography, or other unique characteristics of the property;
(b) The Director and Public Works Director have jointly determined that the height,
location, and grading for the walls are the minimum necessary for reasonable
development of the property;
(c) The additional height will not have any substantial detrimental effect on adjacent
or nearby properties;
(d) Terraces between the walls are of sufficient width and depth to accommodate
landscaping or other techniques designed to reduce the visual impact. Conditions
requiring such techniques shall be incorporated into the Category I permit; and
(e) Clear vision triangles are free of obstructions that exceed three feet in height.
5. SCREENING
All parking and storage areas (except those in conjunction with single family residences) including vehicle
sales areas, truck parking areas, bus parking areas, and service drives shall meet the following standards:
A solid screen with a height not less than five and one-half feet shall be provided when a parking lot is
adjacent to residential land uses. This screen may include fencing, walls, or landscape combinations that
will provide a dense barrier.
3'-0"
MAX
8'-0"
MAX
6'-0"
MAX.
Figure 11-07.10: Ornamental gate/entryway dimensions
CHAPTER 11-07: Development and Design Standards
Section 11-07-06: District-Specific Development Standards
Subsection 1: Residential-Office (R-O) Zoning District
March 2013
Boise Development Code
Page 249
11-07-06. DISTRICT-SPECIFIC DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
The standards in this section apply in addition to the generally applicable design and development standards this chapter unless indicated otherwise. Where there is a conflict, this Section shall prevail.
1. RESIDENTIAL-OFFICE (R-O) ZONING DISTRICT
Certain conditional uses in the R-O district may only be approved as part of a mixed use project of allowed uses such as office or residential and shall not exceed 30 percent of the gross floor area of the mixed use project. The conditional uses may be included within a permitted use building or in a separate building within a multi-building mixed use project. The conditional use may not be occupied until an equal amount of floor area of the principally allowed uses have been constructed to the core or shell stage.
A. Standards for Mixed Uses
The standards of this section shall apply to the listed uses as part of a mixed use development in the R-O district.
B. Retail Uses
The proportion of retail in mixed use development shall be not exceed 30 percent, except that the PZC may allow the proportion of retail to increase up to a maximum of 40 percent if the following criteria are met.
(1) Residential dwelling units represent the larger portion of the mixed use; or
(2) One or more of the following amenities are furnished at the developer's expense:
(a) Public Space
A public space (e.g., plaza, courtyard, pedestrian mall) with the following requirements: A minimum square footage equal to 30 percent of the total building footprint, A minimum dimension of 20 feet, Shall be predominantly open above, designed for pedestrian use, At least ten percent shall be landscaped, and Seating and other site amenities such as tables, trash receptacles, lighting, public art, and similar items shall be provided as appropriate. The PZC may allow private residential open space to constitute a portion of the public open space requirement; or
(b) Parking Structure
A parking structure with the following requirements: The parking structure must provide at least 50 percent of the parking for the project. Below-ground parking structures shall be covered by a structure or by developed open space accessible to the public. Above grade structures shall be designed so that vehicles are not visible from adjacent public rights-of-way or pedestrian walkways, shall feature leasable floor space on the ground floor adjacent street(s), and shall have the same exterior surface materials as used on the principle building; or
CHAPTER 11-07: Development and Design Standards
Section 11-07-06: District-Specific Development Standards
Subsection 2: Pedestrian Commercial (PC) Zoning District
March 2013
Boise Development Code
Page 250
(c) New Urbanism Design A design in which the buildings front on the sidewalk and the parking is located in no case closer to the street than the building. In the case of a parking lot beside the building, the width of the parking lot shall not exceed the width of the building. Parking lots may not be located at street intersections. A minimum ten-foot wide landscape strip shall separate all sidewalks from the street. The sidewalks shall be at least ten feet wide, of which the six feet closest to the street shall be established as a public easement. The main entrance to the building shall face the street.
C. Planned Unit Developments
Planned developments in the R-O district shall comply with the provisions of Section 11-07-06.5, Planned Unit Development Standards, except as modified by the following:
(1) Minimum size provisions is 18,000 sq. ft.
(2) Area allowed for use exceptions will be based on the greater of land area or floor area.
(3) Special Use Provision: One square foot of residential use shall be provided for each gross square feet of use(s) approved by special exception.
2. PEDESTRIAN COMMERCIAL (PC) ZONING DISTRICT
A. Building Types Allowed
Three types of buildings may exist in the PC District as follows:
(1) Rear Yard Building
This type of building occupies the front of its lot, full width, leaving the rear portion as a private space. The building facade clearly defines the edge of the public space while the rear elevation may be articulated for functional purposes. The depth of the rear yard can contain substantial parking.
(2) Side Yard Building
This type of building occupies one side of the lot with the primary open space to the other side. This type permits systematic climatic orientation with the long side yard elevation facing the sun or breeze. The side yard can be used for parking.
(3) Courtyard Building
This type of building occupies all or most of the edges of its lot while internally defining one or more private spaces. If the front or rear of the courtyard is left open, the courtyard interior may be used for parking.
CHAPTER 11-07: Development and Design Standards
Section 11-07-06: District-Specific Development Standards
Subsection 2: Pedestrian Commercial (PC) Zoning District
March 2013
Boise Development Code
Page 251
B. General Provisions
(1) Accessory and Ancillary
(a) Accessory structures constructed in the rear yard only shall adhere to the standard
setback requirements of this Code.
(b) All ancillary equipment or facilities (gasoline pumps, car washes, etc.) shall be set
to the side or rear of the principal building.
(2) Access
(a) Drive-through windows and services shall be accessed at the side and rear
property lines.
(b) Driveways to parking areas shall not exceed 24 feet in width if two lanes or 12
feet in width if one lane.
(c) Alleys shall be 20 feet in width and constructed to the standards of the ACHD.
(d) Main customer access shall be in the front half of the building nearest the fronting
street.
(3) Screening
(a) Hedges, garden walls, and fences may be built on property lines provided that
they do not obstruct sidewalks or drive aisles. No berms shall be allowed. Front
yard fences and walls shall not exceed three feet in height. Side and rear yard
fences shall not exceed six feet in height.
(b) Trash containers, mechanical equipment, and outdoor storage shall be located in
the rear yard and shall be screened from view with a wood fence, brick wall,
landscaping, or a combination thereof.
(c) Bays and garages may not face the street.
Figure 11-07.11: Typical site plan of building types
CHAPTER 11-07: Development and Design Standards
Section 11-07-06: District-Specific Development Standards
Subsection 2: Pedestrian Commercial (PC) Zoning District
March 2013
Boise Development Code
Page 252
(4) Setbacks
(a) Where a zero-foot setback is used on an interior side yard, building walls shall be constructed without windows and with an appropriate fire wall in order to allow for future attachment of an adjacent building.
(b) A minimum of 15-feet from a front yard setback is allowed on arterials when one or more of the following conditions are present, and subject to discretionary approval under Section E:
i. Legal on-street parking exists adjacent to the project;
ii. A landscape median exists in the roadway adjacent to the project; and
iii. The arterial is designed as a three-lane roadway adjacent to the project.
(c) Front and exterior side setbacks shall be measured from immediately behind the curb.
(5) Conditional Uses and Variances
Conditional use applications under this code are intended for unusual uses and/or larger projects that may not easily comply with the standards or intent of this code. When considering such a conditional use application, the PZC may grant deviations from the code (such as to allow a large shopping center to have buildings dispersed around a site, not just at curb-side) without need for granting of a variance, provided that the intent of the code is met to provide a pedestrian-oriented design and an attractive, uncluttered street scene that is not dominated by parking lots.
(6) Building Height Standards
(a) Two to three-story buildings are preferred on arterials of four or more lanes.
(b) When a building is on a corner lot and has frontage on both an arterial and a collector, the height allowed for the arterial frontage may also be allowed for the collector frontage.
C. Parking Areas
A primary purpose of the PC district is to ensure that parking lots shall not dominate the street frontage, interrupt pedestrian routes, or negatively impact surrounding neighborhoods. Parking areas in the PC district shall conform to the generally applicable parking regulations of this Code, except as indicated this section.
(1) Location and Design
(a) All parking areas shall be located to the side or rear of the principal building. Parking lots should be located behind buildings or in the interior of a block whenever possible.
(b) Parking areas shall not abut street intersections, be adjacent to squares or parks, or occupy lots that terminate a street vista.
(c) All sites, where feasible, shall provide cross-access to adjacent parcels.
(d) Alley-loaded covered parking shall be set back five feet and located behind a paved apron.
(e) No off-street parking shall be located within any front yard, except as provided for in Section 0, Accessible Parking Spaces.
(f) Landscaping requirements shall be as established Section 11-07-05, with the exception of subsection D, Transition Yards and E, Street Yards below.
(g) No parking space shall be closer to the street than the building.
CHAPTER 11-07: Development and Design Standards
Section 11-07-06: District-Specific Development Standards
Subsection 2: Pedestrian Commercial (PC) Zoning District
March 2013
Boise Development Code
Page 253
(2) Parking Ratios
(a) For non-residential uses, the requirements of Section 11-07-05, Off-Street Parking and Loading Standards, shall apply except that they may be reduced ten percent (cumulative to 30 percent) for each of the following categories of criteria that the development meets: Located on an active transit route. Located on a street with a striped bike lane. Includes an integrated residential component pursuant to this Code that constitutes at least one-third of the floor area of the development; or shares primary vehicular and pedestrian access with an abutting residential use (the residential street and sidewalk system bisect the shopping center and primary access to the pedestrian commercial development is taken from the residential street).
(b) No development may provide parking in excess of ten percent more than the minimum requirements established in Section 11-07-05, Off-Street Parking and Loading Standards.
(c) All developments are encouraged to provide joint use of parking facilities pursuant to Section 11-07-03.3.D of this Code. Allowance of joint use may be made in addition to the maximum 30 percent reduction allowed for in this Code.
(3) Bicycle Parking Required
All developments shall provide bike racks in a prominent location at a ratio of one space per 5,000 square feet of gross building area.
D. Transition Yards
(1) Pedestrian Commercial lots that abut existing residential lots shall provide a screen/buffer between the two uses in order to minimize visual contact and create a strong impression of spatial separation. This may include a wall, wood fence, landscaped earthen berm, planted vegetation, existing vegetation, or any combination of these elements. Minimum planter width shall be ten feet. Intermittent planting of deciduous and evergreen trees shall obtain a height at maturity of no less than 20 feet and have no unobstructed openings wider than ten feet between tree canopies upon maturity. Species selection shall be provided for in accordance with the Boise Community Forester’s Tree Selection Guide or with approval of the City Forester. Pathway, driveway, or roadway connections between uses may cross these buffer areas.
(2) When new residential development is proposed on a back or side lot, with shared parking and/or vehicular access between the PC district and the residential district, the transition yard requirements may be waived or modified by the approving body, provided that the landscape requirements of Section 11-07-05 are met.
CHAPTER 11-07: Development and Design Standards
Section 11-07-06: District-Specific Development Standards
Subsection 2: Pedestrian Commercial (PC) Zoning District
March 2013
Boise Development Code
Page 254
E. Street Yards
(1) Separated Sidewalk
(a) A minimum ten-foot wide sidewalk, of which at least the outer five feet shall be secured by public easement, shall be constructed along the entire street frontage of the PC lot. The sidewalk shall be separated from the street curb by a landscape strip that meets the dimensional standards of this Code, except where the strip transitions to meet an existing attached sidewalk on adjacent properties or where other flexibility is granted by this Code.
(b) On arterials, the landscape strip between curbside and the public sidewalk shall be ten feet wide, unless an alternative reduced setback standard is granted based upon the criteria in Section 11-04-03.3.A, Exceptions in the Residential Zoning Districts and as allowed in subsections (c) or 11-07-06.2.E(2)(d), below. On local and collector streets, a five-foot wide landscape strip shall be provided. These landscape area dimensions shall be in addition to any utility easement that exists adjacent to the sidewalk or curb. Paved sidewalk connections between an attached sidewalk and the building shall be provided through the landscape area on 50-foot intervals at a minimum.
(c) Exception: In cases where the applicant can demonstrate that utility locations, existing mature landscaping or other unique circumstances preclude the use of a separated sidewalk as required by this Code, the DRC may allow alternative designs such as an attached sidewalk or a variation in the dimensions of the sidewalk and landscape strip, provided that street trees are still provided as required by the code.
(2) Landscaping
(a) Minimum two-inch caliper trees shall be planted in the front and exterior side landscape area. Tree spacing shall be determined by the spread of the mature tree, so crowns of adjacent trees touch at maturity. Where possible, Class II or Class III species shall be used to provide the maximum environmental benefits. Species selection shall be approved by the City Forester.
(b) Where any building or combination of buildings has a continuous street facing facade 100 feet or greater in length, provisions for a Class II or III tree within a sufficiently sized landscaped building offset shall be incorporated into the project subject to the approval of Design Review and the Boise City Forester.
(c) All species planted within public rights-of-way shall have the approval of the City Forester and be in compliance with the City Tree Ordinance (Title 9, Chapter 16).
(d) Alternatives to the provision of the full width front and street side landscape area (such as tree wells and street furniture) may be allowed with design review and City Forester approval in instances where pedestrian activity is expected to be high, adjacent roadway design (per 11-07-06.2.B(4), Setbacks) is conducive to smaller setbacks and/or the surrounding streetscape would be more compatible with alternative landscape and hardscape treatments. In these cases, the setback from back-of-curb may be reduced through reduction of landscape area. The presence of overhead utility lines in the landscape area may also be cause for modifications to the tree planting requirements of this Code, subject to design review and City Forester approval.
CHAPTER 11-07: Development and Design Standards
Section 11-07-06: District-Specific Development Standards
Subsection 3: Central Business (C-5) Zoning District
March 2013
Boise Development Code
Page 255
F. Residential Units
Residential uses are allowed as a secondary use at ground level or on upper floors above commercial or entertainment uses on the ground floor subject to the setbacks and height limitations stipulated in this Code. In addition, the following standards shall apply:
(1) Private open space (patio or balcony) per unit shall be a minimum of 60 square feet.
(2) The parking requirement shall be one space/unit plus one-half space for each bedroom beyond two.
(3) Parking must be accessed from the same driveway as the commercial parking area, and, residential parking spaces may be designated for the exclusive use of the residents.
3. CENTRAL BUSINESS (C-5) ZONING DISTRICT
A. Development Standards
(1) Warehouse, storage, repair, manufacture, and similar uses or related activities shall be conducted in an enclosed structure.
(2) The sides of a building shall be designed to minimize environmental impacts such as glare, reflected heat, and wind. High quality non-reflective materials such as stone, tile, and brick are encouraged.
B. Ground Floor Retail Design
Design criteria shall be as follows:
(1) At least 70 percent of the ground level, street facing facade(s) must abut and be oriented to a public sidewalk or plaza.
(2) Shall be accessible to the pedestrian from the sidewalk or plaza.
C. Sidewalk Improvements Required
A continuous public walkway, located between the face of building and adjacent street or a street vacated for vehicular use, is required to provide for an improved pedestrian experience. Adopted city standards apply, except that where this section specifies more restrictive criteria, this section shall control. Design criteria shall be as follows:
(1) Size
The minimum width for clear pedestrian movement shall be seven and one-half feet. The overall width shall be at least 13 and one-half feet.
(2) Pattern
Location of pedestrian zone, and amenities zone, shall be consistent with adjacent blocks. The paving pattern and the placement of trees and pedestrian amenities shall be unobstructed.
(3) Surface Treatment
Surface shall be skid resistant, free of surface obstruction, and of a smooth gradient. The cross slope shall freely drain and not exceed four percent gradient.
(4) Street Trees
Trees shall be consistent with adjacent tree species (except when existing trees do not comply with city standards). Trees shall be two and one-half to three-inch caliper,
CHAPTER 11-07: Development and Design Standards
Section 11-07-06: District-Specific Development Standards
Subsection 3: Central Business (C-5) Zoning District
March 2013
Boise Development Code
Page 256
symmetrical, and shall provide no physical or visual obstructions. Spacing shall be of a consistent pattern, with a minimum of 21 feet, and a maximum of 40 feet between trees.
(5) Pedestrian Amenities
Pedestrian amenities may include benches, bollards, newsstands, kiosks, tree grates, bicycle racks, planters, and trash receptacles. Elements shall be constructed of durable materials; of adequate quantity to meet the intended level of use; and compatible with the design of the space.
(6) Pedestrian Lighting
Shall be a minimum of 12 feet and a maximum of 16 feet in height, shall replace mid-block high mast lighting, and be normally spaced at 60 feet apart.
D. Floor Area Ratio Bonus
Buildings within the C-5 zone may exceed the maximum Floor Area Ratio (FAR) stated in Table 11-04.7, Dimensional Standards for Commercial Zoning Districts and Table 11-04.9, Dimensional Standards for Industrial Zoning Districts, in accordance with the following:
(1) General
(a) A FAR bonus shall be awarded for an amenity feature if it complies with the required minimum design standards.
(b) Selection of amenities shall be subject to approval by the Design Review Committee to ensure conformance with adopted standards for the Downtown Policy Planning Area.
(2) Amenities
The following amenities shall be furnished at the developer's expense.
(a) Landscape Feature
An open space located at or near grade. Landscaped areas shall be in addition to other landscaped areas required by this Code. The minimum area shall be 200 square feet, or ten percent of the site, whichever is greater. The minimum width shall be five feet or ten feet if trees are utilized. The area shall be visible to adjacent vehicular and pedestrian traffic in the public right-of-way. Amenities may include lighting, water, art and provisions for seating. FAR Bonus
5:1 maximum, measured as gross square footage of permitted development for each qualifying square foot of area.
(b) Plaza
A public plaza of at least 500 square feet and 20 feet wide in any direction. A plaza space shall be predominantly open above; and designed for pedestrian use only. FAR Bonus
12:1 measured as gross square footage of permitted development for each qualifying square foot of area.
CHAPTER 11-07: Development and Design Standards
Section 11-07-06: District-Specific Development Standards
Subsection 3: Central Business (C-5) Zoning District
March 2013
Boise Development Code
Page 257
Design Criteria
A. Environmental Considerations:
Plaza shall be located to minimize vehicular noise and prevailing winds. Solar protection shall occur from orientation or adequate tree canopy.
B. Accessibility (Physical & Visual)
Plaza shall be visible from the public right-of-way. Three feet of vertical change to the adjacent street is permitted. .
C. Compatibility (Location & Materials)
Materials shall reflect those used on-site for the primary structure. Plaza layout shall be compatible with surrounding uses.
D. Aesthetics
The space shall be well proportioned, inviting, and compatible with its immediate context.
E. Landscaping
Between five percentand 30 percent, of the area shall be landscaped. Seasonal flower plantings shall be incorporated. Tree grates shall be provided if trees are included.
F. Surface Treatment
Paving shall be compatible and complimentary to surrounding uses.
G. Seating
At least two linear feet of seating shall be provided for each 100 square feet of plaza area.
H. Site Amenities
Trash receptacles and security lighting are required. At least one of the following shall also be included if appropriate seating areas, tables, tree grates, bollards, shelter structures, water, fountains, art, historic artifacts, and kiosks.
I. Special Features
Shall be included if appropriate to the design of the space. Includes: water, fountain, art, historic artifacts, etc.
(c) Residential Development
Residential units for sale or lease located within a structure that is developed as an integral part of a building or building complex. FAR Bonus
4:1, measured as gross square footage of non-residential development area for each qualifying square foot of residential development area restrictions. Below-grade residential units shall not be included in the square footage calculations for bonus floor area. Hotel or motel units shall not be included in the calculations for bonus floor area. Common hallway areas shall not be included in square footage calculations for bonus floor area unless the entire floor is residential.
(d) Parking Structure
A parking facility located within a structure.
CHAPTER 11-07: Development and Design Standards
Section 11-07-06: District-Specific Development Standards
Subsection 4: Residential Modular (R-1M) Zoning District Design Standards
March 2013
Boise Development Code
Page 258
FAR Bonus
4:1 , measured as gross square footage of development area for each qualifying square foot of parking structure located below grade; 1:1 one square foot for each qualifying square foot of parking structure located at or above grade. Design Criteria
A. Below-grade structures shall be covered by a structure or developed open space that is accessible to the public.
B. Parking shall be enclosed so vehicles are not visible from adjacent public rights-of-way or pedestrian walkways.
C. The same materials used on the principal building must be used on the parking structure.
D. Parking maneuvering areas may be included in the calculations for bonus floor area.
4. RESIDENTIAL MODULAR (R-1M) ZONING DISTRICT DESIGN STANDARDS
A. Site Orientation
Multiple dwellings in a single building are allowed only in townhouse or row house design, with one dwelling per lot and with the dwellings attached at the common lot line. Units must have an entrance visible from the street and a sidewalk to the entrance from the street. On a street corner these features may be on the exterior side of the building. Where feasible, a detached sidewalk with a street landscape strip is preferred.
B. Architectural Elements
Attached units must have a facade or roof treatment that distinguishes it from the other attached units. Architectural treatments used may include individual pitched roofs, modulated facades, porches, different siding materials and colors, dormers and pop-outs, or vertical windows. These architectural treatments may also be used to demonstrate acceptable design for single family detached units.
C. Open Space
Units have individual on-site (backyard/courtyard) or common area open space equal to ten percent of the lot area. Open space must be at least12 feet wide and may not be located within setback areas, except in the case of zero-foot lot line developments where interior side yard setback areas may be used as open space. Common area open space may not be closer than five feet to a dwelling unit opening. Decks and balconies shall not constitute open space.
D. Landscaping
One deciduous tree of at least two-inch caliper shall be planted in front of each unit.
5. PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
For planned unit developments, changes from zoning district development standards may be approved in accordance with this Section.
A. Planned Development Size
The minimum size for a planned development shall be as follows:
(1) Residential - no minimum.
(2) Commercial - one acre.
(3) Industrial - five acres.
CHAPTER 11-07: Development and Design Standards
Section 11-07-06: District-Specific Development Standards
Subsection 5: Planned Unit Development Standards
March 2013
Boise Development Code
Page 259
(4) Office - two acres.
B. Amenities
(1) At least two of the following amenities shall be provided in projects greater than one acre in size:
(a) Energy conservation measures such as solar energy, heating, or water heating capacity or water conservation measures such as the use of drought-tolerant plants.
(b) Private recreational facility, such as a swimming pool, tennis court, playground, or picnic area, in scale with the development.
(c) Landscaped open space of at least ten percent of gross development area. Setbacks are not included in the calculation of the gross area. The open space shall be designed so as to benefit all residents.
(d) Public access to or additions to the Boise River Greenbelt, neighborhood park system or other public open space.
(e) A Class I public bicycle circulation system to connect to existing or planned routes on the periphery of the development. Such facilities shall be designed and constructed in accordance with The Bicycle Pedestrian Design Manual for Ada County.
(f) Other amenities as approved by the PZC or Hearing Examiner.
(2) Residential planned developments on less than one acre shall provide each dwelling unit at least 100 square feet of open space.
C. Required Setbacks
(1) Attached structures may be permitted in planned developments.
(2) Along the periphery setbacks must meet the district standards.
(3) At the periphery, the setbacks should, match the setbacks of existing development. For example, side setbacks should be provided adjacent to side setbacks, rear setbacks adjacent to rear setbacks and front setbacks opposite front yards.
D. Residential Density
The maximum number of dwelling units shall be calculated by multiplying the number of acres set aside for residential uses by the maximum density number from the tables in Chapter 11-04, Zoning Districts.
E. Residential Uses
A variety of housing types or residential uses may be included in planned developments including attached units (duplexes, townhomes), detached units (patio homes), single family dwelling units (except mobile homes and manufactured homes, see Section 11-06-03.1.D), and multiple family units (three or more units) regardless of the zoning classification of the district, provided that the overall density of the zone is maintained. Duplexes reviewed as part of a planned development shall meet the design criteria of Section 11-06-03.1.B, Dwelling Duplex.
F. Amenities Waived for Residential Infill Planned Developments
In reviewing residential infill planned development, the PZC may allow exceptions to the amenity standards of this Section.
CHAPTER 11-07: Development and Design Standards
Section 11-07-07: Historic Street Light Districts
Subsection 1: District Locations
March 2013
Boise Development Code
Page 260
11-07-07. HISTORIC STREET LIGHT DISTRICTS
This Section establishes the criteria for historic street light districts. Where a historic street light district is established pursuant to this Section, the standards of this Section shall apply.
1. DISTRICT LOCATIONS
The following areas may be considered appropriate locations for improvement with historic street lights:
A. Gateway Streets;
B. Historic districts;
C. Conservation districts;
D. Any area to which the Downtown Plan is applicable; and
E. Any other areas with historic character.
CHAPTER 11-07: Development and Design Standards
Section 11-07-07: Historic Street Light Districts
Subsection 2: Maps
March 2013
Boise Development Code
Page 261
2. MAPS
Figure 11-07.12: Maps of Historic Street Light District
CHAPTER 11-07: Development and Design Standards
Section 11-07-07: Historic Street Light Districts
Subsection 2: Maps
March 2013
Boise Development Code
Page 262
CHAPTER 11-07: Development and Design Standards
Section 11-07-07: Historic Street Light Districts
Subsection 3: Requesting a New or Expanded District
March 2013
Boise Development Code
Page 263
3. REQUESTING A NEW OR EXPANDED DISTRICT
Request for inclusion in a historic street light district shall be made in writing to the Director and the Public Works Director. The request will be forwarded to the Public Works Commission and the DRC for their recommendation to Council.
4. DECISION CRITERIA
The decision to make an area into a historic street light district will be based on the following:
A. Appropriateness of location based on subsection A, above.
B. Source and availability of funding of initial installation (both city and outside funding sources).
C. Source and availability of funding for continued maintenance.
5. INSTALLATION AND MAINTENANCE
All installations shall be installed and paid for by the developer of the project, shall meet current Public Works standards and be approved and inspected by Public Works. If the installation is not associated
CHAPTER 11-07: Development and Design Standards
Section 11-07-07: Historic Street Light Districts
Subsection 6: Established Lighting Districts
March 2013
Boise Development Code
Page 264
with a specific development, the applicant shall contract the work with technical assistance provided by Public Works. Upon completion and successful inspection, Public Works will accept ownership of the lights and assume responsibility for operation and maintenance costs.
6. ESTABLISHED LIGHTING DISTRICTS
The following are existing historic street light districts. Maps showing the exact location of each district are appended to this Code.
A. Vista Historic Street Light District,
B. Hyde Park Historic Street Light District,
C. Warm Springs Historic Street Light District,
D. Downtown Historic Street Light District, and
E. Harrison Boulevard Historic Street Light District.
7. SPACING REQUIREMENTS
A. General
The spacing standards for each historic street light district are listed below. These standards establish general location requirements only; exact locations will be determined in consultation with the Public Works Director. Generally, historic street lights shall be located to match the street light on the opposite side of the street. When a District is fully built out, historic street lights shall be replaced to maintain the current location.
B. By Sub-District
(1) Downtown district
Set standard, as adopted by latest approved Capitol City Development Corporation design standards. See exceptions listed below.
(2) Vista Avenue district
Three lights per block evenly spaced along street.
(3) Harrison Boulevard district
Lights shall be located at either end and center island.
(4) Hyde Park district
65 to 75 feet spacing, both sides of the street.
(5) Warm Springs district
Three lights per block evenly spaced along street.
8. EXCEPTIONS
Following are the areas which are exceptions to the Historic Street Light District but fall within the areas mentioned above:
A. The Grove Plaza
B. 30th Street Area
C. Broad Street
CHAPTER 11-07: Development and Design Standards
Section 11-07-07: Historic Street Light Districts
Subsection 9: SPECIAL STREET LIGHT DISTRICTS
March 2013
Boise Development Code
Page 265
9. SPECIAL STREET LIGHT DISTRICTS
The following are special street lighting districts. Maps showing the exact location of each district follow this section. The requirements for expansion of the district and installation and maintenance follow the above requirements.
A. The Grove Plaza
(1) The light for this area is the Landscape Forms FGP 12-foot light. Model numbers and light requirements can be obtained from the Public Works Department.
(2) The locations of the lights will be regulated by the Public Works Department.
B. 30th Street Area
Main Street south to the Connector and following district boundary east and west.
(1) The light for this area is the EPAX Eurotique Aluminum Pole Series 12- foot light. Model numbers and light requirements can be obtained from the Public Works Department.
(2) Four lights per block evenly spaced on the east and west running streets.
(3) North and South Street shall have a light at the alley. Locations to be determined by the Boise City Public Works.
CHAPTER 11-07: Development and Design Standards
Section 11-07-07: Historic Street Light Districts
Subsection 9: SPECIAL STREET LIGHT DISTRICTS
March 2013
Boise Development Code
Page 266
C. Broad Street
Broad Street from Capitol Boulevard to Second Street.
(1) The Lights for this area is the EPAX Eurotique Aluminum Pole Series 12 foot, Eurotique
Arms and Antique Street Lamps Munich Pendant. Model numbers and light requirements can
be obtained from the Public Works Department.
(2) Light locations are to be determined by the Public Works Department.
CHAPTER 11-07: Development and Design Standards
Section 11-07-08: Hillside and Foothills Development Standards
Subsection 1: Purpose and Intent
March 2013
Boise Development Code
Page 267
11-07-08. HILLSIDE AND FOOTHILLS DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
1. PURPOSE AND INTENT
To development of hillsides and foothills is consistent with the Boise City Comprehensive Plan and to ensure protection from hazards due to slope, erosion-prone soils, unstable soils, earth movement, and other geologic and hydrologic hazards.
2. APPLICABILITY
These provisions shall apply to development on properties where the slope exceeds 15 percent or where adverse conditions due to slope stability, expansion soils, high water table and springs, erosion, or sedimentation are present as determined by the Director or City Engineer.
3. CATEGORIES OF HILLSIDE DEVELOPMENT PERMITS
The director (with input from the City Engineer) shall determine whether an application may be processed as a Category I, II, or III permit.
A. Category I
Category I permits are issued by the Director for minor, routine construction on prepared building pads and single-lots that do not involve significant grading. For example:
(1) Single-family residential homes or accessory structure placed on lots needing little modification, in a development for which a Category III permit has previously been issued.
(2) Single-family residential homes or accessory structures, placed upon lots of record that; comply with approved building envelopes and limits to grading; and, for which Category II permit criteria are not exceeded.
B. Category II
Examples of the development requiring a Category II permit are:
(1) Exterior additions to existing structures; or
(2) Grading with significant modification of approved topography; including:
(a) A retaining wall which is greater than four feet of exposed height or more than one retaining wall when the horizontal distance between retaining walls is less than ten feet and the total of all exposed retaining walls exceeds four feet in height.
(b) An excavation or fill which exceeds the limits as defined International Building Code Chapter 18 and Appendix J as amended by Boise City Code Chapter 4-02.
(3) Access roads or driveways in excess of 100 feet in length or in excess of 15 Percent grade. Such driveways shall be reviewed for impacts on drainage and soil stability, emergency access, access to the public street and potential physical impacts on neighboring properties.
(4) Multiple retaining walls located within setbacks, per Section 11-07-05.4, Retaining Walls.
C. Category III
Category III permits are for PUDs, preliminary subdivision plats, or grading involving modification of approved topography beyond that allowed under Categories I and II, including:
CHAPTER 11-07: Development and Design Standards
Section 11-07-08: Hillside and Foothills Development Standards
Subsection 4: Hillside Development Restrictions
March 2013
Boise Development Code
Page 268
(1) Projects where the Director , with input from the City Engineer, determines that slope stability or drainage problems exist.
(2) Projects involving modification of pre-graded lots in excess of 30 percent of the volume of previous excavation or fill or 30 percent of the surface area by square footage.
(3) Projects involving modification of lots with natural topography in excess of 30 percent of the surface area of the lot.
(4) Projects not defined as a Category I or II but that fall under the purview of this chapter.
4. HILLSIDE DEVELOPMENT RESTRICTIONS
Any area that presents one or more of the following limiting factors shall not be subject to development unless the project engineer can demonstrate satisfactorily to the City Engineer, based on the required technical reports, that these site limitations can be overcome in such a manner as to minimize hazard to life, hazard to property, and adverse effects on the safety, use, or stability of a public way or drainage channel. Such site limitations to be overcome shall include but not be limited to the following:
A. Landslide areas or scarps, or areas of active landslides.
B. Lines of active faults.
C. Areas with expansive soils or collapsible soils.
D. Slopes greater than 25 percent.
E. High water table and springs.
5. HILLSIDE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
A. Standards Applicable to All Categories of Hillside Development Permits
(1) Planning of development shall account for the topography, soils, geology, vegetation, outstanding features such as outcropping and cliffs, hydrology and other conditions existing on the proposed site.
(2) Development shall be oriented on the site so that grading and other site preparations are kept to a minimum.
(3) Essential grading shall be completed during site preparation, rather than left for future lot owners so that:
(a) Shaping shall blend in with existing topography to minimize the necessity of padding or terracing of building sites; and
(b) Building pads and terracing shall be graded to blend into the natural contours.
(4) Paving shall be completed within 60 days after final grading (final grading any grading done after the placement of utilities).
(5) Areas not well suited for development because of soil, geology, vegetation, or hydrology limitations shall be reserved for open space.
(6) Disruption of existing plant and animal life shall be minimized.
CHAPTER 11-07: Development and Design Standards
Section 11-07-08: Hillside and Foothills Development Standards
Subsection 5: Hillside Development Standards
March 2013
Boise Development Code
Page 269
(7) Innovative methods of slope and soil stabilization, grading, and landscaping are encouraged.
(8) Multiple access points and street grades that meet requirements of the Fire Department and ACHD shall be provided.
(9) Pedestrian access to and through the project shall be provided.
(10) Conformance Bond and Surety
A bond and surety agreement or an irrevocable letter of credit in an amount of 110 percent of the cost estimated by the City Engineer is required to enable restoration of the site if the project is not completed as approved. The bonding shall be provided prior to the issuance of a grading permit or signing of the final plat by the City Engineer.
(11) Prior to issuance of a grading permit, the owner and/or developer shall provide a legally binding easement allowing the City of Boise and/or its agents to enter upon the property to do work, as deemed necessary by the City Engineer, to restore the site's appearance and drainage in case of non-completion or substantial deviation from the approved plans of the project by the developer/owner.
(12) All work must be performed in accordance with the latest approved contract plans and specifications. Work not in accordance may not be accepted. Revisions to the plans and specifications shall be submitted to the City Engineer and Planning Director, allowing sufficient time for review, comment, revision and approval.
B. Grading Standards
(1) No grading, filling, clearing, or excavation of any kind in excess of 50 cubic yards or stripping of vegetation shall be initiated until the required final grading plan is approved by the Public Works Department and a grading permit is issued.
(2) Fill areas shall be prepared by removing any organic material that is determined by the geotechnical report to be detrimental to proper compaction or otherwise not conducive to stability.
(3) Borrowing for fill shall be prohibited unless the material is obtained from a cut permitted under an approved grading plan or imported from outside the hillside areas of Ada County. No cuts shall be permitted solely for the purpose of obtaining fill unless approved in the grading plan.
(4) All retaining walls higher than four feet shall be engineered so that structural members are keyed into stable foundations and are capable of sustaining the design loads.
(5) Fills shall be compacted to at least 95 percent of maximum density, as determined by AASHTO T-99, ASTM D-698, ASTMD-1557 or greater as recommended by the geotechnical report. The frequency of compaction testing shall be addressed in the geotechnical report and shall be approved by the City Engineer.
(6) Cut slopes shall be no steeper than two feet horizontal to one foot vertical unless it can be shown by the project geotechnical engineer that steeper slopes are feasible, taking into account safety, stability, erosion control, and re-vegetation. For cut slopes steeper than two feet horizontal to one foot vertical, subsurface drainage shall be provided as necessary for stability.
CHAPTER 11-07: Development and Design Standards
Section 11-07-08: Hillside and Foothills Development Standards
Subsection 5: Hillside Development Standards
March 2013
Boise Development Code
Page 270
(7) Fill slopes shall be no steeper than two feet horizontal to one foot vertical unless it can be shown by the project geotechnical engineer that steeper slopes are safe, stable, erosion resistant, and can be adequately re-vegetated. Fill slopes shall not be located on natural slopes two to one or steeper, or where fill slopes toe out within 12 feet horizontally of the top of an existing or planned cut slope.
(8) Prior to placement of fill, the ground shall be prepared in accordance with the International Building Code Chapter 18 and Appendix J as amended by Boise City Building Code Chapter 4-02. Subsurface drainage shall be provided as necessary for stability.
(9) Tops and toes of cut and fill slopes shall be set back from property boundaries in accordance with the requirements of the International Building Code Chapter 18 and Appendix J as amended by Boise City Building Code Chapter 4-02.
C. Re-vegetation and Erosion Control Standards
(1) Vegetation should not be disturbed beyond the limits of the approved grading plan.
(2) Topsoil removed during construction shall be conserved for later use on areas requiring re-vegetation or landscaping.
(3) Topsoil shall be placed at a minimum thickness of four inches.
(4) The minimum acceptable plant coverage is 80 percent two years after planting.
(5) Seed mix shall include deep-rooted plants and subsequent planting of seedlings.
(6) Erosion shall be controlled to prevent deposition of sediment on adjacent property.
D. Hydrologic Controls
(1) Interceptor ditches or other methods approved by the City Engineer shall be established above all cut or fill slopes, and the intercepted water shall be conveyed to a stable channel with adequate capacity. Provision for ditch maintenance must be approved by the City.
(2) Curb, gutter and pavement design and lot grading shall be such that water on roadways is prevented from flowing off roadway, except in conveyance conduits.
(3) Natural stream channel shall be stabilized using a method acceptable to the City Engineer.
(4) Runoff from areas of concentrated impervious cover such as roofs, driveways, and roads shall be retained on-site or collected and transported to a channel with sufficient capacity to accept the discharge without erosion or flooding. Provision should be made by the owner or developer for the cleaning of drainage facilities from the onset of construction through the completion of the project.
(5) Waste material from construction, including soil and other solid materials, shall not be deposited within the 100-year flood plain unless the City Engineer concurs that there is no reduction in storage and flow capacity of the flood plain.
(6) Drainage systems shall be designed to accommodate a 100-year flood event.
CHAPTER 11-07: Development and Design Standards
Section 11-07-08: Hillside and Foothills Development Standards
Subsection 5: Hillside Development Standards
March 2013
Boise Development Code
Page 271
(7) With the exception of road crossings, approved drainage structures, and recreation and open space uses that do not involve the destruction of vegetative cover, development shall be prohibited within the 100-year floodway.
(8) Sediment catchment ponds shall be constructed and maintained downstream from each development unless sediment retention facilities are otherwise provided. Any facility used shall provide for the removal of surface debris and contaminants, as well as sediment retention. The facilities shall be designed to facilitate maintenance at minimal cost. Each completed phase of a drainage system shall be designed for the 100-year occurrence.
(9) The overall drainage system shall be completed and made operational at the earliest possible time during construction.
(10) Alterations of major floodways shall only be made with approved drainage conveyance systems and structures as approved by the City Engineer, Army Corps of Engineers, and FEMA.
(11) Natural streams or improved open channels shall be preserved or provided for in major (ten acres or larger) catchments except where otherwise approved by the City Engineer. In minor catchments, drainage shall be permitted to be enclosed in conduits.
(12) Flow rates from a newly developed site shall not exceed the flow rate from the site in its natural condition prior to development. Exceptions shall be appropriate if compliance with the prior sentence creates more adverse impacts to the overall drainage area than other drainage alternatives.
(13) Drainage facilities shall be designed to coordinate with any Master Drainage Plan for the drainage basin in which the proposed development is located.
(14) Special drainage facilities or an overflow path for floodwater shall be designated in all locations where there is a sag in the profile of the street or at the end of a cul-de-sac that is lower than the intercepting street. Restriction shall be placed to protect the overflow path from the future building of any fence, shed, dwelling, or obstruction that would impede the flood flow.
E. Roadways and Circulation
(1) Roads shall be designed to minimize land coverage and soil disturbance.
(2) Existing deep-rooted perennial vegetation shall be preserved to the extent possible.
(3) Variations in road design and construction and right-of-way requirements shall be sought through ACHD in order to keep grading and cut or fill slopes to a minimum.
(4) Road alignments should follow natural contours; cul-de-sacs and common driveways are encouraged.
(5) One-way couplets shall be encouraged where appropriate for the terrain and where public safety would not be jeopardized. Road width shall be a minimum of 20 feet to allow the passage of emergency vehicles.
(6) If the sidewalk is to be installed parallel to the roadway on fills, the slope shall be rounded for four feet from the back of the sidewalk.
CHAPTER 11-07: Development and Design Standards
Section 11-07-08: Hillside and Foothills Development Standards
Subsection 5: Hillside Development Standards
March 2013
Boise Development Code
Page 272
(7) A pedestrian pathway shall be required as approved by the PZC. (See 11-07-04.4, Pedestrian Access.)
(8) Combinations of collective or common private driveways, cluster parking areas, and on-street parallel parking bays shall be used where possible to attempt to optimize the objectives of minimum soil disturbance, minimum impervious cover, excellence of design, and aesthetic sensitivity.
F. Maintenance
The owner of any private property on which grading or other work has been performed pursuant to a grading plan approved under the provisions of the this Section, or a building permit granted by the Development Services Department, within a subdivision approved under the provisions of this Section 11-07-08, Hillside and Foothill Development Standards, shall maintain in perpetuity and repair all graded surfaces and erosion prevention devices, retaining walls, drainage structures, means, or devices deemed not to be the responsibility of the ACHD or other public agency, and plantings and ground cover installed or completed. Such requirements shall be incorporated into the protective covenants for any subdivision or development.
G. Waivers
The developer, the project engineer, or the developer's representative may request a waiver of any of the provisions of this Section. The request shall be made to both the Director and the City Engineer. The Director and City Engineer shall notify the public of the request for waiver in accordance with Section 11-03-03.4, Step 4: Notice. After public notice and comment on the waiver request, the City Engineer and Director will review and decide on the proposed waiver. The decision may be appealed to the Council.
H. Inspection and Enforcement
(1) All construction subject to these regulations shall be subject to inspection by the City Engineer and Planning and Development Services Department in addition to inspections by the Project Engineer and consultants. When required by the City Engineer, special inspections and special testing shall be performed to verify conformance with these regulations. The cost of special inspections and special testing shall be borne by the developer.
(2) If the City Engineer determines that any portion of the project is not in conformance with the requirements of this Chapter and no waiver of such requirements has been granted, the City Engineer shall notify, in writing, the Project Engineer and/or Developer. The Project Engineer and/or Developer shall take prompt action to resolve the problem(s) enumerated. If corrective action is not taken to the satisfaction of the City Engineer then the City Engineer shall cause a stop work order be issued by the Planning and Development Services Department, notify the agency issuing the bond or irrevocable letter of credit, shall cause the necessary work to be performed at the developer's expense, not sign the final plat, cause the Planning and Development Services Department to not issue any additional building permits for this development and/or collect on the bond or irrevocable letter of credit.
CHAPTER 11-07: Development and Design Standards
Section 11-07-08: Hillside and Foothills Development Standards
Subsection 6: Application Procedure
March 2013
Boise Development Code
Page 273
6. APPLICATION PROCEDURE
A hillside and foothill development permit may be obtained by submitting an application(s) in one or two stages as follows:
A. As a detailed hillside and foothill development plan, on an application form to be provided by the Planning Director and including all information required by this chapter.
B. As a conceptual master plan.
(1) The applicant must specify on the application form that concept approval is being requested and must be accompanied by a request for rezoning if the land is not zoned for the intended use. A concept approval is a statement by the City of Boise that a general development plan including the general arrangement of uses, density, location of major streets, open spaces, utilities, etc. is acceptable. A concept review allows the applicant to obtain approval of a general development plan without incurring the expense of preparing detailed building plans until after the concept approval. It provides the developer and the City with guidelines for the design of each phase of a project. Supporting information shall be required for concept applications as determined by the Planning Director.
(2) A concept plan which falls under the purview of this section will by its nature require more detailed engineering studies than concept plans in less sensitive areas. Therefore, at least generalized plans for drainage, grading and utility service shall be provided with the application.
(3) Each phase of a concept approval requires detailed hillside and foothill development approval through a new application, fee and public hearing. Conditions attached to applications for detailed hillside and foothill approval shall not exceed the parameters of the conditions of approval attached to the concept plan so long as the concept plan has not expired. Submittal requirements are the same as for a detailed hillside and foothill development application that is processed and reviewed in one step.
C. Hearings: The concept and detailed Hillside and Foothill Development applications are both subject to the public hearing requirements of Section 11-03-04.17.
D. The requirement for a public work session on phases of a conceptual master plan may be waived by the Planning Director if:
(1) The detailed submittal conforms to the approved concept plan.
(2) The phase of the project involves development on slopes less than 15 percent.
7. TERM OF PERMITS
A. Due to the special problems related to hillside developments, the applicant or developer shall have 36 months in which to affect a hillside and foothill development permit after approval by the PZC. Within this period, the holder of the permit must:
(1) Acquire construction permits and commence placement of permanent footings and structures on or in the ground. The definition of structures in this context shall include sewer lines, water lines, streets, or building foundations;
CHAPTER 11-07: Development and Design Standards
Section 11-07-08: Hillside and Foothills Development Standards
Subsection 7: Term of Permits
March 2013
Boise Development Code
Page 274
(2) Commence the use permitted by the permit in accordance with the conditions of approval;
(3) For conceptual hillside and foothill development permits, submit an application for a detailed hillside and foothill development permit; or
(4) For projects which require platting, the plat must be recorded within this time frame.
B. For phased projects each phase must be submitted within 24 months from the date of the concept approval or the date of approval of the previous phase, unless the PZC specifically approves a different phasing schedule.
C. The PZC may also fix the time or period within which the permit shall be completed, perfected, or bonded. If the conditions of approval are not completed or bonded within such period, said permit shall lapse.
D. Extensions
(1) The PZC may, upon written request by the holder, grant a one-year time extension to an unexpired conceptual or detailed hillside and foothills development permit.
(a) A maximum of three extensions may be granted to initiate the project or a phase of a project.
(b) Additional conditions of approval may be required based upon the existence of legal requirements not existing at the time of the original approval.
(2) Upon receipt of written request for extension, the Director shall determine if a hearing on the request is required, based on the following considerations:
(a) Detailed Permits Whether there have been significant amendments to the Boise City Comprehensive Plan or Title 11, Boise City Code, which will apply to the subject permit; If significant land use changes have occurred in the project vicinity which would adversely impact the project or be adversely impacted by the project; Whether hazardous situations have developed or have been discovered in the project area; or If community facilities and services required for the project have become inadequate.
(b) Conceptual Master Plans
Concept plans are encouraged to facilitate good planning in the Boise foothills. Developers must have some assurance that concept plans that have been initiated in accordance with existing ordinances and conditions of approval may be completed under the originally applied standards. Therefore, approved conceptual master plans will not be subject to new ordinance requirements if the following findings are made: The applicant has made significant on- and off-site improvements that implement the overall plan such as the extension or on-site installation of water mains, sewer lines, streets, and utilities;
CHAPTER 11-07: Development and Design Standards
Section 11-07-08: Hillside and Foothills Development Standards
Subsection 8: Modification and Revocation
March 2013
Boise Development Code
Page 275
If development of previous phases of the plan have occurred in such a manner that it is physically impossible or economically unfeasible to comply with the new ordinance standards; The applicant demonstrates that application of the new standards will make it impossible or totally unfeasible to complete the remaining phases of the concept plan; and If any of the considerations in i, ii, or iii above are found to exist with regard to the project for which an extension is sought, a hearing shall be required.
(3) If a hearing is required, notice shall be provided as described in Section 11-03-03.4 of this Code and a new application and fee must be submitted in compliance with current plans and ordinances and in accordance with the application procedures of this chapter.
8. MODIFICATION AND REVOCATION
A. Upon application by the holder of a hillside and foothills development permit, the PZC may modify the conditions and limitations of the permit in accordance with the limitations and requirements of Section 11-03-04.17. The PZC may revoke or modify a hillside and foothills development permit, upon notice and hearing, for breach or violation of any condition or limitation of said permit.
B. Administrative Review of Minor Modifications
(1) The PZC may delegate to the Director authority to consider minor modification to approved hillside and foothill development permits. Minor modifications to Category III permits shall be limited to the following considerations:
(a) A reduction in development density which does not exceed 25 percent of the total units.
(b) A relocation of dwelling units, building pads, or building envelopes for some practical reason such as road alignment, topography, access, solar access, or stability in hillside areas.
(c) A change in the approved phasing plan or schedule.
(d) A modification to recreation area or open space design, but not including elimination or significant reduction.
(e) Minor change in proposed location of building envelope.
(2) Prior to approving a minor modification, the Director shall determine that the following are true:
(a) The requested modification was not specifically appealed during the public hearing process; and
(b) The requested modification will not cause adverse physical impacts on adjacent properties.
CHAPTER 11-07: Development and Design Standards
Section 11-07-09: Foothills Planned Development Standards
Subsection 9: Application Requirements
March 2013
Boise Development Code
Page 276
9. APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS
All required information shall be prepared in conformance with the adopted Boise City Public Works Hillside Development Manual.
11-07-09. FOOTHILLS PLANNED DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
1. PURPOSE AND INTENT
To implement residential subdivision density and design elements of the Comprehensive Plan in the Foothills Planning Area. It is also designed to protect and promote preservation of contiguous areas of Foothills open space that contain important and significant natural and cultural resource values, as identified in The Plan and this ordinance.
2. APPLICABILITY
The Foothills Planned Development Ordinance shall apply to all proposed developments in the Foothills Planning Area where an annexation and/or rezone is required.
3. GENERAL APPLICATION AND DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS
A. All developments shall be processed as Planned Developments (PDs) Section 11-03-04.7.
B. Planned development proposals shall include applications for an annexation, a development agreement, a preliminary plat subdivision, a “Hillside and Foothill Areas Development” permit, and where applicable, a floodplain permit. The initial applications may consist of conceptual applications as described in Appendix A, Phase II.
C. Upon annexation the buildable areas of the PD shall be zoned “R-1A,” Single-Family Residential, with the density and design further controlled by the provisions of this ordinance. Slope protection and preserved open space areas shall be zoned A-1 or A-2.
D. Developments shall be required to connect to municipal water and sewer services and participate in other municipal service districts as applicable.
E. Density bonuses do not add to buildable area to be developed, they simply add to the number of units allowed.
4. DENSITY BONUS
A. Basic Provisions of the Density Bonus
(1) A density bonus pursuant to the formula in Table 11-07.9 shall be granted in return for preservation of open space.
(2) Density bonuses do not increase the area that may be developed. Rather, they increase the number of units that may be developed within the buildable area.
(3) The base density is according to that stated in the existing base zoning district(s).
(4) The bonus density units may be added to the density base units without the requirement for additional open space preservation.
CHAPTER 11-07: Development and Design Standards
Section 11-07-09: Foothills Planned Development Standards
Subsection 4: Density Bonus
March 2013
Boise Development Code
Page 277
(5) The density bonus is based upon the ratio of buildable area to be preserved as open space, to the buildable area to be developed. See Chapter 11-012, Definitions, for the definition of “Buildable Area.”
(6) Open space or density bonus points are allowed between the numbers shown in Table 11-07.9, Density Bonus Formula, provided that the formula is unchanged.
(7) The density formula may be adjusted to allow density transfers from non-contiguous parcels after a Transfer of Development Rights (TDR) ordinance is in effect.
B. Eligible Preserved Open Space
Preserved Open Space Eligible for a Density Bonus as per the formula in Table 11-07.9, Density Bonus Formula, shall meet the following requirements:
(1) Slopes shall be 25 percent or less. Size shall be at least one acre with a minimum average width of 30 feet.
(2) Public rights-of-way that connect development pockets, and provide access to public open space may be included in the density calculation for open space, roads within a development pocket shall not be included. Rights-of-way that have dwelling units fronting or siding onto them shall not be included.
(3) Shall be classified as Priority Open Space in Section D below.
C. Ineligible Preserved Open Space
The following may not be considered as preserved open space in the density bonus calculation, except as may be provided in subsection D:
(1) Urban development such as club houses, tennis courts, swimming pools, dirt bike tracks, golf driving ranges, and similar uses that dramatically alter land from its natural state;
(2) Commercial land uses; and
(3) Internal park sites may only be included as eligible open space when in a primarily natural condition and include a significant opening from the subdivision into a larger designated open space area outside the subdivision. Table 11-07.9 - Density Bonus Formula Built Area (percent) Open Space Dedicated (percent) Density Bonus (units/acre) Buildable Area On 100 acres After Open Space Set-Aside (acres) Number of Bonus Units
75
25
0.5
75.0
38
69
3
0.75
68.8
52
63
38
1.0
62.5
63
56
44
1.25
56.3
70
50
50
1.5
50.0
75
44
56
1.75
43.8
77
38
63
2.25
37.5
84
31
69
3.0
31.3
94
25
75
4.0
25.0
100
CHAPTER 11-07: Development and Design Standards
Section 11-07-09: Foothills Planned Development Standards
Subsection 4: Density Bonus
March 2013
Boise Development Code
Page 278
D. Priority Open Space Eligibility
(1) The city recognizes that the foothills provide a great degree of variability in landforms, environmental habitats and cultural resources. Some areas may have a combination of characteristics that cause them to be considered worthy of special incentives for preservation, even if they do not meet the normal size, slope, or dimensional requirements necessary to qualify as open space eligible for a density bonus as per paragraph B above. When these areas are identified on a property and proposed for preservation, the PZC may classify them as priority open space and allow all or a portion of them to qualify for the granting of a density bonus.
(2) In order to qualify for a density bonus, Priority open space lands demonstrating four of the characteristics listed below in (a) may qualify for a density bonus as high priority open space lands.
(3) Priority open space, when it exists, should be used in balance with other forms of eligible open space to meet the requirements of this Code. The amount allowed to qualify as open space eligible for a density bonus shall be discretionary based upon the degree to which it meets or exceeds the minimum criteria established in this section.
(a) Priority Open Space Characteristics
Four of the following characteristics of priority open space, must be present to be eligible for a density bonus: Wetlands; Riparian areas; Rare plant communities; Critical deer and elk winter range and migration corridors; Potential Public Preservation Sites as documented by the HPC; Unique geologic or visual features; Archeological or other historic sites; Designated trails and trail-heads in the Ada County Ridge to Rivers Pathway Plan; Other public trails and trail heads as approved by the Parks and Recreation Board; Adjacent to publicly-held open spaces; Adjacent to areas that are, or have been identified for consideration as permanent public open space; and Dedicated or discounted sale to a public agency.
(b) Criteria for Determining Demonstrable Increase in Public Value of Priority Open Space
In allowing density bonus credit for priority open space in steeply sloped areas or in fragmented pieces, there must be a demonstrable increase in the public value of the resource by such allowance. Demonstrable increase in value may include but is not limited to the following:
CHAPTER 11-07: Development and Design Standards
Section 11-07-09: Foothills Planned Development Standards
Subsection 4: Density Bonus
March 2013
Boise Development Code
Page 279
Allowance for public access. Protection from alteration of important vegetation, terrain, or scenic views and vistas that could otherwise occur from a permitted use such as mining, logging, grazing, or construction of utilities or infrastructure. Linkage of interspersed eligible open space areas into a more biologically complete and continuous wildlife corridor. Dedication or discounted sale to a willing public agency.
(c) PZC Consideration of Priority Open Space It is not the intent of this section to broadly allow the designation of highly fragmented or steeply sloped land as open space to the total exclusion of the normal requirements of clustering and set aside of buildable area open space. Priority open space, when it exists, should be used in balance with other forms of eligible open space to meet the requirements of this code. When the applicant demonstrates that a portion of his property not otherwise qualified as open space eligible for a density bonus per Section 11-07-09.4, does meet the above-listed criteria, the PZC may classify it as priority open space and allow some or all of it to qualify for the granting of a density bonus. The amount allowed to qualify as open space eligible for a density bonus shall be discretionary based upon the degree to which it meets or exceeds the minimum criteria established in this section. The PZC shall seek the input of the Idaho Department of Fish and Game, the Parks and Recreation Board, and other public agencies with expertise in the issue at hand in determining the proper amount to be allowed to be set aside in return for a density bonus. Golf Courses Allowed in Open Space
Link type golf courses may be permitted in designated preserved open space areas, provided that the intervening spaces are maintained in a primarily natural condition. Golf courses shall use native plants and natural contours shall be left intact. Parking lots, club houses, driving ranges, maintenance facilities, and similar golf related uses shall not be counted as open space contributory to the density bonus. Designated trails and park sites must be preserved in or around the golf course.
E. General Design Criteria
(1) Residential uses shall be clustered pockets rather than scattered throughout the property.
(2) Development pockets shall be designed in compliance with policies in the Comprehensive Plan concerning clustering, environmental protection, open space conservation, and scenic and aesthetic goals.
(3) Designated open space areas shall be linked wherever possible.
(4) Road and trail access to adjacent properties shall be provided to prevent landlocked parcels or breaks in the trail systems; and to provide the opportunity for future connectivity.
(5) Where possible roads and infrastructure shall not cross designated open space, floodways, wetlands, and areas of high wildlife habitat value.
CHAPTER 11-07: Development and Design Standards
Section 11-07-09: Foothills Planned Development Standards
Subsection 4: Density Bonus
March 2013
Boise Development Code
Page 280
(6) Disturbance of the land shall be minimized and development shall be avoided in areas that would necessitate excessive grading, cut, and fill.
(7) Fire safety and protection measures shall be incorporated into the design in accordance with the International Fire Code and Boise City Code Title 7. Such measures shall include residential sprinkling systems, defensible space around structures, and the provision of safe evacuation routes.
(8) Gated entrances to a PUD are prohibited due to the potential for such limited access to restrict or delay emergency response in the Foothills.
(9) Crossing designated open space, floodways, wetlands, and areas of high wildlife habitat value with roads and infrastructure shall be avoided to the greatest extent possible.
(10) A mixture of dwelling unit types is encouraged, including single family and multi-family dwelling units.
(11) Commercial and service commercial uses that serve the immediate neighborhood are allowed, but must be designed to be compatible with the height, mass, materials, and site design of the residential structures in the planned development.
F. Standards for Trails
Trails are required in accordance with the following:
(1) Public access to trails within and contiguous to the development shall be provided.
(2) Trail design should preserve the natural scenic and wildlife habitat values.
(3) The Ada County Ridge-To-Rivers Pathway Plan shall guide trail locations.
(4) Trails shall be secured through dedication, easement, or other such binding mechanism, and shown on the subdivision plat.
(5) If no contiguous or intersecting public trails exist or are proposed, private trails may be established through the common open space area, provided that the design preserves the natural character and wildlife habitat value.
G. Standards for Preserved Open Space
(1) Preserve contiguous areas of open space, within the development and adjacent properties by aligning them along common corridors to the extent possible.
(2) Maintain indigenous plant species undisturbed to the extent possible. Noxious and invasive weeds are not considered indigenous and need not be preserved.
(3) Preserve areas of highest wildlife habitat value and migration corridors in designated wildlife habitat areas per the Comprehensive Plan.
(4) Preserve unique geologic and historic features, defined as heritage sites and sites designated for historic preservation by city, state, and federal agencies.
(5) Landslide areas and areas with unstable soils shall not be developed.
(6) Agricultural or utility uses may be permitted in open spaces, including livestock grazing, community gardens, irrigation ponds, or storm water retention ponds. These uses shall not include buildings or structures except those necessary appurtenances required by those uses, such as dams and irrigation or drainage systems.
CHAPTER 11-07: Development and Design Standards
Section 11-07-09: Foothills Planned Development Standards
Subsection 4: Density Bonus
March 2013
Boise Development Code
Page 281
(7) Fencing shall not encroach into preserved open space areas.
H. Ownership and Maintenance of Open Space
(1) Open space areas may be owned and maintained as follows:
(2) Owned and maintained by and for the use of the homeowners’ association of the project of which it is a part;
(3) Joined with preserved open space lands held by any neighboring homeowner’s association, or, preservation through an organization with adjacent lands held in permanent open space that would then be jointly maintained under an agreement contained in the conditional use permit or development agreement with the city;
(4) Dedicated or sold to the city, if recommended for approval by the Board of Parks and Recreation PZC, or other public agency, or private land trust for open space uses as may be approved in the development agreement or the conditional use and approved by the Council; or
(5) Other open space preservation strategies under sole or joint ownership, such as deed restrictions, or conservation easements, may be set up, and executed when approved by the city.
(6) Where the goals and policies of adopted plans specify the need for public trails or open space, easements for public lands or trails may be required. Trails or open spaces may be held in private ownership subject to an easement, or may be purchased by the city, or dedicated by the landowner(s) to the city.
(7) Specific agricultural or utility use exceptions may be permitted in open spaces, including livestock grazing, community gardens, irrigation ponds, or storm water retention ponds. These uses shall not include buildings or structures except those necessary appurtenances required by those uses, such as dams and irrigation or drainage systems. These use exceptions shall comply with the policies of the Foothills Policy Plan, shall be shown on the conditional use site plan, and shall not degrade the value of the permanent open space.
(8) The city will accept no responsibility for the costs for maintenance of open space or recreational facilities unless the Board of Parks and Recreation PZC and the Council specifically approve such charges.
I. Building and Grading Disturbance Envelopes
(1) Building envelopes may be required on the final site plan for a conditional use. If required, the building envelopes shall be recorded or referenced in the notes on the final plat.
(2) Slopes greater than 25 percent shall be shown on the conditional use permit site plan with a disturbance envelope that defines the area outside of which no grading will be allowed.
CHAPTER 11-07: Development and Design Standards
Section 11-07-09: Foothills Planned Development Standards
Subsection 4: Density Bonus
March 2013
Boise Development Code
Page 282
J. Appendix A
(1) Application Submitting Requirements
The following items are required for a Foothills Planned Development application, in addition to those items required for submitting of a standard Planned Development application under Section 11-03-04.7, and a “Hillside and Foothill Area Development” permit application under Section 11-03-04.17.
(2) A slope analysis in map and table form depicting areas and polygon labels for:
(a) All buildable areas, based on two foot contour intervals;
(b) All non-buildable areas based on five foot contour intervals;
(c) Buildable areas equal to, or greater, than one acre in size labeled as such on map and table.
(3) A special area analysis in map and table form depicting the general locations of:
(a) Floodways, floodway fringes, wetlands and riparian areas;
(b) Deer and elk migration corridors as determined by the Idaho State Fish and Game Department and found on maps referenced in The Plan;
(c) Location of rare, threatened and endangered plant species and communities regulated under the Endangered Species Act of 1973, and administered by U. S. Fish and Wildlife Service Division of Endangered Species;
(d) Geologic and/or historic features of note and sites designated as Heritage sites.
(e) Potential buildable ridge tops visible as skyline features from below the Foothills.
(4) A capital improvements/infrastructure analysis and map of existing and proposed locations of roads, sewers, drainage and storm water facilities, utilities, schools, parks and fire stations.
(5) A recreation analysis in map and table form as appropriate showing locations of existing or proposed trails as established in the Ada County Ridge-to-Rivers Pathway Plan, existing or proposed trail heads, interpretive areas and other facilities.
(6) An adjacent parcel analysis of lands within 300 feet of the subject property, in map form, depicting:
(a) Existing lots and dwellings;
(b) General topography;
(c) Existing and proposed public trails designated by the Ada County Ridge-To-Rivers Pathway Plan;
(d) Geologic and/or historic features of note and sites designated as Heritage sites;
(e) Public rights-of-way and potential road access points.
(7) Foothills Planned Development Design Process and Application Form Checklist
The intent of the process is to allow the applicant and staff to work together to insure that there is a clear understanding about the critical issues prior to the application submitting and throughout the hearings. The applicant should follow this order of events in analyzing, designing and applying for the project.
CHAPTER 11-07: Development and Design Standards
Section 11-07-09: Foothills Planned Development Standards
Subsection 4: Density Bonus
March 2013
Boise Development Code
Page 283
(8) Phase I - Pre-application
(a) Meet with the city staff about basic design issues before development of a conceptual design.
(b) Meet or confer with surrounding landowners about the potential for cooperative development plans.
(c) Do a sketch map of the project area and adjacent parcels showing general soil characteristics, slopes, wildlife habitat, permanent open space and/or public lands, drainage courses, unique geologic and historic features, public trails, and other features of note.
(d) Meet with city staff about design issues based on sketch map findings.
(9) Phase II - Preliminary/Conceptual Design requirements for Annexation, Development Agreement, Conceptual Conditional Use, Conceptual Preliminary Subdivision Plat, Conceptual Hillside and Floodplain Permit Applications
(a) Map potential buildable areas.
(b) Determine which preserved open space/cluster density formula will be applied based upon site characteristics, access and market constraints.
(c) Identify proposed preserved open space area(s) based upon site characteristics including wildlife habitat values, soil conditions, geologic hazards, access constraints, drainage patterns, unique features, etc.
(d) Apply the density bonus formula to the remaining buildable area, according to the Table 1, to determine how many dwelling units may be permitted.
(e) Lay out the cluster subdivision with roads, drainage system and the appropriate number
(f) of lots in the development pockets.
(g) Prepare a fire protection plan following guidelines set by the Boise City Fire Department.
(h) Prepare a traffic analysis and traffic plan consistent with requirements of the Destination 2020 Regional Transportation Plan for Ada County and its subsequent amendments and updates.
(i) Prepare a traffic mitigation plan including appropriate neighborhood protection, traffic calming and buffering techniques.
(j) Prepare a general grading plan under the conceptual “Hillside and Foothill Area Development” ordinance.
(k) Prepare an infrastructure phasing plan.
(l) Prepare a building and grading disturbance envelope plan.
(m) Complete any other items required by The Plan, Planned Unit Development Standards, Section 11-07-06.5, the Flood Hazard Regulations, Chapter 11-08, and the Hillside and Foothill Development Standards, Section 11-07-08.
CHAPTER 11-07: Development and Design Standards
Section 11-07-09: Foothills Planned Development Standards
Subsection 4: Density Bonus
March 2013
Boise Development Code
Page 284
(10) Phase III - Final Conditional Use, Hillside Permit, Floodplain Permit, Annexation, Development
(a) Agreement and Preliminary Plat Subdivision applications:
(b) Meet with city staff about design issues based on conceptual approval findings;
(c) Prepare the applications for preliminary plat and final conditional use, Hillside permit, Floodplain permit, a revegetation and reclamation plan and other required applications and plans.
K. Appendix B
(1) Sample Conservation Easement Document and Deed Restriction Statement
In reference to the requirements for ownership and maintenance of open space in Section 11-07-09.4.H, a sample conservation easement document is provided. This example is taken from the New Hampshire State Code.
(a) Conveyances of Realty and Interests Therein, Conservation and Preservation Restrictions
A conservation restriction shall mean a right to prohibit or require, a limitation upon, or an obligation to perform, acts on or with respect to, or uses of, a land or water area, whether stated in the form of a restriction, easement, covenant or condition, in any deed, will, or other instrument executed by or on behalf of the owner of the area or in any order of taking, which right, limitation, or obligation is appropriate to retaining or maintaining such land or water area, including improvements thereon, predominantly in its natural, scenic, or open condition, or in any other use or condition consistent with the protection of environmental quality.
L. Appendix C
Maps and guides to the regulated features in the Foothills: In reference to the requirements for submitting applications in Section 11-03-04.7, maps and guides to the features noted will be available to applicants. Boise City Foothills Policy Plan Goal 1 Objective 2 Policy 1:
(1) The Foothills Land Use Map provides a generalized depiction of potentially buildable areas based upon slope. At the time of zone change or development application, the developer shall submit detailed documents depicting wildlife habitat areas, existing slopes, geology and soils. This data shall be used to make more detailed determinations regarding the extent of the buildable area governed by the policies of this plan and the Hillside and Foothill Area Development ordinance;
(2) Figure 2-1 Wildlife Habitat Areas;
(3) Deer and Elk migration corridors;
(4) Boise City Heritage Preservation Committee: Potential Public Preservation Sites.
March 2013 Boise Development Code
Page 285
CHAPTER 11-08: FLOOD HAZARD REGULATFLOOD HAZARD REGULATIONS IONS 11-08-01. GENERAL PROVISIONS
1. CHAPTER PURPOSE
A. The flood hazard areas of Boise City, Idaho, are subject to periodic inundation, which may result in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and government services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare.
B. Flood losses are caused by natural forces and construction practices which increase flood heights and velocities, and by structures which are inadequately anchored and which may damage property in other areas. Uses that are inadequately flood-proofed, elevated or otherwise unprotected from flood damage also contribute to flood losses.
C. It is the purpose of this chapter to promote public health, safety, and general welfare, and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed:
(1) To protect human life and health;
(2) To minimize expenditures of public money and costly flood control projects;
(3) To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding which are generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;
(4) To minimize prolonged business interruptions;
(5) To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains; electric, telephone and sewer lines; and streets and bridges located in Areas of Special Flood Hazard;
(6) To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of areas of special flood hazard so as to minimize future flood blight areas;
(7) To ensure that potential buyers are notified when property is in an Area of Special Flood Hazards; and
(8) To ensure that those who occupy the Areas of Special Flood hazard assume responsibility for their actions.
2. METHODS OF REDUCING FLOOD LOSSES
This chapter describes guidelines and provisions for:
A. Restricting or prohibiting uses which are dangerous to health, safety, and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which resulting damaging increases in erosion or in flood heights or velocities;
B. Requiring that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction;
CHAPTER 11-08: Flood Hazard Regulations
Section 11-08-01: General Provisions
Subsection 3: Applicability
March 2013
Boise Development Code
Page 286
C. Controlling the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers, which help accommodate or channel flood waters;
D. Controlling filling, grading, dredging, and other development which may increase flood damage; and
E. Preventing or regulating the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert flood water or may increase flood hazards in other areas.
3. APPLICABILITY
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard, within the jurisdiction of Boise City, and as such lands are identified, within the Floodway, Floodway Fringe, or the Area of Shallow Flooding. The areas of special flood hazard are identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency in a scientific and engineering report entitled "Flood Insurance Study" for Ada County, Idaho, and incorporated areas dated February 19, 2003, which includes Flood Insurance Rate Maps, and flood profiles, along with all subsequent amendments which are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this chapter. The Flood Insurance Study is on file with the Boise City Planning Director, Boise City Planning and Development Services Director, and the Boise City Engineer, Department of Public Works.
4. CREATION OF ZONES
The Floodway Zone, the Floodway Fringe (FF) Zone and Area of Shallow Flooding (ASF) Zone: The Floodway zone, the Floodway Fringe Zone and Area of Shallow Flooding Zone are hereby created and shall have the boundaries as defined in this chapter (Section 11-08-08) and shall have the requirements as set forth in this chapter.
5. EXCLUSIONS
Upon issuance of a Letter of Map Amendment or Letter of Map Revision, such land shall be deemed to be automatically excluded from the Floodway, Floodway Fringe and Area of Shallow Flooding.
6. COMPLIANCE
No new development shall hereafter occur within the Area of Special Flood Hazard (ASFH) unless such new development is undertaken in full compliance with this chapter. Enforcement of violations shall be in accordance with Section 11-1-01-8.
7. ABROGATION & GREATER RESTRICTIONS
The provisions of this chapter shall be in addition to, and shall not be deemed to repeal, abrogate, or impair any other ordinance, regulation, easement, covenant or deed restriction. In the event that the provisions of this and any other ordinance, regulation, easement, covenant or deed restriction conflict or overlap, whichever has the more restrictive requirements shall control.
8. SEVERABILITY
Each section, clause, and provision of this Code is declared severable as per Section 11-01-06.
CHAPTER 11-08: Flood Hazard Regulations
Section 11-08-02: Floodway Zone
Subsection 9: Interpretation
March 2013
Boise Development Code
Page 287
9. INTERPRETATION
All of the provisions of this chapter shall be liberally construed in favor of the governing body and shall not be deemed to limit or repeal any other powers granted under state statutes.
10. WARNING AND DISCLAIMER
The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions. Flood heights may be increased due to artificial or natural causes. This chapter does not imply that lands outside the identified areas of special flood hazard will be free from flooding or flood damages or that uses permitted within the identified areas of special flood hazard will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of Boise City, or any officer or employee thereof, for any flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder. 11-08-02. FLOODWAY ZONE
1. PERMITTED USES
All uses permitted by the base zone district within this Code, and as amended are permitted in Floodway Zones to the extent that the uses are consistent with the standards of this Section.
2. STANDARDS
A. No new development shall be permitted including fill, new construction, substantial improvements or other development, unless
(1) It is public infrastructure, including but not limited to bridges, roadways, sewer and water lines, and
(2) A licensed professional engineer certifies that there is not any increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the Base Flood discharge, either as a result of the development or its cumulative effect.
B. All new development, new construction and substantial improvements shall comply with the applicable standards for uses in the Floodway Fringe.
C. Existing structures in the Floodway Zone which are displaced by floodwater shall not be reconstructed.
D. No alteration or relocation of a water course shall be permitted which would diminish the flood carrying capacity of the water course, or which would result in the flooding of lands which are not subject to flooding prior to such alteration or relocation of the water course, or which will result in adverse effects on other properties including but not limited to, bank erosion resulting from higher velocities, increased heights of floodwaters, extended flood duration, or alterations that may promote channel blockage.
E. Uses on parcels which include any portion of a floodway shall provide for channel stabilization, bank stabilization, or a setback from the edge of the floodway sufficient to protect the use from flood related erosion. Such measures shall be reviewed by a licensed professional engineer for effectiveness for the flood flow and velocity conditions anticipated at the site.
CHAPTER 11-08: Flood Hazard Regulations
Section 11-08-03: Floodway Fringe (FF) Zone and Area of Shallow Flooding (ASF) Zone
Subsection 3: Prohibited Uses
March 2013
Boise Development Code
Page 288
F. Check dams shall be designed and reviewed by a licensed professional engineer, and reviewed and approved by the Boise City Engineer to ensure the safety of persons and property which could be affected by the construction of the check dam.
G. In areas where a regulatory floodway has not been designated, no new construction, substantial improvements, other development (Including fill) shall be permitted within zones A1-30 and AE on the community's FIRM, unless it is demonstrated that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than two feet at any point within the community.
3. PROHIBITED USES
A. New construction or substantial improvements of residential and non-residential structures, including both principal and accessory use structures, except as provided in 11-08-02.2.
B. Manufacture and storage of materials which are buoyant, flammable, toxic or explosive, or which may present a hazard to public health or safety in time of flooding.
C. Standards for Sand and Gravel Extraction - Material stockpiles and permanently installed structures shall not be located within the floodway.
4. RELOCATING THE FLOODWAY (LINE)
A. All proposals to redefine the floodway boundary lines require a resolution from the Boise City Council to adopt the amendments to the Floodway Insurance Rate Map, Floodway Boundary Maps, Floodway Maps, and the Flood Profiles. The procedure shall include a review by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, the Federal Emergency Management Agency, the Boise City Department of Public Works, and the Boise City Planning and Development Services Department, prior to submittal to the City Council.
B. The Floodway Boundary Line may be relocated due to refinements of the floodway calculations based upon new information concerning the existing conditions.
C. The floodway boundary line may not be relocated through physical alterations to the lands in the floodplain. 11-08-03. FLOODWAY FRINGE (FF) ZONE AND AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING (ASF) ZONE
1. PERMITTED USES
All uses permitted in the base zone district within the this Code and as amended, are permitted in the Floodway Fringe Zone and Area of Shallow Flooding Zone to the extent that such uses are consistent with the standards within this Section.
CHAPTER 11-08: Flood Hazard Regulations
Section 11-08-03: Floodway Fringe (FF) Zone and Area of Shallow Flooding (ASF) Zone
Subsection 2: Standards
March 2013
Boise Development Code
Page 289
2. STANDARDS
A. Uses
(1) Except for levees, all new development shall utilize methods and practices that minimize development and prevent the increase in flood damage potential to other properties or other adverse impacts including but not limited to, bank erosion resulting from higher velocities, increased heights of floodwaters, extended flood duration, or alterations that may promote channel blockage.
(2) All new development shall utilize materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage.
(3) All new construction and substantial improvements to structures shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure.
(4) All manufactured homes must likewise be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement, and shall be installed using methods and practices that minimize flood damage. Anchoring methods may include, but are not limited to; use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors (Reference FEMA's "Manufactured Home Installation in Flood Hazard Areas" guidebook for additional techniques).
(5) Drainage practices shall be utilized which minimize exposure to flood hazards.
(6) Manufacture and/or storage of material which is buoyant, flammable, toxic or explosive is prohibited.
(7) River crossings shall be designed to withstand the flows and velocities of the base flood discharge and shall not impede the flows.
(8) All development and structures shall meet or exceed the requirements of Section 11-05-06 Boise River System Overlay District if applicable.
(9) Water velocities within the floodway fringe are not significantly increased so as to cause adverse effects on the site or to surrounding properties.
(10) Require adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures.
B. Utilities
(1) All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to prevent infiltration of flood waters into the systems.
(2) New and replacement wastewater disposal systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems and discharge from the systems into flood waters.
(3) On-site waste disposal systems are prohibited in the Floodway Fringe Zone and Area of Shallow Flooding Zone.
(4) Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air-conditioning equipment and other service facilities shall be designed and/or otherwise elevated or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding.
CHAPTER 11-08: Flood Hazard Regulations
Section 11-08-03: Floodway Fringe (FF) Zone and Area of Shallow Flooding (ASF) Zone
Subsection 2: Standards
March 2013
Boise Development Code
Page 290
C. Subdivisions
(1) All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage.
(2) All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage.
(3) All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage to reduce exposure to flood damage.
(4) Base flood elevation data shall be provided and shown on the preliminary plat for all subdivision proposals. Such elevation data shall be certified by a licensed professional engineer or registered land surveyor. Where base flood elevation data has not been provided or is not available from another authorized source, it shall be generated for subdivision proposals and other proposed developments which contain at least 50 lots or 5 acres (whichever is less).
D. Residential Structures
(1) New construction and substantial improvement of any residential structure (including but not limited to mobile or manufactured homes) located in the Floodway Fringe shall have the lowest floor including basement, elevated one foot above the base flood elevation.
(2) New construction and substantial improvement of any residential structure located in the Area of Shallow Flooding (AO Flood Zone) shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to the base flood elevation. The height of the adjacent grade and the lowest floor including basement and/or the first floor shall be certified by a licensed professional engineer or registered land surveyor.
(3) Fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are subject to flooding shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered professional engineer and must meet or exceed the following minimum criteria:
(a) A minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding shall be provided.
(b) The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade.
(c) Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, or other coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters.
E. Manufactured Homes
(1) All manufactured homes shall be placed or substantially improved on sites:
(a) Outside of a manufactured home park or subdivision;
(b) In a new manufactured home park or subdivision;
(c) In an expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision; or
(d) In an existing manufactured home park or subdivision on which a manufactured home has incurred substantial damage as the result of a flood.
CHAPTER 11-08: Flood Hazard Regulations
Section 11-08-03: Floodway Fringe (FF) Zone and Area of Shallow Flooding (ASF) Zone
Subsection 2: Standards
March 2013
Boise Development Code
Page 291
(2) All manufactured homes shall be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated to or above the base flood elevation and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement.
(3) Manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved on sites in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision that are not subject to the provisions of "A" above, be elevated so that either:
(a) The lowest floor of the manufactured home is at or above the base flood elevation, or
(b) The manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced piers or other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength that are no less than 36 inches in height above grade and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement.
F. Nonresidential Structures
(1) Elevating
New construction and substantial improvement of any nonresidential structures shall meet the following:
When located in the Floodway Fringe, such structures shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to one foot above the base flood elevation. When located in the Area of Shallow Flooding, such structures shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to the level of the base flood elevation.
(a) Elevations of adjacent grade and the first floor shall be certified by a licensed professional engineer or registered land surveyor to the Building Director.
(b) Nonresidential structures that are elevated, but not flood proofed, must meet the same standards for space below the first floor as described in subsection D above.
(2) Flood-proofing
In lieu of elevating nonresidential structures as required in this Section, new construction and substantial improvement of any nonresidential structures shall meet the following:
(a) When located in the Floodway Fringe, such structures together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities shall be flood-proofed to one foot above the base flood level so the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water.
(b) When located in the Area of Shallow Flooding, such structures, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, shall be flood-proofed to the base flood level so the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water.
(c) Such flood-proofing may not be required if a licensed professional engineer certifies that such flood-proofing is not necessary to resist hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effects of buoyancy because uplift will not occur due to the nature of the flood, provided however, that flood-proofing of attendant utility and sanitary facilities is still required.
(d) Structural components shall be capable of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effects of buoyancy.
CHAPTER 11-08: Flood Hazard Regulations
Section 11-08-04: Unnumbered "A Zones"
Subsection 1: Permitted Uses
March 2013
Boise Development Code
Page 292
(e) A licensed professional engineer shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting provisions of this Section based on their review of the structural design, specifications and plans. Such certifications shall be provided to the Planning Director.
G. Accessory Structures and Uses
(1) New accessory structures are prohibited in the floodway. Accessory structures shall not exceed the following standards if constructed or placed in the Floodway Fringe:
(a) Accessory structures to nonresidential principal uses shall meet the standards listed for nonresidential structures (subsection F above) if the accessory structure exceeds 1,000 square feet in size.
(b) Accessory structures to residential principal uses shall not exceed 1,000 square feet in size; or 40 percent of the area of the rear yard of the property; or have construction costs of more than 10 percent of the market value of the principal residential structure, whichever is the least.
(2) Accessory structures and uses shall be designed to have a low flood damage potential and shall be placed on the building site and constructed so as to offer the minimum resistance to the flow of floodwaters.
(3) Accessory structures shall meet the requirements of subsection A above, Standards for Uses.
H. Recreational Vehicles
Recreational vehicles placed on sites within areas of special flood hazard (ASFH) or areas of shallow flooding (ASF) as identified on the City's most recently adopted Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) shall either:
(1) Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days, or
(2) Be fully licensed and ready for highway use, or
(3) Meet the permit and elevation requirements for residential structures (subsection D above) and the anchoring requirements for manufactured homes (subsection E above). 11-08-04. UNNUMBERED "A ZONES"
1. PERMITTED USES
All uses permitted in the Base Zone District within this Code and as amended, are permitted in the Unnumbered "A Zone" to the extent that such uses are consistent with the standards within this Section.
2. STANDARDS
A. Uses
(1) The use shall meet the standards listed in the standards for uses in the Floodway Fringe Zone and Area of Shallow Flooding Zone (Section 11-08-03.2.A).
(2) Where elevation data is not available either through the Flood Insurance Study or from another authoritative source (Section 11-08-01.3), applications for building permits shall be reviewed to assure that proposed construction will be
CHAPTER 11-08: Flood Hazard Regulations
Section 11-08-05: Critical Facilities
Subsection 1: Duties of the Floodplain Adminstrator (Boise Planning Director)
March 2013
Boise Development Code
Page 293
reasonably safe from flooding. The test of reasonableness is a local judgment and includes use of historical data, high water marks, photographs of past flooding, etc., where available. Failure to elevate at least two feet above grade in these zones may result in higher insurance rates.
(3) Require adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures.
B. Utilities
The utilities shall meet the standards listed for utilities in the Floodway Fringe Zone and Area of Shallow Flooding Zone (Section 11-08-03.2.B).
C. Subdivisions
The subdivision shall meet the standards listed for subdivisions in the Floodway Fringe Zone and Area of Shallow Flooding Zone (Section 11-08-03.2.C).
D. Standards for Residential Structures
The residential structures shall meet the standards for residential structures listed in Floodway Fringe Zone and Area of Shallow Flooding Zone (Section 11-08-03.2.D). 11-08-05. CRITICAL FACILITIES
Construction of new critical facilities shall be, to the extent possible, located outside the limits of the Special Flood Hazard Area (SFHA) (100-year floodplain). Construction of new critical facilities shall be permissible within the SFHA if no feasible alternative site is available. Critical facilities constructed within the SFHA shall have the lowest floor elevated three feet or to the height of the 500-year flood, whichever is higher. Access to and from the critical facility should also be protected to the height utilized above. Flood-proofing and sealing measures must be taken to ensure that toxic substances will not be displaced by or released into floodwaters. Access routes elevated to or above the level of the base flood elevation shall be provided to all critical facilities to the extent possible. 11-08-06. ADMINISTRATION
1. DUTIES OF THE FLOODPLAIN ADMINSTRATOR (BOISE PLANNING DIRECTOR)
The Boise City Planning Director is hereby appointed to administer and implement this chapter and, as the Floodplain Administrator, shall perform the following duties:
A. Review Applications
Review all applications for Base Zone District changes, subdivisions, special use permits, conditional use permits and planned developments to determine:
(1) If the development is within an area of special flood hazard;
(2) To determine that all necessary permits have been obtained from those federal, state, or local governmental agencies from which prior approval is required; and
(3) For compliance with the provisions of this chapter and disclose to the PZC and Council whether the application is, or is not, in compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
CHAPTER 11-08: Flood Hazard Regulations
Section 11-08-06: Administration
Subsection 1: Duties of the Floodplain Adminstrator (Boise Planning Director)
March 2013
Boise Development Code
Page 294
B. Interpretations
(1) Make interpretations of the location of the boundaries of the Floodway and the Floodway Fringe.
(2) When uncertainty exists as to whether a new development is within an Area of Special Flood Hazard, determine whether development is within the Floodway or Floodway Fringe.
C. Zoning Certificates
Issues zoning certificates for those structures which are to be constructed or modified in compliance with the provisions of this chapter and the other applicable provisions of this code.
D. Variances
Variances may be issued by the Director for the reconstruction, rehabilitation or restoration of structures listed on the National Register of Historic Places or the State Inventory of Historic Places, without regard to the procedures set forth in this chapter.
E. Available Data
Obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state or other source when such data has not been provided in the Flood Insurance Study.
F. Record Keeping
Compile and maintain for public inspection all records pertaining to the provisions of this chapter, including records of all appeal actions and variances, records of first floor elevations, flood-proofing certificates, letters of map amendment and all other records required by this chapter and by federal regulations.
G. Notification
Notify adjacent jurisdictions and the Idaho Department of Water Resources prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency; and require that maintenance be provided within the altered or relocated portion of such watercourse so that the flood carrying capacity of the watercourse is not diminished.
H. Annual Reports
Submit annual reports, and other reports to the Federal Emergency Management Agency, as required and as requested.
I. Engineer Certification
(1) Require that for all new or substantially improved structures in an Area of Special Flood Hazard along the Boise River or in the gulches, a licensed professional engineer or registered land surveyor certify the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the lowest floor (including basement) of the structure; and record the certified elevation and whether or not the structure contains a basement.
(2) Require that for all new or substantially improved structures in an Area of Shallow Flooding in an Area of Special Flood Hazard, a licensed professional engineer or registered land surveyor shall certify the actual height in feet, as measured from the building edges at the lowest floor height to the highest ground which surrounds the building and record the certified height and whether or not the structure contains a basement.
CHAPTER 11-08: Flood Hazard Regulations
Section 11-08-07: Variances and Appeals
Subsection 2: Duties of the Boise City Engineer
March 2013
Boise Development Code
Page 295
(3) Require that for all new or substantially improved flood-proofed non-residential structures; a licensed professional engineer or registered land surveyor certify that the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which the structure is flood-proofed; and the Boise City Planning and Development Services Director shall maintain copies of the flood-proofing certificates as required in this chapter.
J. Permit Issuance
Issue building or grading permits for new construction, new development, and substantial improvement to structures which are in compliance with the provisions of this Ordinance.
2. DUTIES OF THE BOISE CITY ENGINEER
Upon request from the Director, the Boise City Engineer shall provide technical assistance and information including but not limited to verify field surveys and technical information submitted by any applicant for new development. 11-08-07. VARIANCES AND APPEALS
1. GENERAL PROVISIONS
A. Consideration of Size and Location
Generally, the only circumstances under which a variance may be issued are for new construction and substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of 1/2 acre or less in size, contiguous to and surrounded by, lots with existing structures constructed below the Base Flood Elevation.
B. Consideration of Standards
Variances may only be approved after the standards provided in (see Section C below) have been fully considered. As the lot size increased beyond 1/2 acres, the technical justification for issuing the variance increases.
C. Consideration of Technical Information
In the review of requests for variances, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, and standards specified in this chapter:
(1) The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others;
(2) The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;
(3) The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner;
(4) The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the community; the necessity to the facility of a waterfront location where applicable;
(5) The availability of alternative locations for the proposed use which are not subject to flooding or erosion damage;
(6) The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development;
(7) The relationship of the proposed use to the Boise City Comprehensive Plan and floodplain management program for that area;
(8) The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles;
(9) The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and sediment transport of the flood waters, if applicable, expected at the site; and
CHAPTER 11-08: Flood Hazard Regulations
Section 11-08-07: Variances and Appeals
Subsection 2: Conditions for Variances
March 2013
Boise Development Code
Page 296
(10) The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities including but not limited to sewer, gas, electrical, water systems, and streets and bridges.
2. CONDITIONS FOR VARIANCES
For new developments and substantial improvements to existing structures, the conditions for a variance shall comply with Section 11-08-07.1 as well as the following:
A. Prohibitions
Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the Base Flood discharge would result.
B. Necessary Minimum
A variance shall only be issued upon determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief.
C. Approval Criteria
A variance shall only be issued upon a showing of good and sufficient cause; a determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant; and a determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, the creation of nuisances, degradation of or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances.
D. Rarely Allowed
Variances as interpreted in the National Flood Insurance Program are based on the general zoning law principle that they pertain to a physical piece of property; they are not personal in nature and do not pertain to the structure, its inhabitants, economic or financial circumstances. They primarily address small lots in densely populated residential neighborhoods. As such, variances from the flood elevations should be quite rare.
E. Variances for Nonresidential Structures
Variances may be issued for nonresidential buildings in very limited circumstances to allow a lesser degree of flood-proofing than watertight or dry-flood-proofing, where it can be determined that such action will have low damage potential, and otherwise complies with of the Standards for Uses and Standard for Utilities.
F. Conditions for Approval
Upon consideration of the factors and the purposes of this chapter, the PZC may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this chapter.
G. Flood Insurance Notice Required
Any applicant to whom a variance is issued shall be given written notice that the cost of flood insurance may be commensurate with any increased flood risk.
CHAPTER 11-08: Flood Hazard Regulations
Section 11-08-08: Definitions
Subsection 3: Appeals
March 2013
Boise Development Code
Page 297
3. APPEALS
A. Process for an Appeal
(1) The applicant or any aggrieved party may appeal the Director's decision or determination to the PZC in accordance with this Code (Section 11-03-03.9).
(2) The applicant or any aggrieved party may appeal the PZC decision or determination to the Council in accordance with this Code (Section 11-03-03.9).
(3) Within 10 calendar days after receipt of the appeal, the Council shall establish a date for hearing such appeal and shall notify the appealing party and all persons notified for the previous hearing.
(4) The Council, in reviewing the decision of the PZC, may sustain or deny the PZC, or the Council may amend or modify the decision or determination of the PZC by imposing additional or different conditions or limitations.
B. Basis for an Appeal
An appeal which alleges that there is an error in any requirement, decision, or determination made by any administrative officer of Boise City, or by the PZC in the enforcement or administration of this chapter, shall be supported by technical and scientific evidence, which may include, but is not limited to:
(1) An actual copy of the recorded plat map showing the property;
(2) A topographic map showing ground elevation contours and the curvilinear line representing the area subject to inundation by the Base Flood; and
(3) Certification by a licensed professional engineer or licensed land surveyor of the elevation of the lowest floor (including basement), the elevation of any fill and the date on which the fill was placed, the elevation to which any structure has been flood-proofed, and written statement setting forth the error alleged and the basis for appeal. 11-08-08. DEFINITIONS
As used in this Chapter each of the terms defined shall have the meaning given in this Section unless a different meaning is clearly required by the context.
Accessory Use or Structure
A use or structure which is subordinate to the principal use structure on the same parcel and which serves a purpose customarily incidental to the principal use or structure. The accessory use or structure shall, in no instance, include a dwelling unit or be used for human habitation.
Appeal
A request to the Planning and Zoning Commission for a review of the floodplain administrator’s interpretation of any provision of this chapter.
Area of Shallow Flooding (ASF)
An area shown on the flood insurance rate map as an AO zone with base flood depths from one to three feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate, and where velocity flow may be evident. These areas are also referred to as the alluvial fans, and are characterized as sheet flow.
Area of Special Flood Hazard (ASFH)
The lands within Boise City which are subject to flooding from the base flood (or 100 year flood). These areas are also referred to as the floodplain. Designation on maps always include the letters A or V.
CHAPTER 11-08: Flood Hazard Regulations
Section 11-08-08: Definitions
Subsection 3: Appeals
March 2013
Boise Development Code
Page 298
Base Flood
The flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year, and is synonymous with "one-percent flood" and "100 year flood." Designation on maps always include the letters A or V.
Base Flood Elevation
The elevation in feet in relation to mean sea level as determined by the Federal Emergency Management Agency to which flood water can be expected to rise during a base flood.
Base Flood Height in Areas of Shallow Flooding
The height expressed in feet above adjacent grade to which flood waters can be expected to rise during a base flood. This height is determined by the Federal Emergency Management Agency and is shown on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM). Adjacent grade is the elevation of the crown of the nearest street or back of the adjacent curb after adjustment is made for slope of the ground.
Base Zone District
The zone district classification which is in effect on any given land for which standards are included in the Development Code of Boise City, Idaho dated June 2002, and as amended.
Basement
Any area of the building with its floor sub-grade (below ground level) on all sides.
Check Dam
A structure erected in a floodway which does not exceed ten feet in height or impound more than fifty acre feet of water. For the purposes of this Chapter, energy dissipating devices shall be considered to be check dams.
Critical Facility
A facility for which even a slight chance of flooding might be too great. Critical faculties include, but are not limited to schools, nursing homes, hospitals, police, fire and emergency response installations, installations which produce, use or store hazardous materials or hazardous waste.
Development
Any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate over which the Boise City Council exercises control. In addition to structural construction, the term includes mining, drilling, dredging, grading, paving, excavation and filling.
Elevated Building
For insurance purposes, a non-basement building which has its lowest elevated floor raised above ground level by foundation walls, shear walls, post, piers, pilings or columns.
Existing Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision
A manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the adopted floodplain management regulations.
Expansions to an Existing Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision
The preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA)
The agency with the overall responsibility of administering the national flood insurance program (NFIP).
CHAPTER 11-08: Flood Hazard Regulations
Section 11-08-08: Definitions
Subsection 3: Appeals
March 2013
Boise Development Code
Page 299
Flood or Flooding
A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from the overflow of a watercourse and/or the unusual and rapid accumulation of run-off of surface waters from any source., including but not limited to snow melt or heavy rain.
Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM)
The official report provided by the Federal Emergency Management Agency which has delineated both the areas of special flood hazard and the risk premium zones applicable to the community.
Flood Insurance Study(FIS)
The official report provided by the Federal Insurance Administration that includes flood profiles, the Flood-Boundary-Floodway Map, and the water surface elevation of the base flood.
Floodplain
The land that has been or may be covered by floodwaters, or is surrounded by floodwater and inaccessible, during the occurrence of the regulatory flood. The riverine floodplain includes the floodway and the flood fringe.
Flood-proofing
Any combination of structural and non-structural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate potential flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures, and their contents.
Flood Protection Elevation (FPE)
An elevation that shall correspond to the elevation of the one percent chance flood (one hundred year flood) plus any increased flood elevation due to floodway encroachment, plus any required freeboard.
Floodway (FW)
The Channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot, as shown in the Flood Insurance Study for Boise City, Idaho.
Floodway Fringe (FF)
The area between the floodway boundary and the outer limits of the 100 Year Flood. These lands within Boise City are subject to flooding from the Base Flood (aka the 100 year Flood), and are also referred to as part of the floodplain or the Area of Special Flood Hazard located outside of the floodway.
Letter of Map Amendment (LOMA)
A letter issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency exempting a specific structure or site from the Flood Insurance requirements. The site is exempted by virtue of its being elevated above the 100 year flood elevation.
Letter of Map Revision (LOMR)
A letter issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency exempting a specific structure or site from Flood Insurance requirements. The site or structure is exempted by virtue of its being elevated above the 100 year flood elevation.
Levee
A levee is a continuous dike or ridge, constructed of earth or other materials that confines flood waters (excluding landfill).
Lowest Floor
The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage, in an area other than a basement area, is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable non-elevation design requirements of this Chapter. (Section 11-08-03.2.A)
CHAPTER 11-08: Flood Hazard Regulations
Section 11-08-08: Definitions
Subsection 3: Appeals
March 2013
Boise Development Code
Page 300
Manufactured Home
A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities. The term "manufactured home" does not include a "recreational vehicle."
Mobile Home
A transportable, factory-built home designed to be used as a year-round residential dwelling and built prior to enactment of the National Housing include and Safety Standards Act of 1974, which became effective June 15, 1976.
Mobile Home Park or Subdivision
Any area, tract, plot or parcel of land, developed and designed primarily for placement of mobile homes located and maintained for dwelling purposes on a permanent or semi-permanent basis.
New Construction
Structures for which the start of construction commenced on or after the effective date of this Chapter.
New Development
Any development for which final approval entitling the applicant to proceed with the development was issued on or after the effective date of this Chapter.
New Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision
A manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective date of adopted floodplain management regulations.
Non-residential Structure
A building other than a residential structure. The term includes but is not limited to: buildings used for places of assembly, education, child care, business, maintenance, storage, manufacturing, government, hospitals, sanitariums and nursing homes.
Ordinary High Water Mark (OHWM)
The line which the water impresses on the soil by covering it for sufficient periods to deprive the soil of its vegetation and destroy its value for agricultural purposes.
Recreation Vehicle
A vehicle which is: (a) Built on a single chassis; (b) 400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projections; (c) Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and (d) Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel or seasonal use.
Regulatory Floodway
The channel of a river or other watercourse and adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot (1’).
Residential Structure
A building used as a dwelling for one or more persons. The term includes, but is not limited to houses, mobile homes, apartment buildings, lodging homes, dormitories, (and the guest or patient rooms of), hotels, and motels. The term also includes accessory use areas used in conjunction with and forming an integral part of a residential structure.
Start of Construction
The date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, placement or other improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footing, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a mobile home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor
CHAPTER 11-08: Flood Hazard Regulations
Section 11-08-08: Definitions
Subsection 3: Appeals
March 2013
Boise Development Code
Page 301
does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundation or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure.
Structure
Anything constructed or erected, which requires permanent location on the ground or is attached to something having location on the ground.
Substantial Damage
Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to it’s before damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.
Substantial Improvement
Any repair, reconstruction, or improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure either before the improvement or the repair is started, or if the structure has been damaged and is being restored, before the damage occurred. For the purposes of this definition, "substantial improvement" is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the structure. The term "Substantial Improvement" does not, however, include either: any project for improvement of a structure to comply with existing state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions, or: any alteration of a structure listed on the National Register of Historic Places or a State Inventory of Historic Places.
Unnumbered "A Zone"
An area shown on the Flood Insurance Rate Map as an "A Zone" in which base flood depths and a clearly defined channel are not shown.
Variance
A grant of relief from the requirements of this Chapter which permits construction in a manner that would otherwise be prohibited by this Chapter.
March 2013 Boise Development Code
Page 302
CHAPTER 11-09: SUBDIVISION STANDARDSUBDIVISION STANDARDSS 11-09-01. PURPOSE AND APPLICABILITY
1. PURPOSE
To promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of present and future residents, and to ensure the coordinated and efficient subdividing of land. Procedures for review and decision-making on subdivision applications are located in Sections 11-03-04.4, Subdivision Plat, of this Code.
2. APPLICABILITY
A. This Chapter shall apply uniformly to all land divisions within the City of Boise. However, if a parcel to be subdivided is of such unusual size or shape or is surrounded by such development or unusual conditions that the strict application of the regulations in this chapter would result in substantial hardship or inequity, the Council or Commission may waive or modify the regulations according to the procedures and criteria of Section 11-09-05.1 Modifications and Waivers.
B. Five-Acre Parcel Division (Record of Survey not required)
The division of land into parcels of five acres or more meeting the following standards:
(1) The land is not zoned for or intended to be used for residential development purposes;
(2) The dedication of public streets or construction of private streets is not required other than dedications for the widening of existing streets, and
(3) The parcels front onto a street and meet the dimensional standards of the zoning district within which they are located, unless a modification or waiver of those standards is granted by the Commission. 11-09-02. RECORDS OF SURVEY
1. STANDARDS
The following divisions of land and/or change of parcel boundaries will require the review and approval of a Record of Survey prepared in accord with Idaho Code, 55-19, to establish that resulting parcels are conforming, buildable parcels.
A. Minor Land Division
The purpose of the Minor Land Division is to allow the creation of up to four buildable parcels without being subject to the procedural provisions of the Preliminary and Final Plat regulations of this title. A Record of Survey, application and the appropriate fee are required for a Minor Land Division of a lot, tract or parcel of land. The Minor Land Division must that meet the following conditions:
(1) No Minor Land Division shall create more than 4 new parcels.
(2) No property involved in a Minor Land Division shall be involved in a subsequent Minor Land Division for a period of 1 year from the recording date of the previous Record of Survey for a Minor Land Division;
(3) No new street dedication, excluding widening of an existing street, is involved
CHAPTER 11-09: Subdivision Standards
Section 11-09-02: Records of Survey
Subsection 1: Standards
March 2013
Boise Development Code
Page 303
(4) No new public utility lines shall be extended within the right-of-way to property involved in a Minor Land Division;
(5) Wet line sewer and central water lines must be currently located in the public right-of-way that abuts the parcel to be divided;
(6) All resulting parcels must conform to the minimum requirements of all existing land use regulations including the adopted Zoning Ordinance; and
(7) All existing buildings to remain shall meet applicable zoning requirements regarding allowed uses and parking and shall comply with the setback requirements of the existing zone as measured from any parcel boundary being created by this process. Additionally, the following shall apply:
(a) Any setback that was legally non-conforming prior to the Minor Land Division may remain as a legal non-conforming setback, provided the legal non-conforming setback is not altered by the Minor Land Division;
(b) Any building not meeting the required setback that is to be partially or completely demolished or moved shall be either demolished or moved prior to the approval of the Minor Land Division;
(c) Any existing structures shall connect to public water and sewer lines prior to approval of the Minor Land Division;
(d) If required parking is provided by means of a permanent shared-parking agreement, a note on the face of the survey must list the total required and provided parking for all parcels to which the shared parking provisions of the shared-parking agreement applies;
(e) When utilities cross land being divided, a utility easement shall be provided and indicated on the Record of Survey. If an easement is located in a proposed permanent structure construction area, the easement shall be vacated prior to the Planning Director’s approval of the Minor Land Division; and
(f) All new parcels that abut the public right-of-way shall be improved with sidewalk, curb and gutter, and if applicable, a paved driveway apron that extends to the edge of street pavement will be required. All right-of-way improvements, license agreements, and/or bonding shall be completed prior to the Planning Director’s approval of the Minor Land Division.
B. Property Line Adjustment
A property line adjustment that establishes buildable parcels with boundaries that differ from existing buildable parcel and/or buildable lot boundaries.
(1) Conforming Lots of Record
(a) The total number of buildable parcels must not be greater than the number of buildable parcels and/or lots existing prior to the record of survey. When Property Line Adjustments occur between section land and subdivided lots no lot shall increase in area by more than 20 percent.
(b) The resultant parcels must meet the minimum requirements for area, frontage and width for the existing zone.
(c) All existing buildings, driveways and parking areas must meet the setback requirements of the existing zone as measured from any parcel boundary being created by this process. Any setback that is legally non-conforming may remain
CHAPTER 11-09: Subdivision Standards
Section 11-09-02: Records of Survey
Subsection 1: Standards
March 2013
Boise Development Code
Page 304
as a legal non-conforming setback, provided the legal non-conforming setback is not altered by the Property Line Adjustment. If any building not meeting the required setback is to be partially or completely demolished, the demolition must be completed prior to the Planning Director’s approval of the Record of Survey.
(d) If existing residential buildings are to remain, the parcel containing such building(s) must comply with current Boise City Zoning Ordinance parking requirements. The parking shall be located on-site. If existing commercial, office or industrial buildings are to remain, the parcel containing such building(s) must comply with current parking requirements, either within the parcel or by means of a permanent recorded shared-parking agreement, as evidenced by a note on the Record of Survey stating both the number of spaces provided and the code required number of spaces. If required parking is provided by means of a permanent shared-parking agreement, the Record of Survey must list the total required and provided parking for all parcels to which the parking provisions of the shared-parking agreement applies.
(e) When utilities cross land being divided a utility easement shall be provided and indicated on the Record of Survey. If an easement is located in a proposed permanent structure construction area, the easement shall be vacated prior to the Planning Director’s approval of the Record of Survey.
(f) If the street(s) adjacent to the lot(s) have not been improved with sidewalk the applicant shall landscape the right-of-way area between the edge of the street pavement and the property line with lawn or other vegetative ground cover that will prevent the area from being used as an off street parking area. Depending on the paved street width, the Ada County Highway District may require some separation between the landscaping and the edge of the street pavement. If the lot is not alley loaded and has driveways off of the street, the area between the edge of the street pavement and the property line shall be paved to align with the driveway. The applicant shall obtain a license agreement from the Ada County Highway District prior to landscaping and/or paving in the right-of-way. Sidewalks shall be installed if sidewalk exists on adjoining property.
(g) The boundaries of a parcel with a residential zone or use may be adjusted through the Property Line Adjustment process twice. Any additional boundary adjustments shall require a subdivision plat or a Record of Survey for a Minor Land Division.
(2) Substandard Original Lots of Record
(a) A Property Line Adjustment shall not result in more buildable parcels than the total number of original substandard lots of record.
CHAPTER 11-09: Subdivision Standards
Section 11-09-02: Records of Survey
Subsection 1: Standards
March 2013
Boise Development Code
Page 305
(b) Property Line Adjustment that includes a partial lot requires documentation that the split of the lot was recorded prior to October 30, 1965. If the partial lot does not qualify as a buildable parcel, it must be combined with an original lot to count as 1 buildable parcel if the partial lot was created by recorded deed prior to October 30, 1965.
(c) Adjusted side property lines shall be perpendicular to the public street. Exceptions can be made for lots where the original side lot lines were not perpendicular to the street, such as pie shaped lots.
Figure 11-09.1: Substandard Original Lot of Record
Figure 11-09.2: Adjustment Not Allowed
CHAPTER 11-09: Subdivision Standards
Section 11-09-02: Records of Survey
Subsection 1: Standards
March 2013
Boise Development Code
Page 306
(d) A Property Line Adjustment shall not result in buildable parcels that decrease the area, frontage or width below that of the substandard original lots of record.
(e) All existing buildings, driveways and parking areas must meet the setback requirements of the existing zone as measured from any parcel boundary being created by this process. Any setback that is legally non-conforming may remain as a legal non-conforming setback, provided the legal non-conforming setback is not altered by the Property Line Adjustment. If any building not meeting the required setback is to be partially or completely demolished, the demolition must be completed prior to the Planning Director’s approval of the Record of Survey.
(f) If existing residential buildings are to remain, the parcel containing such building(s) shall comply with current Boise City Zoning Ordinance parking requirements. The parking shall be located on-site. If existing commercial, office or industrial buildings are to remain, the parcel containing such building(s) must comply with current parking requirements, either within the parcel or by means of a permanent recorded shared-parking agreement, as evidenced by a note on the Record of Survey stating both the number of spaces provided and the number of spaces the Boise City Zoning Ordinance requires. If required parking is provided by means of a permanent shared-parking agreement, the Record of Survey must list the total required and provided parking for all parcels to which the parking provisions of the shared-parking agreement applies.
(g) All parcels that abut an improved alley shall be required to take parking access from the alley.
(h) If the street(s) adjacent to the lot(s) have not been improved with sidewalk the applicant shall landscape the right-of-way area between the edge of the street pavement and the property line with lawn or other vegetative ground cover that will prevent the area from being used as an off street parking area. Depending on the paved street width, the Ada County Highway District may require some separation between the landscaping and the edge of the street pavement. If the lot is not alley loaded and has driveways off of the street, the area between the edge of the street pavement and the property line shall be paved to align with the driveway. The applicant shall obtain a license agreement from the Ada County Highway District prior to landscaping and/or paving in the right-of-way. Sidewalks shall be installed if sidewalk exists on adjoining property.
(i) When utilities cross land being divided a utility easement shall be provided and indicated on the Record of Survey. If an easement is located in a proposed permanent structure construction area, the easement shall be vacated prior to the Planning Director’s approval of the Record of Survey.
(j) The boundaries of a parcel with a residential zone or use may be adjusted through the Property Line Adjustment process twice. Any additional boundary adjustments shall require a subdivision plat or a Record of Survey for a Minor Land Division.
(k) A Property Line Adjustment shall only occur between an original corner lot and an original interior lot if the original corner lot is a minimum of 35 feet or more in width, unless three or more lots are combined resulting in a reduction in density. Adjusted corner lots shall comply with the following standards:
CHAPTER 11-09: Subdivision Standards
Section 11-09-02: Records of Survey
Subsection 1: Standards
March 2013
Boise Development Code
Page 307
The adjusted corner lot shall be of the same square footage as the original corner lot. If an existing home is located on a corner lot, a 15 foot rear setback shall be provided from the existing home to the new property line, regardless of the orientation or street address of the existing home.
Figure 11-09.3: Adjustments Not Allowed
CHAPTER 11-09: Subdivision Standards
Section 11-09-03: Subdivision Design Standards
Subsection 1: General
March 2013
Boise Development Code
Page 308
A minimum of 150 square feet of open space, located outside of the setbacks, is required for existing homes. Open space that complies with the standards in this Code shall be designated as such on the Record of Survey.
(3) Parcel Consolidation
A Record of Survey is required to allow the consolidation of two or more existing contiguous parcels, with at least one parcel deemed as buildable, into one buildable parcel.
(a) Prior to issuance of a building permit, a copy of a recorded Notice of Buildable Parcel and a copy of a recorded deed describing by metes and bounds the entirety of the platted lots shall be submitted to the Planning Director.
(b) If platted or recorded easements exist within any lot, the easements must be vacated prior to any construction within the easement area.
(4) Within15 calendar days The Planning Director shall either approve or deny. If approved each Notice of Buildable Parcel shall be signed and returned to the applicant for recording. 11-09-03. SUBDIVISION DESIGN STANDARDS
All subdivisions, except minor subdivisions as defined in Section 11-012-05, Other Terms Defined, shall comply with the following standards:
1. GENERAL
The PZC and Council shall give full consideration and weight to the following:
A. Street intersections in residential areas may be of a “T” rather than an “X” design wherever such design will not unduly restrict a free movement of traffic.
B. Reserve strips controlling access to public streets shall be permitted provided that the control and disposition of land comprising such strip is placed within the jurisdiction of the city under conditions specified by the Council and shown on the plat.
2. BLOCK NUMBERS
Block numbers shall be designated as required by Idaho Code.
3. LOT LAYOUT
A. Dimensions
Lot area, dimensions, and minimum street frontage shall be as established in Chapter 11-07, Development and Design Standards, and as otherwise provided in this Code. An alley does not qualify as required street frontage. The front lot line may directly abut a collector or arterial street provided that a public, rear-loaded access is provided at the rear of such lots to provide direct lot access. Direct lot access to the collector or arterial is prohibited.
B. Building Envelope
To guide compatible building siting, the Director may require a building envelope that identifies the setbacks shown on the preliminary plat or site plan.
Figure 11-09.4: Adjustment demonstrated
CHAPTER 11-09: Subdivision Standards
Section 11-09-03: Subdivision Design Standards
Subsection 4: Public Streets
March 2013
Boise Development Code
Page 309
C. Double Frontage Lots
Double frontage lots are prohibited except where it is shown that unusual topography or other conditions make it impossible to meet this requirement. Lots with double frontage shall be limited to one street access on one frontage by a plat note.
D. Landlocked Parcels
All parcels that do not have required frontage shall be labeled “non-buildable” on the plat. Each such non-buildable lot shall be required to have a pedestrian ingress and egress easement provided to it unless street frontage exists that adequate for a pedestrian pathway.
4. PUBLIC STREETS
The arrangement, character, extent, width, grade, and location of all streets shall conform to the standards of the City of Boise, ACHD, and Idaho Transportation Department as applicable, and shall be considered in their relation to existing and planned streets, topographic conditions, to public convenience and safety, and in their appropriate relation to the proposed uses of the land served.
A. Street Design
The design of all public streets shall conform to requirements as established by the ACHD.
B. Street Grades
Street grades shall be such as to provide for the safe movement of traffic in all weather and for adequate drainage of both streets and abutting properties.
C. Partial Street Dedications
Partial street dedications shall not be permitted unless the street forms the boundary of the property being subdivided, the adjacent property is not under common ownership, and the street is anticipated to be a through street upon development of adjacent properties. All partial street dedications shall require construction of partial street sections that meet ACHD standards.
D. Dead-end Streets
Dead-end streets shall not be permitted, except that streets terminating at the boundary of a subdivision may be allowed when the street is shown on the Boise City Comprehensive Plan or when, the ACHD or Council, agrees that the extension of the street is necessary to the proper development of the street pattern. A sign indicating that the street is planned to be extended in the future will be installed at the end of the street.
E. Street Names
Proposed streets that are a continuation of an existing street shall be given the same name as the existing street. All street names used shall not duplicate or be of a spelling or pronunciation apt to be confused with the names of existing streets within the Ada County area. The applicant shall obtain approvals for all street names within the proposed subdivision from the Ada County Street Name Committee prior to submitting the plat for signature by the City Engineer.
F. Sidewalks
Sidewalks shall be required on both sides of the street. Sidewalks shall be a minimum of five feet wide when adjacent to curbs and a minimum of four feet wide when separated from the curb by a landscaped area.
G. Street Patterns
(1) Street Network
Street patterns in residential neighborhoods shall be designed to create a network of streets that allow local trips to circulate in the area without encouraging through traffic
CHAPTER 11-09: Subdivision Standards
Section 11-09-03: Subdivision Design Standards
Subsection 5: Private Streets
March 2013
Boise Development Code
Page 310
between arterial streets. Such a pattern shall benefit the collector and arterial network by keeping local trips on local roads and provide emergency vehicles with multiple routes to access any parcel.
(2) Multi-Modal Street Patterns
Street patterns in residential neighborhoods shall be designed for the needs of the bicyclist, pedestrian, and motor vehicle alike.
(a) The circulation plan for a subdivision shall incorporate and tie into existing or proposed pathways and take into account topography, parcel lines, or other features.
(b) Streets should be designed to convey residents conveniently to parks, schools, and shopping areas in the neighborhood; and to adjacent neighborhoods. A multi-use subdivision should be designed to provide roadway connections between the various uses.
(c) A free flow of pedestrian and vehicular traffic through local neighborhoods is encouraged. Pedestrian traffic shall be accommodated on local roads, or on pathways, in cases where the roadway network is inadequate for this purpose. Connectivity with adjacent parcels and subdivisions shall be included where ever possible. Except for designated connector and arterial streets, connectivity shall be designed to discourage cut-through traffic while allowing flow of local traffic without accessing the connector-arterial network.
(d) Local streets shall provide for non-motorized travel and shall be designed to encourage slow auto speeds. Traffic calming strategies, such as reduced rights-of-way, chokers, traffic circles, and chicanes (as described in the ACHD Traffic Calming Policy) should be employed. Traffic calming devices that can significantly impede the response of or possibly damage emergency vehicles, such as speed-bumps are not allowed.
(e) Roads shall be designed to accommodate bike routes or lanes.
5. PRIVATE STREETS
A. Required Findings
Private streets shall:
(1) Provide safe and effective movement of vehicular and pedestrian traffic;
(2) Not adversely affect access or good public transportation planning to adjacent property and the area network;
(3) Not landlock adjacent property;
(4) Not restrict public access to places of public interest;
(5) Not connect one public street to another; and
(6) Not interfere with the continuity of public streets.
B. Requirements
(1) Comply with the ACHD structural standards for streets. The design shall be prepared and certified by a registered professional engineer.
CHAPTER 11-09: Subdivision Standards
Section 11-09-03: Subdivision Design Standards
Subsection 5: Private Streets
March 2013
Boise Development Code
Page 311
(2) The plat shall contain the following:
(a) A legal description
(b) Identification of a recorded ingress-egress easement agreement,
(c) Conveyance to each lot owner the perpetual right of ingress and egress over the described private drive, and
(d) Provision that such perpetual easement shall run with the land.
(e) Certification of construction to ACHD specifications is required, with the exception of ACHD street width requirements.
C. Use Specific Standards
(1) Single Family/Townhouse/Duplex Residential
(a) Private streets may be permitted when: The parcel shape or site topography will not allow street design to meet ACHD width standards; or In the cases in which conformance to ACHD requirements is in conflict with the intent of minimizing disruption to vegetation as defined in the Hillside and Foothill Areas Development Ordinance.
(b) Standards for Single Family/Townhouse/Duplex Residential Single Family/Townhouse/Two Family Private Residential Street Standards shall be according to Table 11-09.1, Private Residential Street Standards: Single-family/Townhouse/ Duplex:
Table 11-09.1 Private Residential Street Standards: Single-family/Townhouse/ Duplex Number of Residential Lots vs. Street Length Minimum R/W Width (feet) Street Width Back of Curb to Back of Curb (feet) Sidewalk Required Both Sides Sidewalk Required One Side Sidewalk Easement Allowed
Up to 3 lots w/length less than 200 feet 24 24 No Yes Yes*
Up to 3 lots w/length greater than 200 feet 28 (24 for the final 200 feet) 28/24 No Yes Yes*
4 to 10 lots w/length less than 200 feet 24 24 Yes No Yes*
4 to 10 lots w/length greater than 200 feet 28 (24 for the final 200 feet) 28/24 Yes No No
11 or more lots 40 28 Yes No No
* Setback requirements shall be from the back of sidewalk where sidewalks are placed within an easement and not separated from the street by landscaping. If such sidewalks are separated from the street by landscaping, only the setback for the garage door portion of the building shall be measured from the back of sidewalk. If sidewalks are detached or placed within an easement, building setback requirements shall be measured from the back-of-sidewalk or the property line, whichever is more restrictive, unless sidewalks are separated by landscaping in which case only the garage portion of the building shall be set back from the back of sidewalk or as otherwise approved through a conditional use permit.
CHAPTER 11-09: Subdivision Standards
Section 11-09-03: Subdivision Design Standards
Subsection 6: Easements
March 2013
Boise Development Code
Page 312
(2) Multi-family Residential
A private street in a multi-family residential development provided that the proposed street meets the general requirements as identified in subsection A and B, above and:
(a) The developable land that was saved by use of a private street must be utilized as open space. If there are lots to be owned individually, the open space shall be a common lot; and
(b) The private street serves less than 40 dwelling units.
(c) The application has complied with the requirements for a PUD including a traffic circulation plan.
(d) Standards for multi-family developments Dimensional requirements for private streets shall be the same as permitted in this Code for service drives for multi-family developments (Section 11-07-04.3.B, Service Drives) when the use of the private street provides a similar function, such as the drive aisles and the common parking for the development are interrelated, as opposed to units that front on the private street and have individual garages or parking pads in front of each unit as is typical with townhouses or single family dwellings. If the private street does not provide a similar function, the standards of Section 11-07-04.2, Private Roads, shall apply. In developments of over 40 dwelling units, the dimensions of any private street shall be as recommended in the approved internal traffic circulation and as permitted in this Code for service drives for multi-family developments Section 11-07-04.3.B, Service Drives. Exception: This requirement may be waived in developments of over 40 dwelling units when it can be shown by the applicant that no section of roadway will exceed 240 vehicles per day in daily traffic. All utility easements shall be within, or immediately adjacent to, the private streets.
(3) Commercial/Industrial Developments
Private streets used solely for commercial/industrial purposes shall:
(a) Be a minimum of 24 feet in width.
(b) Not be required to have curbs, gutters, and sidewalks unless specifically required by Council.
6. EASEMENTS
A. Easements shall be provided as required by the utilities, and other public services.
B. The Council may require applicants to reserve permanent public use easements for public access micro-pathways. Such easements shall be for future improvement and maintenance by either the city or the landowner or association. Any easement required under this section may be utilized in conjunction with or as an alternative to a public pedestrian access requirement under Section 11-07-04.4, Pedestrian Access.
CHAPTER 11-09: Subdivision Standards
Section 11-09-03: Subdivision Design Standards
Subsection 7: Arterial and Collector Street Buffering
March 2013
Boise Development Code
Page 313
7. ARTERIAL AND COLLECTOR STREET BUFFERING
Landscaped buffer areas shall be provided where single family residential lots are adjacent to collector or arterial streets.
A. Perimeter Landscape Buffer
(1) The buffer shall be located outside of any planned future right-of-way.
(2) The width of the buffer along arterial streets shall be a minimum of 30 feet, along collector streets it shall be a minimum of 20 feet.
(3) The buffer area may be located within the lot provided that:
(a) The depth of the lot is a minimum of 130 feet;
and,
(b) In cases where the side lot line runs along an arterial or collector, the width of the lot is a minimum of 80 feet.
(4) Fences and walls shall not be placed within the buffer areas.
(a) The boundary farthest from the street of the landscape buffer;
(b) A minimum of five feet from the back of attached sidewalks;
(c) At the back of sidewalks separated from the curb by landscaping (provided the fence is not higher than four feet tall); or
(d) 15 feet from back of curb.
B. Frontage Road
(1) Frontage roads, as permitted by the ACHD, and separated from a collector or arterial street by a ten foot wide landscaped median, may be permitted.
(2) The landscaped median shall be planted with trees and shrubs that at maturity will form a solid screen at least six feet high and a continuous tree canopy.
Figure 11
Figure 11--09.09.55: : Landscape buffer Landscape buffer within buildable lotwithin buildable lot
CHAPTER 11-09: Subdivision Standards
Section 11-09-04: Required Improvements
Subsection 8: Alley (Public or Private)
March 2013
Boise Development Code
Page 314
C. Alley-loaded
The front lot line of a parcel may directly abut a collector or arterial street provided that an ACHD-approved alley is provided at the rear of such lots to provide direct lot access. Direct lot access to the collector or arterial is prohibited.
8. ALLEY (PUBLIC OR PRIVATE)
Minimum alley width for a one-way alley shall be 12 feet. Minimum alley width for a two-way alley shall be 20 feet. Alley construction shall meet ACHD standards. 11-09-04. REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS
The following improvements are not required for minor land divisions as defined in Section 11-012-05.
1. GENERAL
No building permit for the construction of any new structure upon property within a proposed subdivision plat shall be issued until the subdivision plat has been recorded.
2. FILING OF PLANS AND BONDING SURETY
A. Plans for the
required improvements shall be certified by a professional engineer registered in the State of Idaho, unless otherwise specifically approved by the applicable public agency.
B. At or prior to the time of filing certification of the final plat, the applicant shall file with the Director a surety bond to secure the completion of the construction of required improvements not yet completed. All bonds or other guarantees shall be in the amount of 110 percent of the estimated cost of the improvement.
C. The period of construction may be extended for six months upon the payment of extension fees and adjustments of the bonding surety amount to reflect revised construction costs. Extensions of bond surety and construction time beyond this initial six month extension may be approved
Figure 11
Figure 11--09.609.6: : Perimeter landscape bufferPerimeter landscape buffer
LOCALFRONT YARDREAR YARDSIDEWALKPROPERTY LINELOCALPERIMETER LANDSCAPE BUFFER
CHAPTER 11-09: Subdivision Standards
Section 11-09-04: Required Improvements
Subsection 3: Water
March 2013
Boise Development Code
Page 315
by the Council upon a showing of undue hardship and the payment of appropriate fees.
D. Improvement(s) installed by the applicant as a condition of platting shall require certification by a professional engineer that the construction is in accordance with approved plans.
E. After the completion of improvements the applicable public agency shall certify the completion and acceptance of said improvements in writing and shall transmit a copy of the certification to the City Clerk and to the applicant. Upon receipt of the certification, the city shall authorize release of the surety bond or other guarantee upon application.
3. WATER
A. Water Lines and Hydrants
Central water lines and fire hydrants shall be provided in all subdivisions as noted below.
(1) In any subdivision, alternate provision may be made for domestic water supply and fire protection provided that such provision shall meet the standards of the Fire Code as adopted by Fire Department, the Idaho Public Utilities Commission, the Idaho Department of Water Resources, and the Idaho Department of Health and Welfare and further provided that such alternate provision shall be made to the satisfaction of the Council.
(2) In considering such alternate provision, the Council may require an increase in the minimum lot size and may impose any other requirement that it deems necessary to protect the public health, safety, or welfare.
(3) Water facilities necessary to meet Boise Fire department standards shall be provided.
4. SANITARY SEWER
A. Wet-line sewers shall be provided in all subdivisions per the requirements of the appropriate sewer entity.
B. Plans and specifications shall be approved by the appropriate sewer entity prior to signing of the Final Plat by the City Engineer.
5. DRAINAGE
A. Improvement plans and hydrology calculations shall be prepared in accordance with the Storm Water Ordinance B.C.C. 8-15 and Public Works’ Storm Water Management Design Manual:
(1) Plans shall be submitted to the Public Works Department.
(2) All natural drainage courses shall be left undisturbed or be improved in a manner that will improve the hydraulics and ease of maintenance of the channel.
(3) Relocation of natural swales is acceptable if the hydraulics and ease of maintenance are provided for. The term “natural drainage course” shall not be deemed to apply to minor swales and depressions that are located entirely on the applicant’s property and that serve a relatively small area where runoff is infrequent.
CHAPTER 11-09: Subdivision Standards
Section 11-09-04: Required Improvements
Subsection 6: Irrigation
March 2013
Boise Development Code
Page 316
B. In single family residential subdivisions where public streets are being dedicated to ACHD and development drainage will be discharged to an ACHD-maintained storm water system, the development drainage system will be required to meet the ACHD design and review requirements.
C. The reservation of an easement along any stream or important surface drainage course located in an area being subdivided may be required by the Council for the purpose of widening, deepening, sloping, improving, or protecting the stream or drainage course.
6. IRRIGATION
A. Irrigation Conveyance
(1) No ditch, pipe, or structure for delivery of irrigation water or for carrying irrigation wastewater shall be obstructed, rerouted, covered, or changed in any way unless it has first been approved in writing by the authorized representative of the person(s) owning the water rights delivered or diverted by means of the ditch. For the purpose of this section, “person” shall be defined as an irrigation district, ditch company, water users association, or water right holder. Should the person not have an authorized representative, a determination of the majority of the holder(s) of the water right shall be binding. A copy of such written approval by such authorized representative or majority holder(s) of the water right shall be filed with the subdivision application. In the event the applicant cannot obtain a response from said authorized representative, approval will be assumed to be obtained if the applicant meets the conditions as outlined in subsection (5).
(2) All irrigation ditches, laterals, canals, and drains, exclusive of natural waterways, intersecting, crossing, or lying adjacent to an area being subdivided shall be covered or fenced with a chain link fence at least six feet in height to deter access to said ditch, lateral, or canal. Adjacent means being located within 60 feet of any lot included in the development. This requirement may be waived if it is found that the public purpose requiring such will not be served in an individual case. Any covering or fencing program involving the distribution system of any irrigation district shall have the prior approval of the affected district.
(3) The fencing requirement may be waived by the Director for “water amenities”. A water amenity is any body of water that is to be part of the development, in which the banks are no steeper than one foot vertical per four feet horizontal and where the depth (in feet) multiplied by the peak velocity (feet per second) does not exceed four. Plans prepared by a professional engineer shall be submitted to the Director and the authorized representative of water facility for approval.
(4) In the event the applicant cannot obtain a response for the modifications proposed from the authorized representative of the water entity, approval shall be assumed to be obtained if the following documents are submitted to the Director:
(a) Copy of certified letter to said authorized representative along with documentation of receipt of letter. Said letter to authorized representative shall be accompanied by plans and shall request written approval forwarded to the Director within 30 days of receipt.
(b) Letter from a registered professional engineer stating that the improvements and/or modifications to the ditch, lateral, canal, or drain will meet the provisions
CHAPTER 11-09: Subdivision Standards
Section 11-09-04: Required Improvements
Subsection 7: Park or School Dedication
March 2013
Boise Development Code
Page 317
of Titles 31 and 42 of the Idaho Code, relating to requirements of delivery of water to downstream users.
7. PARK OR SCHOOL DEDICATION
Whenever the applicant desires or proposes to reserve area for a school or public park, the area shall be delineated on the subdivision plat and such proposal must be acceptable to the school district and the city. Acceptance of school site or park must be in writing from the appropriate entity prior to signature by the City Engineer.
8. PEDESTRIAN ACCESS
Pedestrian access shall be required where deemed essential by the Council to provide pedestrian access to schools, playgrounds, shopping areas, transportation, or other community facilities. Said access shall be not less than ten feet wide.
9. STREET LIGHTING
All applicants subdividing within the city limits shall be required to install, at the applicant’s expense, street lights in accordance with Public Works specifications and standards. After installation and acceptance by the Public Works Department, street lights shall become city property and the city shall pay the cost of maintenance and power.
10. LANDSCAPING
Where landscaping is required by the city, such as parkways, perimeter buffers, street medians, and other such areas, their design shall comply with the following standards:
A. Definition
The term “landscaping,” as used in this Section shall include, as a minimum, grass and trees as required below.
B. Non-vegetative Materials
(1) Non-vegetative materials, such as decorative rock, bark, and perma-bark, shall not be used in lieu of landscaping. Non-vegetative material may only be used to augment the landscape or around the base of shrub groupings or flower beds as long as the coverage does not exceed 20 percent. The use of bark or other loose material shall be designed or located to keep the bark from being blown onto the paved path, shall be approved by the Director.
(2) The 20 percent limitation on non-vegetative material shall not apply provided the landscape is designed by a licensed landscape architect and further provided that the non-vegetative material is used to complement or visually enhance the vegetative material is used to complement or visually enhance the vegetative material.
C. Trees
(1) The city shall require trees with a minimum size of two inch caliper in the landscape area. Tree type and class to be in accordance with the Community Forestry’s “Tree Selection Guide.”
(2) All landscaped areas shall be provided with an underground irrigation system.
(3) For every 60 feet of perimeter landscape, one Class III tree shall be included therein. Class III trees shall be spaced no more than 60 feet apart. Class II trees may be utilized and spaced 25 to 50 feet apart, depending on mature crown
CHAPTER 11-09: Subdivision Standards
Section 11-09-04: Required Improvements
Subsection 11: Pressure Irrigation Facilities
March 2013
Boise Development Code
Page 318
spread. Class I trees shall be used where overhead power lines prohibit use of
taller trees and may be used to mark entry points into a subdivision or to mark a
special feature. Class I trees shall be spaced 15 to 30 feet apart, depending on
mature crown spread. The location and selection of required trees shall be subject
to approval by Community Forestry. Trees located in the public right-of-way shall
be planted and maintained in accordance with the Boise Tree Ordinance (Boise
City Code 9-16).
D. Maintenance
Required landscaped areas shall be placed under the control and maintenance of a Homeowners
Association, unless the applicant can demonstrate that the landscaping will be maintained in an
attractive condition by another entity including but not limited to individual property owners, or
the ACHD.
E. Berms
Berm height is not limited; however, the slope of the berm shall not exceed a 3:1 ratio. The height
of a fence and/or wall that is placed on top of a berm is limited to six feet.
F. Clear Areas
Trees, shrubs and other landscaping shall not encroach into the minimum required clear height and
width of primary or emergency vehicle access. Landscaping shall not block the clear vision triangle
at street intersections as determined by the ACHD.
11. PRESSURE IRRIGATION FACILITIES
A. Except as a waiver is allowed a pressurized individual lot irrigation
system is required for any residential subdivision.
B. Irrigation system maintenance and operation shall be provided by the
irrigation district or canal company a municipal irrigation district, or
another entity capable of operating and maintaining a pressurized
irrigation system.
C. Waivers
(1) The requirement for a pressurized irrigation system may be waived by the City
Engineer in any of the following situations:
(a) Where a lack of sufficient surface irrigation water has been documented by the
appropriate irrigation district or canal company and the Idaho Department of
Water Resources. The sale or transfer of a water right may not be grounds for
requesting a waiver.
FENCE / WALL
MAX. HEIGHT - 6'
MAX 3:1
BERM SLOPE
STREET
WALK
Figure 11-09.7: Landscaping - trees
CHAPTER 11-09: Subdivision Standards
Section 11-09-04: Required Improvements
Subsection 11: Pressure Irrigation Facilities
March 2013
Boise Development Code
Page 319
(b) Where water cannot be delivered to the property due to capacity or scheduling. In these situations, the City Engineer may still require the installation of the pressure irrigation system, provided that an irrigation district or canal company will commit in writing to make improvements to their delivery system so water can be supplied within two years of the subdivision approval.
(c) Where another means of delivery such as flood irrigation can be provided.
(d) When the City Engineer finds that the cost of obtaining water rights, re-establishing water rights, or developing the system would impose an undue economic hardship. Undue economic hardship may be demonstrated if the cost per lot to develop the pressurized irrigation system is 25 percent higher than the cost per lot to serve subdivisions of similar size and density constructed in Boise City within the previous two years; or that the cost per lot of the pressurized irrigation system would exceed five percent of the expected per lot market value of the subdivision. The applicant shall bear the burden of providing documentation, acceptable to the City Engineer. For phased developments, costs will be analyzed over all phases.
(2) Requests for waivers shall be submitted to the City Engineer and shall be accompanied by an irrigation report prepared by a licensed professional engineer analyzing the location and availability of surface irrigation water and documenting the basis for the waiver request. If applicable, the irrigation report shall include a letter from the Irrigation District or Canal Company stating refusal to make improvements to its delivery system so irrigation water can be supplied within two years.
(3) Decision may be appealed to the Public Works Commission by filing a written appeal with the Public Works Department within 60 days of receipt of the written decision of the City Engineer. The Public Works Commission may uphold, overrule or modify the decision of the City Engineer. The decision of the Public Works Commission may be appealed to the Council.
D. Written Assurance
(1) Written assurance that provisions have been made for ownership, operation and maintenance of the system is required before the plat is signed by the City Engineer. Such assurance shall include: A letter from an existing entity capable of owning, operating and maintaining the system assuming responsibility for such operation, and maintenance.
(2) If the system is to be owned, operated and maintained by a Home Owners Association, the applicant shall create binding covenants, conditions, and restrictions, approved by the City Attorney, providing for control, use, maintenance, and operation of the system.
E. Proof of Compliance
Prior to signing of the final plat by the City Engineer, proof of compliance with this section and with Idaho Code, Section 31-3805(1)(b) shall be required.
CHAPTER 11-09: Subdivision Standards
Section 11-09-05: Modifications and Waivers
Subsection 12: Utility Location
March 2013
Boise Development Code
Page 320
12. UTILITY LOCATION
Residential projects, that at a later date may be subdivided, should place utilities in the roadway or in easements parallel and next to the roadway. Projects that are later subdivided and do not comply with this recommendation may be subject to significant reconstruction and relocation costs. 11-09-05. MODIFICATIONS AND WAIVERS
1. Whenever a tract to be subdivided or altered by a record of survey is is of unusual size or shape or has unusual conditions such that the strict application of these regulations would result in substantial hardship or inequity, the Council may waive or modify such regulations so that the property may be developed in a reasonable manner. The Council must first find that the quality of the development is not diminished, that the public welfare and the interests of the City are protected, that the general intent and spirit of these regulations are preserved and that conformity to the Comprehensive Plan is assured.
A. A written request to the Director is required.
B. The request shall be referred to the PZC within 35 days of receipt, but allowing at least ten working days review prior to the PZC meeting.
C. The PZC shall act upon request and make recommendation to the Council.
D. The Council, after receiving the recommendations of the PZC, shall act upon request at its next regular meeting per Section 11-03-04.4.
E. In the case of a record of survey the Commission may issue the waiver or modification.
2. In granting waivers and/or modifications from these regulations, the Council may require such conditions as will, in its judgment, secure substantially the objectives of the standards or requirements so waived or modified.
3. Any person, firm, or corporation may appeal the decision of the Council to the District Court in the same manner and within the same time as other appeals may be taken from orders of the Council.
March 2013 Boise Development Code
Page 321
CHAPTER 11-010: SIGNSIGN STANDARDSTANDARDSS 11-010-01. PURPOSE
1. To protect the health, safety, property and welfare of the public;
2. To provide for the neat, clean, orderly and attractive appearance of the community;
3. To improve the effectiveness of signs;
4. To provide for safe construction, location, erection and maintenance of signs; and
5. To minimize adverse visual safety factors to the traveling public. 11-010-02. SIGN DEFINITIONS
This Section contains definitions for types of signs and parts of signs.
1. TYPES OF SIGNS
A. Animated Sign
Any sign that uses movement or change of lighting to depict action or to create a special effect or scene or the illusion of movement. A sign utilizing static message displays as allowed in 11-11-010-05.6 shall not be considered animated.
B. Awning, Canopy, or Marquee
Any shelter or decorative dimensional shape extending from the exterior surface of a building constructed of a supporting framework and covered with non-rigid materials.
C. Awning, Canopy or Marquee Sign
The copy area or separate background area attached to an awning, canopy or marquee.
D. Banner
A flexible substrate on which copy or graphics may be displayed.
E. Construction Sign
Any sign that warns of construction or demolition or that describes a construction project and indicates the builder, architect, or others involved.
F. Directional Sign
A sign that is designed and erected for the purpose of providing direction for pedestrian or vehicular traffic.
G. Electronic Message Display
A sign or portion thereof capable of displaying words, symbols, figures or images that can be electronically or mechanically changed by remote or automatic means.
H. Free-Standing Sign
A sign supported by a column, pole, foundation, pedestal or other structure in or upon the ground.
I. Frame
A complete, static display screen on an electronic message display.
J. Frame Effect
A visual effect on an electronic message display applied to a single frame.
CHAPTER 11-010: Sign Standards
Section 11-010-02: Sign Definitions
Subsection 1: Types of Signs
March 2013
Boise Development Code
Page 322
K. Height of Sign
The distance from the ground supporting the sign to the highest point of the sign. A landscape berm or other structure erected to support the sign shall be measured as part of the height. If the street to which the sign is oriented is higher than the grade at the base of the sign, then the street elevation shall be used in determining the permitted height.
L. Mansard
A sloped roof-like projection that is attached to an exterior building wall or façade.
M. Monument Sign
A free-standing sign in which the sign face is supported by a continuous and solid base which extends the full length of the sign face or is supported by posts not more than six inches above the ground on which the sign face is mounted.
N. Nit
A luminance unit equal to one candela (one candle) per square meter measured perpendicular to the rays from the source.
O. Projecting Sign
A sign other than a wall sign, which projects from and is supported by a wall of building or other structure.
P. Roof Sign
A sign erected on the roof of a building. Signs mounted on mansard facades, eaves and architectural projections such as canopies or marquees shall not be considered to be roof signs.
Q. Sign
Any device visible from a public right of way that displays either commercial or noncommercial messages b means of graphic presentation of alphabetic or pictorial symbols or representations. Noncommercial flags or any flags displayed from flagpoles or staffs will not be considered signs.
R. Sign Area
The area comprising the message portion of a sign, not including the supporting structure. When computing the area of sign background, only the face or faces, which may be seen from one direction at one time, shall be considered. It is computed by measuring the area enclosed by straight lines drawn around the extremities of the text or graphics.
S. Sign Structure
Any structure that supports a sign, including any decorative cover.
T. Temporary Sign
A sign that is used only temporarily and is not permanently mounted or embedded in the ground.
U. Wall Sign
A sign that is affixed to or painted on an exterior wall of a building or structure.
V. Window Sign
A sign affixed to the surface of a window that is intended to be viewed from the public right of way or from adjacent property.
CHAPTER 11-010: Sign Standards
Section 11-010-03: General Sign Regulations
Subsection 1: Permit Required
March 2013
Boise Development Code
Page 323
11-010-03. GENERAL SIGN REGULATIONS
1. PERMIT REQUIRED
Unless specifically exempted, a permit must be obtained from the Planning Director for the erection and installation of any sign. Exemption from the need for a permit shall not relieve the responsibility to erect and maintain signs in a safe manner and in conformance with all other provisions of these regulations. Permits are not required for change of copy, repainting, or other normal maintenance and repair. Application shall be made on a form provided by the Planning Division. The permit shall be approved or denied within five working days and shall be valid for a period of one year.
2. SIGNS NOT REGULATED
An application for a sign not regulated herein shall be considered by the Director as to whether the sign is allowed, prohibited or whether a variance or conditional use permit may be required.
3. ABANDONED SIGN
Any on-premise sign associated with a building or business that has been vacant and unoccupied for at least 6 months, or any sign no longer associated with the use on the property shall be deemed abandoned. An abandoned sign is prohibited.
4. MAINTENANCE AND REPAIR
Signs shall be maintained in a state of good appearance, safety and repair.
5. BLANKETING OF SIGNS
No sign shall be erected in the same horizontal plane with other signs unless spaced at least 25 feet apart.
6. TRAFFIC VISIBILITY
Signs shall not be permitted in the clear vision triangle as defined in this Code. Signs shall not be erected at any intersection so as to obstruct clear vision, or at any location where they may interfere with or obstruct the view of traffic.
7. GATEWAY STREETS
A free-standing sign oriented to a gateway street may be regulated differently (see 11-010-04). The following are gateway streets:
A. Capitol Boulevard
B. Vista Avenue, 1-84 north
C. Broadway Ave., I-84 north
D. State Street, State Capitol to Highway 55
E. Myrtle Street
F. Front Street
G. Federal Way, Capitol Blvd. to Bergeson
H. Warm Springs Avenue
I. Park Center Boulevard
CHAPTER 11-010: Sign Standards
Section 11-010-03: General Sign Regulations
Subsection 8: Design Guidelines for all Signs
March 2013
Boise Development Code
Page 324
8. DESIGN GUIDELINES FOR ALL SIGNS
A. Signs are to be integrated with and harmonious to the building and site.
B. Pole support structures shall be covered.
C. Signs shall complement the architectural style of the building.
9. LEGAL NONCONFORMING
A. Any non-temporary sign legally existing at the time of the passage of this ordinance that does not conform in use, location, height or size shall be considered legal nonconforming.
B. Legal nonconforming signs may not be structurally altered, moved, or replaced without being brought into conformance with the provisions of this Code. Routine maintenance and repair is allowed.
C. Copy changes and sign face changes that use similar materials are allowed.
D. If the sign is abandoned or the use associated with the sign is changed, the sign shall lose its nonconforming status and be removed or brought into compliance.
E. Violation of these provisions shall result in the sign losing its legal nonconforming status.
10. SIGN VARIANCE
Variances from sign standards may be granted in accordance with Section 11-03-04.14.
11. ADJACENT TO RESIDENTIAL ZONES
Signs in non-residential zones shall not be located within 50 feet of a residential zone.
12. STREET TREES
Trees may not be topped or removed to facilitate better view of signs.
13. SIGNS FOR WHICH A PERMIT IS NOT REQUIRED
The following shall be exempt from the provisions of this chapter except that no sign shall be exempt from the requirement to maintain clear vision triangles.
A. Official notices authorized by a court, public body or public safety official.
B. Directional, warning or information signs authorized by a government.
C. Memorial plaques, building identification signs and building cornerstones when cut or carved into a masonry surface or when made an integral part of the building or structure.
D. The flag of government or noncommercial institution, such as a school, and business identification flags.
E. Religious symbols and seasonal decorations.
F. Works of art containing no form of advertising.
CHAPTER 11-010: Sign Standards
Section 11-010-03: General Sign Regulations
Subsection 14: Prohibited Signs
March 2013
Boise Development Code
Page 325
G. Street address signs and combination nameplate and street address signs that contain no advertising copy and which do not exceed 6 square feet in area.
H. Signs oriented only to the property on which they are located and which are not visible from the public right of way.
I. Signs in the display windows of a business which are incorporated in a display of merchandise.
J. “No Trespassing,” “No Dumping” or similar signs not to exceed one and one-half square feet in area and not exceeding four per parcel.
14. PROHIBITED SIGNS
The following are prohibited in all districts:
A. Non-permitted signs or posters that are visible from a public way and are affixed to walls, buildings, trees, poles, fences, bridges or other structures.
B. Signs placed on any street right of way, sidewalk, pole, bridge or tree, unless specifically permitted herein. Such signs may be deemed nuisances and removed by the City without prior notice.
C. Banners, pennants, strings of lights, ribbons, streamers, balloons or similar devices that call attention rather than contribute to the business décor except as maybe specifically permitted by this chapter.
D. Portable signs except those allowed as temporary signs and those allowed in the C-5 district.
E. Signs whose lighting, location or appearance would cause such signs to have the appearance of traffic safety signs and lights, or municipal vehicle warnings.
F. Any sign attached to or place on a vehicle or trailer that is parked on public or private property or driven on public streets, except for signs meeting the following:
(1) The primary purpose of such a vehicle or trailer is not the display of signs.
(2) The signs are magnetic, decals or painted upon an integral part of the vehicle or equipment.
(3) The vehicle or trailer is in operating condition, currently registered and licensed to operate on public streets, and actively used or available for use in the daily function of the business to which such signs relate.
G. Roof signs.
H. Animated signs.
I. Strobe lights and flashing lights.
J. Any sort of sign used to advertise or display any visually communicated message by letter or by picture, of any kind, on any seating bench, or in direct connection with any bench unless authorized by the regional public transportation system authority as permitted from the Director.
CHAPTER 11-010: Sign Standards
Section 11-010-04: On-Premise Signs
Subsection 1: Accessory On-Premise Signs
March 2013
Boise Development Code
Page 326
11-010-04. ON-PREMISE SIGNS
1. ACCESSORY ON-PREMISE SIGNS
A. Wall Signs
Wall signs may be displayed in accordance with the standards set forth in Table 11-010.1 and the following:
(1) Wall signs shall not project above the wall.
(2) Wall signs shall face the street or streets which the building faces, except that a sign on a building wall in a commercial, office or industrial zone that does not face a street may be permitted according to the following:
(a) The sign background area may be borrowed from that allowed on the building wall facing the street; and
(b) The sign area may not exceed 10% of the building wall; and
(c) The adjoining property is zoned commercial, office or industrial.
(3) Number allowed
In commercial, office and industrial zones the area allowed may be divided among multiple signs.
Table 11-010.1: Wall Signs Zoning District Maximum Sign Area
R (multi-family and non-residential signs) and A zones
One square foot per three lineal feet of building facing street. Maximum 50 square feet.
L-O, N-O, R-O, HS
One square foot per two lineal feet of building facing
street. Maximum 75 square feet.
C-1, C-4, PC, M-4
15% of building wall facing the street.
C-2, C-3, C-5, M-1, M-2, T-1, T-2
20% of building wall facing the street.
B. Free-Standing Signs (Accessory)
Free-Standing accessory signs may be displayed in accordance with the standards set forth in Table 11-010.2 and the following. Free-standing signs:
(1) Signs shall be located within a landscaped area no smaller than the background area of the sign. New landscaped areas shall be reviewed as part of the sign; application. Decorative rock or part may be a component of the landscaping.
(2) Shall include the street address in letters at least 3.5 inches tall;
(3) Shall be oriented to the street providing frontage to the business and be located toward the front of the parcel and as close to the main vehicle entrance as possible. Orientation to interstate highways is prohibited; and,
(4) Shall be set back at least five feet from the front property line in residential and office zones; one foot in other zones. Setback shall be five feet from side property lines.
(5) Number allowed: One per street frontage. Where two signs are allowed for a business on a street corner, each sign must be designed and located so as to be viewed only from the street on which it is located. In lieu of two signs, one corner
CHAPTER 11-010: Sign Standards
Section 11-010-04: On-Premise Signs
Subsection 1: Accessory On-Premise Signs
March 2013
Boise Development Code
Page 327
sign designed to be viewed from both streets is allowed, provided it complies with other provisions of this code.
(6) May have architectural appurtenances with no text extend up to 2 feet over the allowed height. Table 11-010.2: Free-standing Sign, Maximum Background Area and Height Zoning District Maximum Background Area (square feet) Maximum Height (feet) Gateway (feet)
R-1, R-2, R-3, A-1, A-2
1 per 3 lineal ft. of street frontage up to 50
6
6
L-O, N-O, R-O, HS, T-1
1 per 3 lineal ft. of street frontage up to 50
8
8
C-1, C-4, C-5, M-1, M-2, T-2
70
15
12
C-2 , C-3
80
20
12
C. Master Sign Plan
For multi-tenant commercial developments on at least two acres that are planned and developed as a unit including but not limited to, hospital complexes, office centers (multiple buildings on at least 2 acres) and industrial parks (multiple buildings on at least five acres), a master sign plan is required prior to the placement of any signs.
(1) The master sign plan shall establish standards and criteria for all signs that require sign permits and shall address location, materials, design and quantity.
(2) One free standing center sign is permitted on each street frontage (maximum of two) according to the provisions of the following table. Where there is more than 1,000 feet of frontage on a street, a second sign is allowed. Center signs on Gateway Streets may not exceed the Gateway Street height standards.
(3) Free-standing signs shall be located as near to the primary access driveway as practical. Free-standing signs in commercial and industrial zones shall not be closer than 150 feet from any residentially zoned property.
(4) Separate building pads within centers and parks are allowed one monument style sign with a maximum height of 8 feet and maximum background sign area of 32 square feet, but may not exceed the standards in Table 11-010.2.
(5) Attached signs are permitted in any number, location, or orientation, except toward an adjoining residential property, provided that the total square footage does not exceed 18% of the wall face upon which the signs are placed.
(6) Sign height and placement shall be consistent throughout the development.
(7) Design
Signs shall incorporate materials, colors and design motifs that are compatible with buildings in the development.
Table 11-010.3: Center Sign Maximum Background Area and Height Zoning District Maximum Background Area (square feet) Maximum Height (feet)
L-O, N-O, R-O, HS, T-1
80
15
C-1, C-4, C-5, PC, M-1, M-2,
T-2
100
25
C-2 , C-3
150
30
CHAPTER 11-010: Sign Standards
Section 11-010-04: On-Premise Signs
Subsection 2: Temporary Signs
March 2013
Boise Development Code
Page 328
D. Directional Signs
(1) Up to two directional signs shall be permitted at the street entrance to any parcel. The maximum area is four square feet and the maximum height is four feet.
(2) Non-accessory directional signs may be erected by governments giving direction to places of general interest such as colleges, parks, hospitals, etc. Such signs shall be subject to approval by the Director as to the size, location and method of erection.
2. TEMPORARY SIGNS
A. Real Estate Signs
Non-illuminated real estate signs shall be allowed in all zones without permits subject to the following:
(1) Number
(a) One per residential parcel.
(b) One per frontage for nonresidential.
(2) Size
(a) Six square feet for a single residential lot
(b) 32 square feet in residential and office zones
(c) 64 square feet in commercial and industrial zones.
B. Development and Construction Signs
Non-illuminated signs temporarily erected during construction to inform the public of the nature of the project shall be allowed in all zones subject to the following:
(1) Number
(a) One per residential parcel.
(b) One per frontage for nonresidential parcel.
(2) Size
(a) Six square feet for a single residential lot
(b) 64 square feet in residential and office zones
(c) 96 square feet in commercial and industrial zones.
(3) Display Duration
Such signs may not be displayed until after the issuance of construction permits and must be removed not later than 24 hours following issuance of an occupancy permit for any portion of the project.
C. Special Promotions, Event and Grand Opening Signs
Any lawful business location (except a home occupation) may utilize one temporary, portable sign after obtaining a permit and in accordance with the following:
(1) Within any calendar year, a business shall be limited to the display of one temporary sign for a maximum of three 30 consecutive day periods. Each 30 day period shall be separated by at least 30 days.
CHAPTER 11-010: Sign Standards
Section 11-010-05: Regulations by Sign Type
Subsection 1: Canopy and Marquee Signs
March 2013
Boise Development Code
Page 329
(2) Maximum sign area is 32 square feet for free-standing signs the maximum height is 8 feet.
D. Special Community Event Signs
Signs advertising a special community event shall be permitted, including in or over public rights-of-way, subject to approval by the Director as to the size, location and method of erection. Signs that might impair safety or obstruct traffic visibility may not be approved.
E. Political Signs
Political signs shall be allowed in all zoning districts without permits. Such signs shall not be placed in any public right-of-way and may not obstruct traffic visibility.
F. Community events within the Grove
Pennants, flags, banner, balloons and promotional sandwich boards may be permitted during and for community events in the Grove. Signs may not remain in place overnight. Sandwich boards shall not exceed a height of four feet or a width of three feet. Permits are not required. 11-010-05. REGULATIONS BY SIGN TYPE
For some sign types, regulations shall apply as indicated in this Section.
1. CANOPY AND MARQUEE SIGNS
The permanently-affixed copy area of canopy or marquee signs shall not exceed an area equal to 25 percent of the face area of the canopy, marquee or architectural projection upon which such sign is affixed. Graphic striping, patterns or color bands on the face of a canopy, marquee or architectural projection shall not be included in the computation of sign area.
2. AWNING
The copy area of awning signs shall not exceed an area equal to 25 percent of the background area of the awning to which the signs is affixed, or the permitted area for wall or fascia signs, whichever is less. Background colors, striping, patterns or valances, shall not be included in the computation of the sign area.
3. PROJECTING
A. Districts Where Allowed Table 11-010.4: Projecting Signs Allowed by Zone District Allowed
C-1, C-2, C-3, C-4, C-5, R-O, PC, T-1, M-1, M-2 Prohibited
R-1, R-2, R-3, A-1, A-2
B. Standards
(1) Maximum Background Area
The maximum background area shall be 5 percent of the wall area facing a street in the C-1 district (50 square feet maximum and 10 percent in all other districts where allowed (75 square feet maximum). When both projecting and wall signs are utilized, the maximum area for both signs is reduced by 50 percent.
(2) Number Allowed
One per street level business for each street frontage. Where there is more than 150 feet of frontage for one business, a second sign is allowed.
CHAPTER 11-010: Sign Standards
Section 11-010-05: Regulations by Sign Type
Subsection 4: Under Canopy/Marquee (Hanging)
March 2013
Boise Development Code
Page 330
(3) Projection above Building Height
No sign shall extend vertically above the highest point of the building façade upon which it is mounted by more than two feet.
(4) Projection from Wall
Projection from wall shall be no more than ten feet, or to within two feet of the face of the curb, whichever is lesser.
(5) Clearance
Clearance over public property shall be a minimum of 12 feet.
(6) Height
Not to exceed 30 feet above the ground.
4. UNDER CANOPY/MARQUEE (HANGING)
A. Under canopy signs shall be limited to no more than one such sign per public entrance to any occupancy, and shall be limited to an area not to exceed 16 square feet.
B. Such signs shall maintain a clear vertical distance above any sidewalk or pedestrian way a minimum of 8 feet.
5. WINDOW
Window signs shall be allowed without permits for any business (except home occupations) subject to the following:
A. The aggregate area of all such signs shall not exceed 25 percent of the window area.
B. Window signs shall not be assessed against the sign area permitted for other sign types.
6. ELECTRONIC MESSAGE DISPLAYS (EMD)
Signs may contain electronic message displays in accordance with the following:
A. Such displays shall contain static messages only, and shall not have movement, or the appearance or optical illusion of movement, of any part of the sign structure, design, or pictorial segment of the sign, including the movement or appearance of movement of any illumination or the flashing, scintillating or varying of light intensity.
B. Each message or frame must be displayed for a minimum of eight seconds.
C. Area shall not occupy more than 50 percent of the sign.
D. The brightness or intensity of the EMD shall be factory set not to exceed 5,000 nits on clear days and 500 nits from dawn to dusk. The EMD shall also not exceed 50 percent of its maximum brightness on clear days and 10 percent of maximum brightness from dawn to dusk. Each display must have a light sensing meter that will adjust the display brightness as the ambient light changes. Brightness levels must also be appropriate for the ambient light conditions.
CHAPTER 11-010: Sign Standards
Section 11-010-05: Regulations by Sign Type
Subsection 7: Wall Signs Oriented to Interstate Highways
March 2013
Boise Development Code
Page 331
E. Text-only single-color message displays with letters no higher than 12 inches may scroll or travel without the static message limitation. Maximum area for such displays is 8 square feet.
F. EMD’s are allowed in R- A- and O- zones only by conditional use permit.
G. One EMD per business or center.
H. EMD’s may not be installed on a non-conforming sign.
7. WALL SIGNS ORIENTED TO INTERSTATE HIGHWAYS
Commercial and industrial zoned properties that abut I-84 or I-184 southwest of 15th Street may have one wall sign per business oriented to the highway, in accordance with the following:
A. Area
One square foot in sign area for each lineal foot of wall up to 32 square feet.
B. Height
Shall not exceed the height of the wall or 30 feet.
C. Readerboards and EMD’s are prohibited.
8. PORTABLE SIGNS IN THE C-5 DISTRICT
Portable signs are defined as A-frame, T-frame and similar free-standing, movable signs that are placed on the sidewalk.
Number
(1) Ground floor businesses with street frontage are allowed one per street frontage.
(2) One sign per building frontage may be permitted for upper levels and one for below ground uses.
B. Maximum sign area is 7 square feet.
C. Location
Signs shall be located outside vision triangles in the furnishing zone or close to the curb in front of the business and shall not obstruct pedestrian traffic or violate ADA guidelines. If adequate space does not exist in a furnishing zone or near the curb, a sign may be placed in a vestibule or alcove near a building entrance, so long as a 5 foot clear pedestrian zone is maintained. Signs shall not be placed within 5 feet of the curb abutting an on-street accessible parking stall.
D. Signs shall be made of stable and durable material and shall be aesthetically pleasing.
CHAPTER 11-010: Sign Standards
Section 11-010-06: Off-Premise Signs
Subsection 1: Off-Site Identification
March 2013
Boise Development Code
Page 332
11-010-06. OFF-PREMISE SIGNS
1. OFF-SITE IDENTIFICATION
When off-site identification is needed because of excessive distance from a public street, lack of street frontage, unusual topography or other special circumstances, an off-premise sign may be allowed with a conditional use permit. The standard conditional use approval criteria and the special circumstances noted above shall be used to evaluate the request. The base zone standards for sign size and location shall apply.
2. POSTER PANEL AND BULLETIN PANEL OFF-PREMISE SIGNS (BILLBOARDS)
Each application for a billboard must be accompanied by a demolition permit for an existing billboard. The number of billboard signs in the City shall not be increased except through annexation. Off-premise poster panels and bulletin panels may be allowed in the C-2, C-3, M-1 and M-2 zones upon approval of a conditional use permit, except that no signs may be located on Capitol Boulevard or on Federal Way between Capitol Boulevard and Bergeson Street.
A. Approval Criteria
The PZC must make the following findings:
(1) That the sign will not negatively impact the visual quality of a public open space.
(2) That the sign will not block the view of a structure of historical or architectural significance.
(3) That sign height is compatible with buildings within a 300 foot radius. Where view of the sign would be blocked by buildings, or where view of buildings would be blocked by the sign, the sign height shall not exceed the building height by more than 12 feet. Where there are no buildings within 300 feet, sign height shall not exceed 22 feet.
(4) That sign lighting will not spill onto adjacent properties.
B. Design and Location
New signs must comply with the following:
(1) Sign area height shall not exceed 10.5 feet.
(2) Sign area shall not exceed 248 for poster panels and 378 for bulletin panels.
(3) Sign height shall not exceed 40 feet, but may be limited to less by 11-010-06.2.A(3) above.
(4) No sign may be located within 1000 feet of another billboard on the same side of the street. However, if a sign is larger than 312 square feet, the distance to another such sign must be at least 2000 feet.
(5) A sign on one side of the street may be no closer than 150 feet from a sign on the opposite side of the street, as measured along the line of travel.
(6) At any street intersection, there may be no more than 496 square feet of billboard sign area within 250 feet measured from the street corner curbs.
(7) Back-bracing is prohibited.
(8) View of the sign should be unobstructed for 250 feet along the line of travel.
CHAPTER 11-010: Sign Standards
Section 11-010-07: Special Sign Districts
Subsection 1: Capitol Boulevard Sign Standards
March 2013
Boise Development Code
Page 333
(9) Electronic message displays are allowed with static frame effects that change with no transition – no more frequently than every 8 seconds. Brightness levels shall comply with Section 11-010-05.6.
(10) Setbacks shall be at least 5 feet from any property line. When adjacent to residentially zoned property, the setback of that residential zone shall be met. Table 11-010.5: Off-Premise Poster Panels and Painted Bulletin Signs Allowed by Zone District Prohibited
A-1, A-2, R-1, R-2, R-3, R-O, N-O, L-O, C-1, C-4, C-5, PC, T-1 Allowed with Sign Permit
C-2, C-3, M-1, M-2
11-010-07. SPECIAL SIGN DISTRICTS
1. CAPITOL BOULEVARD SIGN STANDARDS
In addition to the generally applicable sign regulations of this Chapter, these special standards apply in the Capital Boulevard Special Design District.
A. Review
(1) Signs require Design Review approval as an overall sign plan for the site.
(2) The Design Review Committee shall provide recommendations to the Planning and Zoning Commission on requests for variances and conditional use permits.
B. General Standards
(1) One sign per building is permitted for each street frontage in accordance with the following provisions. The sign may be of the wall, free-standing or projecting type.
(2) Wall signs shall not exceed 15% of the wall area in size or 65 square feet, whichever is less. In addition, multi-tenant buildings are allowed one 16 square foot sign per tenant.
(3) In lieu of wall signs under 2. above, projecting signs may be allowed. Projecting signs shall not exceed 25 square feet in area and shall not exceed the building height or 20 feet, whichever is less. In addition, multi-tenant buildings are allowed one 12 square foot sign per tenant.
(4) Colors, materials and lighting shall be restrained and harmonious with the building and site.
(5) Use of neon is encouraged for illumination.
(6) Electronic message displays shall be allowed only with a conditional use permit. Manual readerboards must be approved by the Design Review Committee
(7) Free-standing signs are allowed as per the size and height regulations for Gateway Streets.
CHAPTER 11-010: Sign Standards
Section 11-010-08: Enforcement
Subsection 1: Capitol Boulevard Sign Standards
March 2013
Boise Development Code
Page 334
11-010-08. ENFORCEMENT
1. The Planning Director shall take appropriate enforcement action to correct or abate any violation where a sign is erected, constructed, altered, repaired, moved, or maintained in violation of these sign regulations or any other City ordinance.
2. The violation of or failure to comply with any of the provisions of this Code or the erection, use, or display or the allowing of any unlawful sign is a misdemeanor pursuant to Section 1-3-2 of the Boise City Code. Each day or portion thereof upon which a violation occurs constitutes a separate offense.
CHAPTER 11-011: Nonconformance
Section 11-011-01: Nonconforming Uses, Parcels and Structures
Subsection 1: Capitol Boulevard Sign Standards
March 2013
Boise Development Code
Page 335
CHAPTER 11-011: NONCONFORMANCENONCONFORMANCE 11-011-01. NONCONFORMING USES, PARCELS AND STRUCTURES
A nonconforming use, parcel or structure is one that was legally established but that is not in compliance with Tittle 11 due to a subsequent ordinance amendment, annexation, change of zoning, eminent domain or similar action. 11-011-02. NONCONFORMING PARCELS
Notwithstanding the minimum requirements for parcel size within the various zoning districts, structures may be built, expanded, reconstructed, occupied or used on a nonconforming parcel that existed prior to the enactment of this ordinance provided that such structures and uses meet all other applicable requirements of this ordinance. 11-011-03. NONCONFORMING STRUCTURES
1. A structure occupied by a nonconforming use may be maintained and repaired. Examples of allowed maintenance are painting, re-roofing and steps to ensure safety and compliance with building codes.
2. When a structure housing a nonconforming use is illegally modified or expanded, the nonconforming status of the use shall be lost.
3. A nonconforming structure may not be replaced except in compliance with the zoning code, but may be maintained, repaired or internally altered provided that there is no increase in the degree of noncompliance with zoning regulations. 11-011-04. NONCONFORMING USES
1. Minor expansions of nonconforming uses (and the structures housing them) not exceeding 20 percent of gross floor area may be allowed in accordance with the procedures for approving staff level conditional use modifications. Expansions greater that 20 percent and not considered minor by the Director may be allowed in accordance with the procedures for approving a conditional use permit. Both require compliance with findings ii-iv of 11-03-04.6C(7)(a).
2. Nonconforming uses may be converted to other uses upon issuance of a zoning certificate based on the following findings:
A. The conversion will not violate a policy of the Boise City Comprehensive Plan.
B. The conversion will not unduly burden transportation or service facilities.
C. The conversion will not result in adverse impacts to surrounding properties.
D. The use proposed will be equal or less in intensity, impact and demand for services.
3. When a nonconforming use has been impermissibly changed, enlarged or expanded the nonconforming status shall be lost. Thereafter, the lands and structures may only be used in conformance with this ordinance.
4. A nonconforming use that is discontinued for a period of one year shall be deemed to have been purposely discontinued, unless otherwise specified herein. Thereafter, the lands and structures may only be used in conformance with this ordinance.
CHAPTER 11-011: Nonconformance
Section 11-011-05: Destruction by Calamity
Subsection 1: Capitol Boulevard Sign Standards
March 2013
Boise Development Code
Page 336
5. These regulations shall not be used to deprive the use of improvements on private property based solely on nonuse of the improvements for their designed purposes for a period of ten years or less. 11-011-05. DESTRUCTION BY CALAMITY
Nonconforming status shall be lost when a nonconforming structure or a structure occupied by a nonconforming use is destroyed by fire or other calamity to the extent that the cost of restoration is 50 percent or more of the assessed value, except upon issuance of a conditional use permit. Absent a conditional use permit, the structure and property are subject to extant zoning regulations. 11-011-06. DETERMINATION OF NONCONFORMING STATUS
Application for determination of nonconforming status shall be made to the Planning Director with the appropriate form and fee. The burden of proof falls on the party requesting the determination. Proof may include but is not limited to utility records, photographs, assessor’s records, rental receipts, phone directories, notarized statements and Polk Directories.
March 2013 Boise Development Code
Page 337
CHAPTER 11-012: DEFINITIONSDEFINITIONS 11-012-01. MEANINGS OF WORDS GENERALLY
As used in this Code, each of the terms defined shall have the meaning given in this Section unless a different meaning is clearly required by the context.
1. GENERAL RULES
The following rules shall apply for construing or interpreting the terms and provisions of this Development Code.
A. Meanings and Intent
All provisions, terms, phrases, and expressions contained in this Code shall be construed according to the general purposes set forth in this Section and the specific purpose statements set forth throughout this Code.
B. Headings, Illustrations, and Text
In the event of a conflict or inconsistency between the text of this Code and any heading, caption, figure, illustration, table, or map, the text shall control.
C. Lists and Examples
Unless otherwise specifically indicated, lists of items or examples that use terms such as “for example,” “including,” and “such as,” or similar language are intended to provide examples and are not exhaustive lists of all possibilities.
D. Computation of Time
The time in which an act is to be done shall be computed by excluding the first day and including the last day. If a deadline or required date of action falls on a Saturday, Sunday, or holiday observed by the city, the deadline or required date of action shall be the next day that is not a Saturday, Sunday or holiday observed by the city. References to days are calendar days unless otherwise stated.
E. References to Other Regulations/Publications
Whenever reference is made to a resolution, ordinance, statute, regulation, or document, it shall be construed as a reference to the most recent edition of such regulation, resolution, ordinance, statute, or document, unless otherwise specifically stated.
F. Delegation of Authority
Any act authorized by this Code to be carried out by a specific official of the city may be carried out by a designee of such official.
G. Technical and Non-Technical Terms
Words and phrases shall be construed according to the common and approved usage of the language, but technical words and phrases that may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be construed and understood according to such meaning.
H. Public Officials and Agencies
All public officials, bodies, and agencies to which references are made are those of the Boise City, Idaho, unless otherwise indicated.
I. Mandatory and Discretionary Terms
The words “shall,” “must,” and “will” are mandatory in nature, establishing an obligation or duty to comply with the particular provision. The words “may” and “should” are permissive in nature.
CHAPTER 11-012: Definitions
Section 11-012-02: Definitions of Use Categories and Use Types
Subsection 2: Interpretations
March 2013
Boise Development Code
Page 338
J. Conjunctions
Unless the context clearly suggests the contrary, conjunctions shall be interpreted as follows:
(1) “And” indicates that all connected items, conditions, provisions, or events apply; and
(2) “Or” indicates that one or more of the connected items, conditions, provisions, or events apply.
K. Tenses, Plurals, and Gender
Words used in the present tense include the future tense. Words used in the singular number include the plural number and the plural number includes the singular number, unless the context of the particular usage clearly indicates otherwise.
2. INTERPRETATIONS
The Director has final authority to determine the interpretation or usage of terms used in this Code. 11-012-02. DEFINITIONS OF USE CATEGORIES AND USE TYPES
1. RESIDENTIAL USES
A residential structure is building used as a dwelling for one or more persons. The term includes, but is not limited to houses, mobile homes, apartment buildings, lodging homes and dormitories. The term also includes accessory use areas used in conjunction with and forming an integral part of a residential structure.
A. Single- and Two-family Living
This use category is characterized by residential occupancy of a dwelling unit by up to two households. Tenancy is arranged on a month-to-month or longer basis (lodging where tenancy may be arranged for a period of less than 30 days is classified under the “Visitor Accommodation” category). Common accessory uses include recreational activities, raising of pets, gardens, personal storage buildings, hobbies, and parking of the occupants’ vehicles. Home occupations and accessory dwelling units are accessory uses that are subject to additional regulations. Specific use types include, but are not limited to:
(1) Accessory Dwelling Unit
Except as may be further restricted, an accessory dwelling unit is a dwelling unit that is incidental and subordinate to the principal use of the premises, and does not alter the essential characteristic of the use.
(2) Caretaker Residence
A dwelling on a nonresidential property occupied by a person, and the immediate family of the person, who oversees or guards the operation.
(3) Dwelling, Single Family
A building designed for use and occupancy by no more than one family.
(4) Dwelling, Duplex
A detached building containing two dwelling units, each of which includes a separate bathroom and kitchen. The two units must be able to function as dwelling units independently of each other.
CHAPTER 11-012: Definitions
Section 11-012-02: Definitions of Use Categories and Use Types
Subsection 1: Residential Uses
March 2013
Boise Development Code
Page 339
(5) Manufactured Home
A factory-built structure that is manufactured or constructed according to the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974, and as may be amended, that became effective June 15, 1976, and, is to be used as a place for human habitation, but that is not constructed or equipped with a permanent hitch or other device allowing it to be moved other than for the purpose of moving to a permanent site, and that does not have permanently attached to its body or frame any wheels or axles.
(6) Manufactured Home, Stock
A stock manufactured home does not have all the architectural placement standards of an Enhanced Manufactured Home.
(7) Manufactured Home, Enhanced
An enhanced manufactured home meets all the architectural and placement standards of the use standards in Section 11-06-03.1.C, Manufactured Home, Enhanced.
(8) Manufactured Home Community
Any site, lot, tract, plot, or parcel of land, designed for the placement of ten or more manufactured homes, located and maintained for dwelling purposes on a permanent basis on individual lots, pads, or spaces; whether those lots, pads, or spaces be individually owned, leased, or rented.
(9) Mobile Home Park
Any area, tract, plot, or parcel of land, developed and designed for placement of mobile homes located and maintained for dwelling purposes on a permanent or semi-permanent basis.
B. Multi-family Living
This use category is characterized by residential occupancy of a dwelling unit by more than two households. Tenancy is arranged on a month-to-month or longer basis (lodging where tenancy may be arranged for a period of less than 30 days is classified under the “Visitor Accommodation” category). Common accessory uses include recreational activities, raising of pets, gardens, personal storage buildings, hobbies, and parking of the occupants’ vehicles. Specific use types include, but are not limited to:
(1) Multi-family Building
A building, or portion thereof, containing three or more dwelling units excluding attached single family townhouse units located on individual lots.
(2) High Rise
A multifamily building having floors used for human occupancy located more than 75 feet above the lower level of fire department vehicle access.
C. Other
This category is characterized by residential occupancy of a structure that does not meet the definition of “Single and Two-Family Living” or “Multi-family Living”. Generally, these structures have a common eating area for residents. The residents may receive care, training, or treatment, and caregivers may or may not also reside at the site. Accessory uses commonly include recreational facilities and vehicle parking for occupants and staff. Specific use types include, but are not limited to:
CHAPTER 11-012: Definitions
Section 11-012-02: Definitions of Use Categories and Use Types
Subsection 1: Residential Uses
March 2013
Boise Development Code
Page 340
(1) Boarding or Rooming House
A building other than a hotel or restaurant where lodging or lodging and meals are provided for compensation to six to 12 persons who are not members of the householder's family.
(2) Bed and Breakfast
A type of hotel providing overnight accommodations and breakfast food service. If designed to accommodate 12 or fewer guests, it shall be considered a type of boarding or rooming house rather than a hotel.
(3) Convalescent Home, Nursing Home
A building housing any facility, however named, whether operated for profit or not, the purpose of which is to provide skilled nursing care and related medical services for two or more individuals suffering from illness, disease, injury, deformity, or requiring care because of old age.
(4) Fraternity or Sorority House
A facility for housing a club of men (fraternity) or women (sorority) college students.
(5) Halfway House
A type of housing for persons convicted of non-violent crimes who are in the later stages of serving a sentence and are being transitioned back into free society.
(6) Group Home
A single family dwelling or dwelling unit that is occupied exclusively by elderly persons or persons with a disability and no more than two resident staff, where all state and local licensing and standards of operation requirements have been met. Public/Institutional Uses
D. Child or Adult Care
A child or adult care facility is a building where children or adults regularly receive care, maintenance, and supervision usually unaccompanied by a parent, guardian, or custodian, and regardless of whether the facility does or does not provide any educational instruction. This use excludes:
(1) The care of the operator's children or legal wards,
(2) Children or adults related by blood or marriage,
(3) Occasional personal guests,
(4) Any home, place or facility providing overnight custodial services for lodging and/or boarding for the occupants therein, and
(5) Children aged 12 years and over.
The occupant load of a building, as determined by the Building Department and Fire Department requirements, will include all persons using the facility.
E. Adult Day Care
A facility where adults regularly receive care, maintenance, and supervision unaccompanied by a guardian or custodian, regardless of whether the facility does or does not provide any educational instruction. This use excludes
(1) Care of operator's legal wards or relatives;
(2) Occasional personal guests; and
CHAPTER 11-012: Definitions
Section 11-012-02: Definitions of Use Categories and Use Types
Subsection 1: Residential Uses
March 2013
Boise Development Code
Page 341
(3) Any facility providing overnight custodial services for lodging and/or boarding.
F. Child Care Home
A child care facility for six or fewer children that is an accessory use to a primary residential use.
G. Group Child Care Home
A child care facility for 7 to 12 children within the operator's residence.
H. Group Child Care Center
A child care facility for 7 to 12 children that is outside the operator's home.
I. Intermediate Child Care Center
A child care facility providing for 13 to 20 children.
J. Large Child Care Center
A child care facility providing for 21 or more children.
K. Communication Uses
Communication uses transmit analog or digital voice or communications information between or among points using electromagnetic signals via antennas, microwave dishes, and similar structures. Supporting equipment includes buildings, shelters, cabinets, towers, electrical equipment, parking areas, and other accessory development. Specific use types include, but are not limited to:
(1) Broadcasting or Recording Studio
A building or portion of a building used as a place for radio or television broadcasting or recording but without a transmission tower.
(2) Lattice Tower
A self-supporting, multiple sided, open steel frame structure used to support telecommunications equipment.
(3) Microcell Facilities
A small wireless communications facility consisting of an antenna that is either:
(a) Four feet in height and with an area of not more than 580 square inches; or
(b) If a tubular antenna, no more than four inches in diameter and no more than six feet in length.
(4) Monopole
A support structure that consists of a single pole sunk into the ground and/or attached to a foundation.
(5) Transmission Tower
A structure in a fixed location used as an antenna or to support antennas for the primary purpose of transmitting and/or receiving electronic signals. This definition includes nonresidential broadcast, communication, transmission, and similar towers, either freestanding or attached to an adjacent broadcasting or transmitting facility.
CHAPTER 11-012: Definitions
Section 11-012-02: Definitions of Use Categories and Use Types
Subsection 1: Residential Uses
March 2013
Boise Development Code
Page 342
L. Community Facility
Community facility uses include buildings, structures, or facilities owned, operated, or occupied by a governmental or philanthropic agency to provide a service to the public. Specific use types include, but are not limited to:
(1) Cemetery
Land used or dedicated to the interment of human or animal remains, including columbaria, mausoleums, mortuaries, and associated maintenance facilities when operated in conjunction with, and within the boundaries of, such cemetery.
(2) Club, Lodge, Social Hall
The assembly use of a building or of any premises by a nonprofit association, where such use is restricted to enrolled members and their guests.
(3) Government Buildings
A building owned or used by the federal, state, county, or city government, or any political subdivision, agency or instrumentality thereof.
(4) Mortuary
A facility in which deceased human bodies are kept and prepared for burial or cremation.
(5) Recreation Center
A commercial or non-profit bowling alley, roller rink, or similar use designed for amusement or recreation.
(6) Religious Institution
A building that is used primarily for religious worship and related religious activities.
(7) Uses Related to and Operated by a Religious Institution
A use, such as a thrift store, homeless shelter, rectory, or similar, that is operated by a religious institution and located on the same parcel or an adjacent parcel to the religious institution.
M. Educational Use
Education uses are public, private, and parochial institutions at the primary, elementary, middle, high school, or post-secondary level, or trade or business schools that provide educational instruction to students. Accessory uses include play areas, cafeterias, recreational and sport facilities, parking, transit-related facilities, auditoriums, and before or after school day care. Specific use types include, but are not limited to:
(1) Auditorium, Stadium, or Lecture Hall seating more than 500 people
A building or portion of a building in which facilities are provided for more than 500 people, for educational or assembly purposes.
(2) Library
A permanent facility for storing and loaning books, periodicals, reference materials, audio and videotapes, and other similar media to city residents.
(3) Private Commercial School
A school, regardless whether it is operated for profit, primarily devoted to instruction, in dance, music, drama, art, languages, martial arts training, and business.
CHAPTER 11-012: Definitions
Section 11-012-02: Definitions of Use Categories and Use Types
Subsection 1: Residential Uses
March 2013
Boise Development Code
Page 343
(4) School
An institution of learning, whether public or private, that offers instruction to a group of children in those courses of study required by the State Board of Education. This definition includes nursery school, kindergarten, elementary school, junior high school, senior high school, or any special institution of learning under the jurisdiction of the Idaho Department of Education, but it does not include a vocational or professional school or any institution of higher education, including a college or university.
(5) Trade or Vocational School
An institution or facility conducting instruction in the technical or trade skills such as business, secretarial training, medical-dental technician training, beauticians, barbers, electronics and automotive technician training.
(6) University
Boise State University
N. Health Care Uses
Health care uses are characterized by activities focusing on medical services, particularly licensed public or private institutions that provide primary health services and medical or surgical care to persons suffering from illness, disease, injury, deformity, or other physical or mental conditions. Accessory uses may include laboratories, outpatient, or training facilities, and parking, or other amenities primarily for the use of employees in the firm or building. Specific use types include, but are not limited:
(1) Hospital
An institution devoted primarily to the maintenance and operation of facilities for the medical or surgical care of patients 24 hours a day, including specialized and surgical hospitals. The term "hospital" does not include clinics, convalescent or boarding homes, or any institution operating solely for the treatment of mentally ill persons, drug addicts, alcohol addicts, or other types of cases necessitating forcible confinement of patients.
(2) Laboratory, Medical/Dental
A facility that provides medical services, such as pathological testing or manufacturing of prosthetics and orthopedic appliances, or that provides dental services including the manufacturing of orthodontic appliances, crowns, and dentures.
(3) Medical Research Facility
A facility designed for the purpose of conducting medical research.
(4) Office, Medical
A facility for a group of one or more physicians for the examination and treatment of human patients, primarily engaged in furnishing, on an outpatient basis, chiropractic, dental, medical, surgical, medical imaging, or other services to individuals. Patients are not kept overnight except under emergency conditions. Ancillary laboratory facilities may be included.
O. Parks, Recreation and Open Space
Park and open space uses focus on natural areas, large areas consisting mostly of vegetative landscaping, or outdoor recreation, community gardens, or public squares. Lands tend to have few structures. Accessory uses may include clubhouses, playgrounds, maintenance facilities, concessions, caretaker's quarters, and parking. Specific use types include, but are not limited to:
CHAPTER 11-012: Definitions
Section 11-012-02: Definitions of Use Categories and Use Types
Subsection 1: Residential Uses
March 2013
Boise Development Code
Page 344
(1) Forest Reserve, Recreation Area
(2) Golf Course
(3) Park or Playground
(4) Public Plaza
P. Social Care
Social Care uses provide services to people with limited financial resources, including people who are homeless.
(1) Food Kitchen
A facility providing food at meal times to people with limited financial resources, including people who are homeless.
(2) Shelter Home
A facility providing basic services that may include food; personal hygiene support; information and referrals; employment, mail and telephone services; including overnight sleeping accommodations, to people with limited financial resources, including people who are homeless.
(3) Single Resident Occupancy Hotel
Means a building that provides living units with separate sleeping areas and some combination of shared bath or toilet facilities. The building may or may not have separate shared cooking facilities for residents.
Q. Transportation Uses
This category includes facilities that receive and discharge passengers and freight. Accessory uses include freight handling areas, concessions, offices, parking, and maintenance and fueling facilities. Specific use types include, but are not limited to:
(1) Aircraft Landing Field
Any area of land or water that is used or intended for use by aircraft and including the necessary appurtenant structures or facilities located thereon.
(2) Bus Station
Any premises for the transient housing or parking of buses and the loading and unloading of passengers.
(3) Transit Terminal
A passenger terminal or loading facility for a privately or publicly owned transit system, including a private shuttle service.
(4) Trucking Terminal
An area or building where cargo is stored and where trucks, including tractors and trailer units, load and unload cargo on a regular basis. The use may include facilities for the temporary storage of loads prior to shipment. The use shall also include truck stops or fueling stations where primarily diesel fuel is sold.
R. Utility
Utility uses include buildings, structures, or other facilities used or intended to be used by any private or public utility. This category includes buildings or structures that house or contain facilities for the operation of water, wastewater, waste disposal, or electricity services. Accessory uses may
CHAPTER 11-012: Definitions
Section 11-012-02: Definitions of Use Categories and Use Types
Subsection 2: Commercial Uses
March 2013
Boise Development Code
Page 345
include control, monitoring, data, or transmission equipment. Specific use types include, but are not limited to:
(1) Gas Fired Power Plant
An electrical utility plant fueled by natural gas.
(2) Utility Facility, Minor
A small facility required for the operation of a utility controlled by the Idaho Public Utilities Commission including minor wells, pump houses, etc.
(3) Utility Facility, Major
A large facility required for the operation of a utility controlled by the Idaho Public Utilities Commission including electrical substations, major water storage reservoirs, etc.
2. COMMERCIAL USES
A. Agriculture Uses
The use of land for purposes including farming and crop production, dairying, pasturage, horticulture, animal and poultry husbandry, and the necessary accessory uses for treating or storing of farm products and parking of equipment. Specific use types include, but are not limited to:
(1) Agriculture and Stables
Tilling of soil, aquaculture, raising crops, livestock, farming, dairying, and animal husbandry including all customarily accessory and incidental uses, but excluding hogs, slaughterhouses, fertilizer works, bone yards, and commercial feed lots; or a building or structure used or designed for the boarding or care of riding horses.
(2) Hog Raising, Feedlot, Stockyard
A lot or parcel on which hogs are raised, bred and slaughtered, or where livestock are fed intensively in order to fatten for market, or where livestock are held on a short-term basis prior to slaughter. It does not include short-term holding pens for auction facilities.
(3) Slaughterhouse, Rendering Plant
A facility for the slaughtering and processing of animals and refining of animal byproducts.
B. Animal Related Business
Animal related business uses involve the selling, boarding, or care of animals on a commercial basis. Accessory uses may include confinement or exercise facilities for animals, parking, and storage areas. Specific use types include, but are not limited to:
(1) Animal Daycare
A lot or building where five or more dogs, cats, and other household domestic animals are maintained, harbored, or cared for on a daily basis, not to include overnight stays.
(2) Animal Hospital, Large
Any building or portion thereof designed or used for the care of the following animals: cattle, sheep, goats, horses, hogs, large exotic cats, or similar animals.
(3) Animal Hospital, Small
Any building or portion thereof designed or used for the care of the following animals: dogs, cats, primates, birds, water fowl, reptiles, rodents, and similar animals.
CHAPTER 11-012: Definitions
Section 11-012-02: Definitions of Use Categories and Use Types
Subsection 2: Commercial Uses
March 2013
Boise Development Code
Page 346
(4) Boarding Kennel, Commercial
Any lot or premises or portion thereof, on which five or more dogs, cats, and other household domestic animals are maintained, harbored, possessed, boarded, bred, or cared for in return for compensation or are offered for sale.
(5) Boarding Kennel, Non-Commercial
Any lot or premises or portion thereof on which more than four dogs or cats or a combination of such animals are maintained, harbored, possessed, bred, or cared for, without compensation and are not for sale. A noncommercial kennel license for such activity is required from the City Clerk.
(6) Small Animal Grooming
Grooming for small animals on an appointment basis, with drop off and pick up on the same day.
(7) Veterinary Clinic
The office or clinic of a veterinarian, where small animals or household pets are given medical, surgical, or health maintenance treatment. The boarding of animals is limited to short-term care incidental to the treatment clinic and must be a secondary use of the property.
C. Financial Service
Establishments that provide retail banking services, mortgage lending, and similar financial services to individuals and businesses. This classification includes those institutions engaged in the on-site circulation of cash money and check-cashing facilities, but does not include bail bond brokers. Accessory uses may include automatic teller machines, offices, and parking. Specific use types include, but are not limited to:
(1) Bank, Financial Institution
An establishment that provides banking services, lending, or similar financial services to individuals and businesses. This definition includes those institutions engaged in the on-site circulation of cash money and check-cashing facilities, but shall not include bail bond brokers. The establishment may or may not have a drive-thru facility.
D. Food and Beverage Service
Food and beverage service businesses serve prepared food or beverages for consumption on or off the premises. Accessory uses may include food preparation areas, offices, and parking. Specific use types include:
(1) Coffee/Espresso Stand
A beverage service establishment where drive-up window service is the primary customer access.
(2) Tavern/Lounge
A building where alcoholic beverages are sold for consumption on the premises, not including restaurants where the principal business is serving food.
(3) Restaurant
Any land, building or part thereof, other than a boarding house, where meals are provided for compensation, including uses such as brewpub, cafe, cafeteria, coffee shop, lunch room, tea room and dining room, but not taverns or lounges. Brewpubs brew alcoholic beverages that are made and sold for consumption on the premises.
CHAPTER 11-012: Definitions
Section 11-012-02: Definitions of Use Categories and Use Types
Subsection 2: Commercial Uses
March 2013
Boise Development Code
Page 347
E. Office
Office uses are primarily for conducting the affairs of a business, profession, service, or industry, or like activity, that may include ancillary uses such as restaurants, coffee shop, and limited retail sales. Specific use types include, but are not limited to:
(1) Office, Business or Professional
Offers business or professional services, such as accountants, architects, attorneys, insurance brokers, realtors, investment counselors, but not including medical or personal services.
F. Service Retail
Establishments that provide individual services related to personal needs directly to customers at the site of the business, or that receives goods from or returns goods to the customer, that have been treated or processed at that location or another location. Specific use types include, but are not limited to:
(1) Person Service
A facility that provides individualized services generally related to personal needs. These include, but are not limited to, beauty and healthcare services such as hair and nail salons, and barber shops. The term does not include tattoo parlors, body piercing or massage establishments.
(2) Laundry and Dry Cleaning Service
An establishment where laundry or dry cleaning is dropped off by customers or picked up by customers and that also includes on-site laundry and/or cleaning activities, including related operation of equipment and machinery. Establishments that do not include on-site cleaning activities are classified as “general personal services.”
(3) Massage Establishment
A fixed place of business wherein any individual, partnership, firm, association, corporation, or combination of individuals, engages in, conducts, carries on or permits to be conducted or carried on, for money or other consideration, administration of a massage.
(4) Photography Studio
A business where photography is practiced on a professional level for portraiture and for various commercial and industrial applications, including the preparation of photographs for advertising, illustration, display, and record-keeping.
(5) Printing, Lithography, Publishing & Reproductions, Exclusive of Paper Manufacturing
The business of making copies of printed materials.
(6) Self-Service Laundry
An establishment with pay-per-use clothes washing and drying machines where customers launder their own clothes. May include accessory retail sales of laundry soap and similar items, primarily for use on the premises.
(7) Tattoo Parlors and Body Piercing Establishments
A business creating permanent picture or design on skin by prinking it and staining it with an indelible dye and piercing of the body.
CHAPTER 11-012: Definitions
Section 11-012-02: Definitions of Use Categories and Use Types
Subsection 2: Commercial Uses
March 2013
Boise Development Code
Page 348
(8) Retail Tobacco Business
A business which (1) during the normal course of business primarily distributes any tobacco product or provides any equipment or material used for the consumption of tobacco, (2) lawfully may permit smoking indoors, and (3) does operate a smoking area on premises owned, operated, or used by the business, whether indoors or outdoors, during any portion of its hours of operation.
G. Recreation and Entertainment
(1) (1) Concert Hall/ Dance Hall
A business operating in an area, whether indoors or out, where amplified sound or music is provided for entertainment.
(2) Firing Range
A controlled area of activity, indoors or outdoors, specifically designed for the discharging of firearms at targets.
(3) Health Club
A club for leisure and fitness activities.
(4) Recreation, Commercial – Indoor
An indoor facility for bowling alley, skating rink, arcade, arena, archery, and similar uses.
(5) Recreation, Commercial – Outdoor
Amusement parks, ball park (baseball, football, soccer), water park, batting cages, go-cart track, and similar uses partially conducted outside of a building.
(6) Recreation Center
A commercial or non-profit bowling alley, roller rink, or similar use.
(7) Social Event Center
An establishment for weddings, birthdays, dances, celebrations, and other similar special events.
(8) Swimming Pool, Commercial
Any facility intended for swimming or recreational bathing that contains water over 24 inches (610 millimeters) deep. This includes in-ground, above-ground and on-ground swimming pools, hot tubs and spas.
(9) Theater
A building used primarily for the presentation of live stage productions, performances, or motion pictures.
(10) Theater, Drive-In
A form of cinema consisting of a large screen, a projection booth, a concession stand, and a large outdoor parking area for automobiles.
H. Retail (Sales)
Retail (Sales) uses are private enterprises that provide goods directly to the general public for purchase. This use does not include food service, personal service, construction equipment rental, or recreation uses. No outdoor display or outdoor storage is permitted unless specifically authorized by this Code. Accessory uses may include offices, parking, storage of goods, assembly, repackaging, or repair of goods for on-site sale. Specific use types include, but are not limited to:
CHAPTER 11-012: Definitions
Section 11-012-02: Definitions of Use Categories and Use Types
Subsection 2: Commercial Uses
March 2013
Boise Development Code
Page 349
(1) Building Materials, Hay, Grain, Bulk Garden Supply, Heavy Materials
A retail business that sells large, bulky, or heavy goods including building materials and agricultural goods, such as hay, grain, bulk garden supplies, tools, and equipment.
(2) Convenience Store with Gasoline Service
An establishment generally less than 5,000 square feet engaged in the sale of convenience goods, such as pre-packaged food items, tobacco, over-the-counter drugs, periodicals, and other household goods, and that also provides the retail sale of petroleum products dispensed through gasoline pumps and other supplies for motor vehicles.
(3) Drive-Up Establishment
An establishment, whether it be the primary or an accessory use, other than automobile service station or parking lot, that is designed to allow the occupants of a motor vehicles to make purchases or receive services at a window or service area while remaining in the vehicle.
(4) Grocery
A market where food and related items are sold.
(5) Optician
A business that fits and sells lenses, eyeglasses, and other optical instruments.
(6) Pharmacy
A location where prescription drugs are sold. May also include the sale of non-prescription drugs and personal care items.
(7) Retail Store
A single retail use in one stand-alone building or tenant space.
(8) Shopping Center, Convenience Commercial
A small shopping center that typically features an approximately 2,500 square foot groceries/sundries store as an anchor tenant and may also provide other services such as gasoline sales, dry cleaners, coffee shop, dentist office, beauty shop, day care, etc. A convenience shopping center may have an average building area ranging from 15,000 to 35,000 square feet and occupy one to three acres.
(9) Shopping Center, Neighborhood Commercial
A moderate sized shopping center, planned and developed as a unit, typically composed of a grocery up to 60,000 square feet in size, and usually containing additional smaller tenants serving a local market area. A neighborhood shopping center may have a gross floor area ranging from 35,000 to 100,000 square feet and may occupy up to 10 acres.
(10) Shopping Center, Community Commercial
A group of commercial establishments, planned and developed as a unit, typically featuring an approximately 50,000 square foot or greater grocery store and/or department store or volume discount retail outlet as an anchor tenant/s and may include freestanding buildings containing restaurants or other commercial uses. A community shopping center has a gross floor area of over 100,000 square feet but no more than 300,000 square feet and typically occupies from 10 to 25 acres.
(11) Shopping center, Regional Commercial
A group of commercial establishments, planned, developed, owned, and managed as a unit related in location, size and types of shops to the trade area that the unit serves; it provides on-site parking in definite relationship to the type and size of stores. The major
CHAPTER 11-012: Definitions
Section 11-012-02: Definitions of Use Categories and Use Types
Subsection 2: Commercial Uses
March 2013
Boise Development Code
Page 350
tenant is one or more full line department stores. Size of the center can range between 300,000 square feet to over one million square feet of gross leasable area.
I. Vehicles and Equipment
Vehicles and equipment uses include a broad range of uses for the maintenance, sale, or rental of motor vehicles and related equipment. Accessory uses may include incidental repair and storage, offices, and sales of parts. Specific use types include, but are not limited to:
(1) Auto Emission Van Test Site
A lot, structure, or vehicle where emissions are tested or evaluated to determine compliance with law.
(2) Automotive Sales Lot
An establishment engaged in the display, sale, leasing, or rental of new or used motor vehicles.
(3) Battery Rebuilding Shop
A motor vehicle repair shop that rebuilds vehicle batteries.
(4) Car Wash
A facility for the cleaning of automobiles, providing either self-serve facilities or employees to perform washing operations.
(5) Motor Vehicle Repair, Minor
Incidental repairs, replacement of parts, and minor service to motor vehicles, but not including any operation specified as "Motor Vehicle Repair, Major.”
(6) Motor Vehicle Repair, Major
General repairs to vehicle engine, transmission or drive-train; rebuilding or major reconditioning of worn or damaged motor vehicles or trailers; collision service, including body, frame or fender straightening or repair; and overall painting of motor vehicles or trailers.
(7) Parking Lot
An open, graded, and surfaced area, other than a street or public right-of-way, to be used for the storage, for limited periods of time, of operable passenger automobiles and commercial vehicles, and available to the public, whether for compensation, free, or as an accommodation to clients or customers.
(8) Parking Lot, Off-Site
Any required parking space that is separated from the site of the principal use by either an intervening lot, a public roadway, or a public alley.
(9) Parking Garage
A building or portion thereof consisting of one or more levels at, below, or above grade, designed to be used for the parking of automobiles and commercial vehicles that is available to the public, whether for compensation, free, or as an accommodation to clients or customers.
(10) Service Station
Premises where gasoline, motor oils, lubricants, and grease for the operation of motor vehicles are retailed directly to the public on the premises and including tires, accessories, services, and minor motor vehicle repairs.
CHAPTER 11-012: Definitions
Section 11-012-02: Definitions of Use Categories and Use Types
Subsection 2: Commercial Uses
March 2013
Boise Development Code
Page 351
J. Visitor Accommodations
For-profit facilities where lodging, meals, and the like are provided to transient visitors and guests for a defined period. Specific use types include, but are not limited to:
(1) Hotel
A building containing six or more bedrooms where overnight lodging without individual cooking facilities is offered to the public for compensation, primarily for the accommodation of transient guests.
(2) Motel
A building or group of buildings on the same premises, whether detached or attached, containing sleeping or dwelling units independently accessible from the outside, with garage space or parking space located on the premises and designed for, or occupied by, travelers. The term includes, but is not limited to, any buildings or building groups designated as auto courts, motor lodges, tourist courts, or by any other title or sign intended to identify them as providing lodging to motorists.
(3) Recreation Vehicle Park
Any area, tract, plot, or site of land whereupon two or more recreational vehicles or travel trailers are placed, located, and maintained for temporary living quarters on a temporary basis.
K. Other Commercial
(1) Auction Establishment
A building or portion of a building used for the public sale of goods, merchandise, or equipment to the highest bidder.
(2) Bikini Bar
A business, as defined in Title 23 of Idaho Code, licensed to serve beer, wine, alcohol, or spirituous liquor for consumption on the premises that features live performers or servers wearing bikinis or swimsuits covering specified anatomical areas.
(3) Construction Business
A business related to the construction industry, such as a roofing shop, sign painting shop, or sheet metal shop.
(4) Newspaper & Printing Establishment
An enclosed facility for the printing and distribution of newspapers, newsletters, and other similar media that is printed on newsprint-type paper for sale and general circulation.
(5) Sexually Oriented Business
An adult arcade, adult bookstore, adult cabaret, adult motion picture theater, adult theater, or sexual encounter premise; or any premises where employees engage in specified sexual activities or display specified anatomical areas.
CHAPTER 11-012: Definitions
Section 11-012-02: Definitions of Use Categories and Use Types
Subsection 3: Industrial Uses
March 2013
Boise Development Code
Page 352
3. INDUSTRIAL USES
A. Industrial Service
Industrial service firms are engaged in the repair or servicing of agricultural, industrial, business, or consumer machinery, equipment, products, or by-products. Firms that service consumer goods do so by mainly providing centralized services for separate retail outlets. Contractors and similar uses perform services off-site. Few customers come to the site. Accessory activities may include sales, offices, parking, and storage. Specific use types include, but are not limited:
(1) Contractor Shop
A building or part of a building or land area for the construction or storage of materials, equipment, tools, products, and vehicles. Parts and equipment are generally not displayed or sold on-site for retail consumption, but if so, they are a subordinate part of commercial or wholesale sales. Typical examples include air conditioning service, plumbing companies, electrical companies, rental stores, or any area upon which materials are stored for use as part of the business or from which service crews are normally dispatched in service vehicles.
(2) Laundry, Industrial
An industrial facility where fabrics are cleaned on a commercial or wholesale basis.
B. Manufacturing and Production
This use category includes firms involved in the manufacturing, processing, fabrication, packaging, or assembly of goods. Natural, constructed, raw, secondary, or partially completed materials may be used. Products may be finished or semi-finished and are generally made for the wholesale market, for transfer to other plants, or to order for firms or consumers. Custom industry is included (i.e., establishments primarily engaged in the on-site production of goods by hand manufacturing involving the use of hand tools and small-scale equipment). Goods are generally not displayed or sold on site, but if so, such activity is a subordinate part of sales. Relatively few customers come to the manufacturing site. Accessory activities may include retail sales, offices, cafeterias, parking, employee recreational facilities, warehouses, storage yards, repair facilities, truck fleets, and caretaker's quarters. Specific use types include, but are not limited to:
(1) Atmospheric Gas Production Plant
A facility for the production of gases derived from the atmosphere (i.e., N202 Argon).
(2) Brewery, Distillery, Winery
An establishment for production of alcoholic liquors, but does not include food service establishments that produce such products only for on-site sale.
(3) Food Products, Dairy Products & Wholesale Bakeries
A facility for the manufacture and wholesale of dairy and other food products, including baked goods such as bread and cakes.
(4) Lumbermill, Sawmill, Pulpmill
A mill that cuts or processes logs into lumber or pulp.
(5) Tannery
A business that tans or processes raw animal hides into leather. Not to include manufacture of leather goods.
CHAPTER 11-012: Definitions
Section 11-012-02: Definitions of Use Categories and Use Types
Subsection 3: Industrial Uses
March 2013
Boise Development Code
Page 353
C. Mining and Extractive Uses
Mining and extractive uses include the extraction of minerals, sand, gravel, and ores, and distribution of extracted materials, including the excavation, processing and distribution of clay, gravel, stone and soils.
(1) Mining, Dredging, Loading & Hauling of Sand, Dirt, Gravel or Other Aggregate
Extraction and movement of aggregate materials, not to include hard rock mining.
(2) Rock Crushing & Extractive Uses
A business engaged in the reduction of rocks and concrete demolition debris to smaller sizes useable as gravel; fill for construction, or similar commercial use, or in the extraction of materials from hard rock or ore.
D. Storage
This category is characterized by uses where goods, products, materials are kept or stored. No sales or service is included. Specific use types include, but are not limited to:
(1) Bulk Storage
Storage as a primary use, non-accessory storage.
Storage of Corrosive, Acid, Alkali, Flammable, or Explosive Materials
Storage, whether indoor or outdoor, of the named materials types.
(2) Self-Service Storage
An outdoor area or a building(s) that are designed or used exclusively for storage of excess property of an individual, family or business. Buildings are divided into individually accessed units. This shall not be deemed to include the day-to-day operations of businesses of any kind.
(3) Storage Building
A facility for the storage of products, supplies, and equipment.
(4) Wholesale Business
A business primarily engaged in the selling of merchandise to retailers; to industrial, commercial, institutional, or professional business users, or to other wholesalers; or acting as agents or brokers and buying merchandise for, or selling merchandise to such individuals or companies.
E. Warehouse and Freight Movement
Firms involved in warehouse and freight movement are engaged in the storage or movement of goods for themselves or other firms. Goods are generally delivered to other firms or the final consumer, except for some will call pickups. There is little on site sales activity with the customer present. Accessory uses may include offices, truck fleet parking, and maintenance areas. Specific use types include, but are not limited to:
(1) Grain Elevator
A facility or area for the temporary storage of grain for transferal to trucks, train cars, or other forms of transportation.
(2) Trucking Terminal
An area or building where cargo is stored and where trucks, including tractors and trailer units, load and unload cargo on a regular basis. The use may include facilities for the temporary storage of loads prior to shipment. The use shall also include truck stops or fueling stations where diesel fuel is primarily sold.
CHAPTER 11-012: Definitions
Section 11-012-02: Definitions of Use Categories and Use Types
Subsection 4: Accessory Uses
March 2013
Boise Development Code
Page 354
(3) Truck Stop
A facility for the fueling of automobiles and heavy trucks. Accessory uses may include a restaurant, retail sales, maintenance facilities, and sleeping and personal hygiene facilities.
(4) Warehouse
A building or portion thereof used for the storage of merchandise, stock, vehicles, furnishings, supplies, and other trade or business material.
F. Waste and Salvage
Waste and salvage firms receive solid or liquid wastes from others for disposal on the site or for transfer to another location, uses that collect sanitary wastes, or uses that manufacture or produce goods or energy from the composting of organic material or processing of scrap or waste material. Waste and Salvage uses also include uses that receive hazardous wastes from others. Accessory uses may include recycling of materials, offices, and repackaging and shipment of by-products. Specific use types include, but are not limited to:
(1) Composting Facility
A facility where organic matter that is derived primarily from off-site is processed by composting and/or is processed for commercial purposes. Activities of a composting facility may include management, collection, transportation, staging, composting, curing, storage, marketing, or use of compost.
(2) Junkyard
An outdoor space where junk, waste, or discarded or salvaged materials are stored or handled, including automobile wrecking yards, and yards for used or salvaged building and structural steel materials and equipment. Does not include yards or establishments for the sale, purchase or storage of used cars or machinery in operable conditions, and the processing of used, discarded or salvaged materials as a part of a permitted manufacturing operation on the same premises.
(3) Recycle Drop-Off Center
A facility in which recoverable resources such as newspapers, glassware, plastics, and metal cans are recycled, reprocessed, and treated to return such products to a condition in which they can again be used for production.
(4) Sanitary Landfill, Incineration
A planned and approved method or system of waste disposal in which the waste is disposed or buried in layers, compacted by earth or other approved methods, also known as sanitary landfill, or a facility where solid waste is burned prior to disposal.
(5) Vehicle Wrecking Yard
Any use of premises, excluding fully enclosed buildings, on which two or more motor vehicles not in operating condition are standing more than 30 days, or on which used motor vehicles, or parts thereof, are dismantled or stored.
4. ACCESSORY USES
A. Accessory Use
A use incidental or subordinate to the principal use of the premises that does not alter the essential characteristic of the use considered as a whole and as related to other uses permitted in the same district.
CHAPTER 11-012: Definitions
Section 11-012-02: Definitions of Use Categories and Use Types
Subsection 5: Pets generally are animals that may be kept indoors, though pets may also be kept outdoors. Pets are dogs,
cats, up to six chickens (excluding roosters), four ducks, six rabbits, or other small animals or poultry as determined by the
Director.
March 2013
Boise Development Code
Page 355
B. Backyard Composting
The activity of decomposing organic matter generated on any area of land or lot by a homeowner, tenant, occupant, or property owner. Backyard composting shall process materials generated primarily on site. Backyard composting shall be operated in a nuisance free manner. No commercial purpose may be association with backyard composting.
C. Home Occupation
Any gainful occupation engaged in by an occupant of a dwelling unit, such as hair salons, graphic arts, desktop publication, offices and instruction of small classes.
D. Livestock
Livestock are classes of animals that are kept and housed outside the home or in enclosures such as pens, barns, corrals or paddock areas. Livestock includes, but is not limited to horses, cattle (beef and dairy), llamas, mules, swine, sheep, goats, rabbits, poultry, and domestic birds. Livestock includes any other grazing or foraging animal except those specifically included as a pet.
E. Outdoor Storage
The storage of equipment, materials, supplies, etc. in an outdoor area as an accessory to a primary use.
F. Pet
5. Pets generally are animals that may be kept indoors, though pets may also be kept outdoors. Pets are dogs, cats, up to six chickens (excluding roosters), four ducks, six rabbits, or other small animals or poultry as determined by the Director. The keeping of pets must comply with the performance standards in 11-06-07.4.D(7)(f).
6. TEMPORARY USES
A temporary use is any activity on a site approved by the Director for a limited time of operation. Such uses include seasonal or holiday sales of products or placement of temporary structures on a lot incidental to construction occurring on the lot, outdoor display of garden and related supplies, and/or any other uses that the Director may deem as able to function without permanent permits for a short time as allowed by this code.
A. Construction Office, Temporary
A moveable or modular structure or trailer used for the storage of construction materials and/or the offices or work spaces for construction managers or workers during the time a principal or accessory building is being constructed.
B. Sales Trailer
A moveable or modular structure or trailer temporarily used for sale of real estate within the same development.
C. Seasonal Uses
Uses such as fireworks stands, Christmas tree lots, and fruit and vegetable stands.
D. Subdivision Office, Temporary
A moveable or modular structure or trailer used for the storage of construction materials and/or the offices or work spaces for construction managers or workers during the time a subdivision is being constructed.
CHAPTER 11-012: Definitions
Section 11-012-03: Measurement-Related definitions
Subsection 6: Temporary Uses
March 2013
Boise Development Code
Page 356
E. Temporary Parking
A temporary parking lot for non-required parking where new building construction is planned.
F. Temporary Display and Sale of Merchandise
Outdoor display and sale of merchandise, such as a sidewalk sale, arts and crafts show, or tent sale for new, used, or seasonal merchandise. 11-012-03. MEASUREMENT-RELATED DEFINITIONS
Buildable Area (Foothills Planned Development)
The space within the setback lines that remains on a lot after compliance with the minimum open space requirements of this Code. Lands with a slope of 25 percent or less are buildable, if outside of floodways or geologic hazards. Buildable areas must be designated in the conditional use site plan as either development pockets or permanent open space in the ratio chosen under the density bonus formula. Buildable area is determined by natural topography, not by post-construction graded contours.
Buildable Area (General)
The area of the lot excluding the required yards.
Building Height
The vertical distance from the grade to the highest point of the coping of a flat roof or to the deck line of a mansard roof or the average height of the highest gable of a pitch or hip roof.
Clear Vision Triangle
A. At a street intersection or street and railroad intersection, a clear vision triangle shall be formed horizontally by measuring 40 feet along the roadway edges or roadway and railroad track edges from the intersection of the roadway edges or roadway edge and railroad track and connecting those points, and vertically by measuring between three feet and ten feet above grade.
B. Where a driveway enters the street right-of-way, a clear vision triangle shall be formed horizontally, by measuring ten feet into the lot as measured from the sidewalk edge that is closest to the property line (or from the property line if no sidewalk exists), and 20 feet along the sidewalk edge (or property line if no sidewalk exists) parallel to the street, and vertically by measuring between three feet and ten feet above grade.
Figure 11-12.1: Clear vision triangle at a street intersection
CHAPTER 11-012: Definitions
Section 11-012-03: Measurement-Related definitions
Subsection 6: Temporary Uses
March 2013
Boise Development Code
Page 357
Density, Residential
Number of dwelling units per acre of land set aside for residential use.
Effective Lot Area
The gross horizontal area of a lot minus any portion of the lot encumbered by a recorded driveway or road easement.
Floor Area, Gross
The sum of the square footage of all floors, including lofts and basements, inside the exterior walls of a building or portion of a building.
Floor Area, Net Leasable
The entire square foot area of floor space of a building that is enclosed and subject to heating or air conditioning, less any of the following:
A. Any space used and occupied by central mechanical or electrical equipment, elevators, escalators, conveyors, dumbwaiters, lifts, chutes, trash disposal units, and fuel storage spaces; and
B. Public rights-of-way and other similar enclosed spaces open to the public, such as public washrooms, corridors, stairwells, or elevator lobbies.
Floor Area Ratio (FAR)
The gross floor area divided by the lot area.
Grade
The elevation of the finished surface of the ground adjacent to the exterior wall of a building or structure. If a berm has been created adjacent to the structure, or if the structure is built on top of a berm, grade will be considered the lowest point of the berm.
Grade, Established
The curb line grade at the lot lines established by the City Engineer or otherwise established by law.
Lot Area
The square footage within the boundary of a lot or parcel. Lot area shall be determined exclusive of land that is used for public or private streets, highways, alleys, roads, and rights-of-way. The flagpole or stem portion of a flag lot shall not be considered as part of the lot area.
Lot Coverage
The area of a lot occupied by the principal building(s) and any accessory building(s).
Lot Depth
The distance between front and rear lot lines measured in the mean direction of the side lot lines.
Figure 11-12.2: Clear vision triangle at a street and driveway/alley intersection
CHAPTER 11-012: Definitions
Section 11-012-03: Measurement-Related definitions
Subsection 6: Temporary Uses
March 2013
Boise Development Code
Page 358
Lot Width (Average)
The distance between the side lot lines, measured in one of the following manners, whichever is applicable as determined by the Director:
A. In the case of a regular-shaped lot, the width shall be measured along the front lot line;
B. In the case of an irregular-shaped lot, the width shall be the average distance between the side lot lines, with the average distance to be measured at ten-foot intervals for the first 100 feet of the lot depth beginning at the front lot line;
C. In the case of a regular-shaped flag lot, the width shall be measured at a distance of 20 feet from the inside end of the flag pole; or
D. In the case of an irregular-shaped flag lot, the width shall be the average distance between the side lot lines, with the average distance to be measured at ten-foot intervals for the first 100 feet of the lot depth beginning at the front lot line.
In no instance shall the dimension of a lot at its front setback line be less than the minimum average lot width required for the zoning district in question.
Non-buildable Area
Lands with a slope greater than 25 percent are non-buildable areas and do not qualify as a development pocket, nor are they eligible to be calculated as open space for establishing a density bonus, unless classified as priority open space.
Percent Slope
The vertical rise divided by the horizontal distance within which the vertical rise takes place.
Story
A. That portion of a building included between the upper surface of any floor and the upper surface of the next floor above, except that the topmost story shall be that portion of a building included between the upper surface of the topmost floor and the ceiling or roof above.
B. If the finished floor level directly above a basement or cellar is more than six feet above grade, such basement or cellar shall be considered a story.
Yard, Front
An area that extends across the full width of the lot adjacent to the front street line. Building design shall match respective yard types. For corner lots, either street may be designated as the front. Once chosen, the front yard designation and associated rear and side yards may not be changed.
Yard, Interior Side
A side yard that does not abut a street.
Yard, Rear
An area that extends across the full width of the lot between the rear line of the lot and the nearest line of the principal building.
Yard, Side
An area between the wall of the principal and accessory buildings, and side lot line, and between the front and rear lot line.
Yard, Street Side
On a corner lot, a side yard that abuts a street.
6500 C.F.S Setback Line
The line that demarcates the edge of visible moving surface water as determined by the City Engineer in accordance with the following procedures from which the setbacks required in this code are measured:
A. Shall be based upon a flow of 6500 c.f.s. in the river adjacent to the parcel being reviewed.
Figure 11
Figure 11--12.312.3: : Lot width Lot width
CHAPTER 11-012: Definitions
Section 11-012-04: Historic Preservation Definitions
Subsection 6: Temporary Uses
March 2013
Boise Development Code
Page 359
B. Shall only apply to natural channels, including side channels of the Boise River and to man-made channels if the man-made channel capacity is required in order to pass the 6500 c.f.s flow under normal flooding conditions.
C. Shall be the actual location of the water's edge except in areas of extended shallow backwater with no current. For purpose of definition, “shallow” shall mean one foot or less in depth.
The intent of this definition is to also specifically exclude seeps or other surface waters that are present, but not fed directly from river flows. 11-012-04. HISTORIC PRESERVATION DEFINITIONS
For the purposes of this Code, the following terms, phrases, and words shall have the meanings given herein. Additional definitions may be found in the Design Guidelines for Residential Historic Districts available in the Boise City Planning and Development Services Department. In the event of a conflict the definitions in this section shall take precedence.
Acquisition
The act or process of acquiring fee title or interest other than fee title of real property (including acquisition of development rights or remainder interest).
Addition
Any construction that increases the size of a building or structure in terms of site coverage, height, length, width or gross floor area.
Alterations
Any act or process that changes 1 or more exterior features of a building or site. Construction, replacement or erection of new buildings, structures, objects or improvements.
Building (For Purposes of Designation)
A resource created principally to shelter any form of human activity.
Certificate of Appropriateness
The document issued by the Historic Preservation Commission for any and all alterations (not including ordinary repairs per Section 11-05-09.10) within a designated historic district.
Change in Use
A certificate of appropriateness shall be issued by the Historic Preservation Commission prior to the approval of any change of zoning classification within the historic district. A change of zoning classification refers to any application, for property located within a historic district, for a zone change or any application for an addition, modification or deletion to an overlay district.
Character Defining Façade
Any elevation that contains features that helps to define a structure’s significance.
Commission
Historic Preservation Commission.
Comprehensive Historic Preservation Planning
The organization into a logical sequence of preservation information pertaining to identification, evaluation, registration and treatment of historic properties, and setting priorities for accomplishing preservation activities.
Contributing
A contributing building, site, structure or object adds to the historic architectural qualities, historic associations, or archeological values for which a property is significant because (a) it was present during the period of significance, and possesses historic integrity reflecting its character at that time or is capable of yielding important information about the period, or (b) it individually meets the National Register eligibility criteria. For inventory purposes, “primary” shall be used synonymously with “contributing”. This classification has been designated through a survey and a formal hearing process.
CHAPTER 11-012: Definitions
Section 11-012-04: Historic Preservation Definitions
Subsection 6: Temporary Uses
March 2013
Boise Development Code
Page 360
Demolition
Any act or process that permanently, substantially destroys or razes any building, site, structure or object in whole or in part.
Demolition by Neglect
Any act or omission that destroys or contributes to the destruction of a building.
Exterior Features
The architecture, color, size, location, type, style, kind, texture, design, general arrangement and material of a building, site, structure or object including, but not limited to, windows, doors, light fixtures, signs, appurtenant fixtures, streets, streetscapes, sidewalks and landscaping.
Historic District (Referred to as “HD” Overlay)
Any area designated as such by ordinance which includes or encompasses such historic buildings, sites, structures or objects as the Commission may determine to be appropriate for historic preservation. Such designated district or districts need not be a single enclosed area nor do the areas or sites have to be contiguous to constitute a district. A district may include contributing, non-contributing or undeveloped properties.
Historic District – Residential (Referred to as “H” Overlay)
An historic district that is predominantly of a residential nature. Non-residential structures may be included within, and be a component part of a Historic District - Residential.
Historic Easement
Any easement, restriction, covenant or condition running with the land designed and designated to preserve, maintain and enhance all or part of the existing state of places of historical, architectural, archeological, educational or cultural significance.
Historic Landmark
A district, site, building, structure or object that possesses exceptional significance in history, architecture, engineering, archeology or culture at the national, state, or local level and has been designated as a historic landmark through the public hearing process.
Historic Preservation
The research, protection, restoration and rehabilitation of buildings, sites, structures, objects or districts significant in the history, architecture, archeology or culture of the state, its communities or the nation.
Historic Property
A district, site, building, structure or object that is eligible for or listed on the National Register of Historic Places.
Improvement
A valuable addition made to property (usually real estate) or an amelioration in its condition, amounting to more than mere repairs or replacement, costing labor or capital, and intended to enhance its value, beauty or utility or to adapt it for new or further purposes. Generally, buildings, but may also include any permanent structure or other development, such as a street, sidewalks, sewers, utilities etc.
Integrity
The ability of a property to convey its significance; includes the concepts of location, design, setting, materials, workmanship, feeling and association.
Inventory
A list of historic properties determined to meet specified criteria of significance.
National Register
The National Register of Historic Places. A list established by the National Historic Preservation Act of 1966 (as amended) and codified in 36CFR60 (as amended) of buildings, sites, structures, objects and districts having local, state or national historical, architectural or cultural significance and considered worthy of preservation.
CHAPTER 11-012: Definitions
Section 11-012-04: Historic Preservation Definitions
Subsection 6: Temporary Uses
March 2013
Boise Development Code
Page 361
National Register Criteria
The established criteria for evaluating the eligibility of properties for inclusion in the National Register of Historic Places. For further information on the criteria refer to the National Park Service website, National Register of Historic Places (http://www.cr.nps.gov/nr).
New Construction
Construction of an entire structure.
Noncontributing
A noncontributing building, site, structure or object may possess characteristics that make it important to the overall historic character of the district such as, but not limited to, mass, scale, streetscape features, setbacks or proximity to contributing structures. A building, site, structure or object within a district may be noncontributing because (a) it was not present during the period of significance, (b) due to alterations, disturbances, additions, or other changes, it no longer possesses historic integrity reflecting its character at that time or is incapable of yielding important information about the period, or (c) it does not individually meet the National Register eligibility criteria. A noncontributing building, site, structure or object that is within an historic district remains subject to the Historic Preservation Ordinance. For inventory purposes, “secondary” shall be used synonymously with “noncontributing”. This classification has been designated through a survey and a formal hearing process.
Object (For Purposes of Designation)
A construction primarily artistic in nature or relatively small in scale and simply constructed, such as a statue or milepost.
Period of Significance
The length of time when a property was associated with important events, activities, or persons, or attained the characteristics which qualify it for National Register listing. Period of significance usually begins with the date when significant activities or events began giving the property its historic significance; this is often a date of construction. The period of significance for each historic district is described in each district's Statement of Significance which is available for review at the Boise City Planning and Development Services Department.
Person
An individual, firm, corporation, association, municipal corporation, or any other governmental or quasi-governmental agency, or group or combination thereof acting as a unit, except that nothing in this section shall be construed to allow the designation, regulation, conditioning, restriction or acquisition of historic buildings, structures, sites or areas, or other properties or facilities owned by the state or any of its political subdivisions, agencies or instrumentalities.
Person in Charge
The person or persons possessed of the freehold, or a mortgagee or vendee in possession, assignee of rents, receiver, executor, trustee, lessee, agent or any person directly or indirectly in control of a historic property.
Planning Director
The Planning Director of the Boise City Planning Division of the Planning and Development Services Department charged with the administration of the city’s planning and zoning documents, including those pertaining to historic preservation. The Director serves as the Secretary to the Planning and Zoning Commission and is directly responsible to the Director of the Planning and Development Services Department. This definition includes the Planning Director’s designated representative, also referred to in this ordinance as Planning Staff. This definition also includes references to the Planning Administrator, Planning Official and other similar titles.
Preservation
The act or process of applying measures necessary to sustain the existing form, integrity and materials of an historic property. Work, including preliminary measures to protect and stabilize the property, generally focuses upon the ongoing maintenance and repair of historic materials and features rather than extensive replacement and new construction. New exterior additions are not within the scope of this treatment; however, the limited and sensitive upgrading of mechanical, electrical and plumbing systems and other code-required work to make properties functional is appropriate within a preservation project.
CHAPTER 11-012: Definitions
Section 11-012-04: Historic Preservation Definitions
Subsection 6: Temporary Uses
March 2013
Boise Development Code
Page 362
Primary Façade
The elevation that most characterizes a structure’s significance; usually the front elevation.
Property
Land and that which is erected or affixed to the land. Real property extends to rights issuing out of, annexed to and exercisable within or about land. Property includes historic property as defined herein.
Reconstruction
The act or process of depicting, by means of new construction, the form, features and detailing of a non-surviving building, site, structure or object for the purpose of replicating its appearance at a specific period of time and in its historic location.
Rehabilitation
The act or process of making possible a compatible use for a property through repair, alterations and additions while preserving those portions or features which convey its historical, cultural or architectural values.
Restoration
The act or process of accurately depicting the form, features, and character of a property as it appeared at a particular period of time by means of the removal of features from other periods in its history and reconstruction of missing features from the restoration period. The limited and sensitive upgrading of mechanical, electrical, and plumbing systems and other code-required work to make properties functional is appropriate within a restoration project.
Secretary of the Interior’s Standards for Rehabilitation
Standards that were written pursuant to Federal Law to insure that work on historic buildings is done in such a manner which preserves the historical integrity of the building. For further information refer to the Secretary of the Interior’s Standards for the Treatment of Historic Properties with Guidelines for Preserving, Rehabilitating, Restoring & Reconstructing Historic Buildings and the Boise City Residential Design Guidelines both available in the Boise City Planning and Development Services Department.
Site (For Purposes of Designation)
Location of a significant event, a prehistoric or historic occupation or activity, or a building or structure, whether standing, ruined or vanished, where the location itself possesses historic, cultural or archeological value regardless of the value of any existing structures.
Site Improvements
A modification to the grounds of a property not including the buildings or other significant structures such as garages. Such improvements may include, but are not limited to: fences, walls, greenhouses, storage sheds, light fixtures, hot tubs, swimming pools, fountains, barbeques, out-door fireplaces, playground equipment, steps or pavement.
Structure (For Purposes of Designation)
A functional construction made for purposes other than creating shelter, such as, but not limited to, a bridge, canal or dam.
Structure (For All Other Purposes)
Anything constructed or erected which requires permanent location on the ground or is attached to something having location on the ground. Structures may include, but are not limited to buildings, platforms, framework, antennas and prefabricated metal sheds.
Survey Form
A form that catalogues the age, style, contributing or noncontributing classification, address, location, photograph, date of inventory, name of surveyor, building permit history and other relevant information as may be required by the Planning Director or Historic Preservation Commission for a building, site, structure or object.
CHAPTER 11-012: Definitions
Section 11-012-05: Other Terms Defined
Subsection 6: Temporary Uses
March 2013
Boise Development Code
Page 363
Temporary Features
Items that are erected or displayed for a limited amount of time, not to exceed 180 days at any one time unless otherwise approved by the Planning Director, which may include, but are not limited to: sidewalk café tables, chairs, fences, planters, umbrellas and bicycle racks.
Temporary Structures
A structure with or without a foundation that is erected for a limited amount of time, not to exceed 180 days at any one time unless otherwise approved by the Planning Director, which may include, but is not limited to: playhouses and play equipment, mobile buildings and carport/canopy structures. 11-012-05. OTHER TERMS DEFINED
Abate
Means to repair, replace, remove, destroy or otherwise remedy a condition by such means and in such manner and to such an extent as the Director shall determine is necessary in the interest of the general health, safety, and welfare of the community.
Access
The place, means, or way by which pedestrians or vehicles shall have safe, adequate, and usable ingress and egress to a property, use, or parking space.
Access Aisle
An accessible pedestrian space between elements, such as parking spaces, seating, and desks that provides appropriate clearances for use of the elements by physically disabled people.
Access, Emergency
An additional route of access to a development for emergency vehicles. Use of emergency accesses is restricted to emergency vehicles by means of bollards, gates, or some other device to prohibit general use by the public. Emergency access must meet the requirements of the Uniform Fire Code as adopted by the Fire Department.
Access, Secondary
A second means of vehicular access to a development that may be either improved to the district’s standards or private street standards.
Accessible
Describes a site, building, facility, or a portion of a site, building, or facility, that can be approached, entered, and used by physically disabled people.
Accessible Route
A continuous, unobstructed path connecting all accessible elements and spaces in a building or facility. Exterior accessible routes may include parking access aisles, curb ramps, walks, ramps, and lifts.
Accessway
An unobstructed way of specified width containing a drive or roadway that provides vehicular access within a mobile home park and connects to a public street.
ACHD
Ada County Highway District.
Ada County Street Name Committee
An advisory group on street naming established by Ada County.
Adaptive Reuse
The modification of an existing building (most typically a single family dwelling) for use as either an office or a multi-family dwelling unit or a historic institutional use, while maintaining the architectural integrity of the original structure; or the conversion of any such structure back to its original use as a single family dwelling.
CHAPTER 11-012: Definitions
Section 11-012-05: Other Terms Defined
Subsection 6: Temporary Uses
March 2013
Boise Development Code
Page 364
Adult Arcade
A premise where, for any form of consideration, one or more motion picture or slide projectors or similar machines for viewing by five or fewer persons each, are used to display any images emphasizing the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or graphically exposed specified anatomical areas. This shall also apply to any arcade that is not customarily open to the general public because minors are excluded by virtue of their age as a prevailing business practice or as required by law.
Adult Bookstores
A premise that is not customarily open to the general public because minors are excluded by virtue of their age as a prevailing business practice as required by law and has, at any one time, 60 percent or more of its stock-in-trade and offers for sale, trade, or rent of one or more of the following:
A. Books, magazines, periodicals, or other printed matter, or photographs, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or other visual representations that are characterized by an emphasis upon the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or exposed specified anatomical areas;
B. Instruments, devices, or paraphernalia that are designed for use in connection with specified sexual activities; or
C. Goods that are replicas of or that simulate specified anatomical areas or goods that are designed to be placed on specified anatomical areas to cause sexual excitement thereof.
Adult Cabaret
A nightclub, bar, restaurant, or similar premise that features live performances that are characterized by the exposure of specified anatomical areas or by specified sexual activities, or that features films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or other photographic reproductions that are characterized by specified sexual activities or Specified anatomical Areas.
Adult Motion Picture Theater
A premise where, for any form of consideration, has, at any one time, 60 percent or more of its stock, rented or owned, that shows films, motion pictures, video cassettes, digital images, slides or similar reproductions, and in which at least 50 percent of the total presentation time is devoted to the showing of material that is characterized by the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
Affected Person
As used in Section 11-03-03.11, Mediation, “Affected Person” means the applicant or any member of the public who provided written or oral testimony in opposition to an application submitted to the city.
Affordable Housing
Housing for which the occupant(s) is/are paying no more than 30 percent of his or her income for gross housing costs, including utilities and where total annual household income does not exceed eighty percent (80%) of area median income. Affordable housing may provide both ownership and rental opportunity. An affordable rental property generally receives a subsidy or has received a subsidy to allow units to be rented at or below Fair Market Rent for income qualifying households or receives a rental voucher allowing a household to pay no more than 30% of its monthly income towards housing.
Agricultural Parcel
A parcel of land at least five acres in size that is in agricultural use and that may include the owner’s residence, if the required street frontage is provided.
Alley
A minor public way that provides access at the back or side of a property or a secondary means of access to abutting property and that is not intended as a traffic thoroughfare.
Alterations, Structural
Any change, other than incidental repairs, that would prolong the life of the supporting members of a building or structure, such as bearing walls, columns, beams, and girders.
CHAPTER 11-012: Definitions
Section 11-012-05: Other Terms Defined
Subsection 6: Temporary Uses
March 2013
Boise Development Code
Page 365
Animal, Large
Animals including horses, mules, donkeys, llamas, sheep, and goats. Other animals that are not listed but are of a similar size, as determined by the Director, are subject to all regulations in this Code for large animals.
Animals, Small
Animals such as rabbits, poultry, geese, domestic birds, and game birds, excluding such birds as are caged and housed inside the dwelling, and other animals deemed as such by the Director and not raised for commercial purposes. Commercial purposes or uses do not include FFA, 4-H, or other student projects.
Animal Unit
A unit of measure for determining livestock densities. Each mature horse, mule, or llama shall represent one animal unit. Any of the following groups of animals represent one animal unit: four mature sheep, swine, or goats; 12 mature chickens or ducks; six mature geese or turkeys or game birds; or ten mature rabbits. The animal unit equivalency for miniature versions of pigs and other animals shall be determined by the Director.
Annexation
The process by which the city's corporate boundary is expanded to incorporate additional property pursuant to Idaho Code 2.C50-222.
Antenna
A transmitting or receiving device used in telecommunications that radiates or captures radio signals. Antennas include the following types:
A. Omni directional (or “whip”) antenna: Receives and transmits signals in a 360-degree pattern, and that is up to 15 feet in height and up to four inches in diameter.
B. Directional (or “panel”) antenna: Receives and transmits signals in a directional pattern typically encompassing an arc of 120 degrees.
C. Parabolic (or “dish”) Antenna: A bowl-shaped device that receives and transmits signals in a specific directional pattern.
D. Ancillary antenna: An antenna that is less than 12 inches in its largest dimension and that is not directly used to provide personal wireless communications services. An example would be a global positioning satellite (GPS) antenna.
E. Other: All other transmitting or receiving equipment not specifically described in paragraphs A through D, above, inclusive, shall be regulated as for the type that it most closely resembles.
Apartment
A room or suite of rooms in a multiple-family structure that is arranged, designed, or used as a single housekeeping unit including complete kitchen and permanently installed sanitary facilities.
Apiary
A place where bee colonies are kept.
Appeal
A request for a review of any decision or interpretation of any provision of this code.
Appellant
A party of record or other person who is entitled by law to appeal and who initiates an appeal.
Applicant
An individual, corporation, firm, or group who submits and represents the subdivision application and undertakes the subdividing of a lot, tract, or parcel of land. If the applicant is not the property owner, the property owner’s permission to submit the application must be submitted with the application.
Approved Topography
The natural topography of a parcel or the topographic conditions of a parcel approved by the city prior to the effective date of this Code, or as approved by a subdivision, conditional use permit, hillside and foothill development permit, grading permit, or building permit.
CHAPTER 11-012: Definitions
Section 11-012-05: Other Terms Defined
Subsection 6: Temporary Uses
March 2013
Boise Development Code
Page 366
Architect
An individual holding a valid architect's license from the State of Idaho that renders or offers services in connection with the design, construction, enlargement, or alteration of a building or a group of buildings. The services covered within this definition include architectural planning, advice and consultation; providing preliminary studies; architectural design, drawings, and specifications; technical submissions; and administration of construction contracts.
Area of Impact
An area mutually agreed upon, including plans and codes, between the city and county as provided for by Idaho Code §67-6526 and §50-1306.
Area of Shallow Flooding (ASF)
An area shown on the Flood Insurance Rate Map as an AO zone with base flood depths from one to three feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate, and where velocity flow may be evident. These areas are also referred to as the alluvial fans, and are characterized as sheet flow.
Area of Special Flood Hazard (ASFH)
Lands within Boise City that are subject to flooding from the base flood (or “100-year flood”). These areas are also referred to as the floodplain. Designation on maps always include the letters A or V.
Area with a Slope Greater Than Twenty-five Percent
An area with a natural (pre-grading) slope greater than 25 percent, mapped to a minimum resolution of 6,000 square feet in area, also called a Non-buildable Area.
Area with a Slope of Twenty-five Percent or Less
An area with a natural (pre-grading) slope of 25 percent or less, mapped to a minimum resolution of 6,000 square feet in area, also called a Buildable Area.
Argument Memoranda
Written arguments based on the established hearing record that are submitted after an appeal has been filed.
Attached
Anything physically connected to a building or structure so as to become an integral part of the building or structure. The term includes components of a structure joined together by a common wall, floor, or ceiling or a fully enclosed hallway.
Awning
A projecting cover extending over a door, window, or wall section with supports attached to the building and used as cover, protection, or as decoration.
Balcony
A platform enclosed by a parapet or a railing that projects from an exterior wall of a building and open to the sky. Balconies don not include stairs for exterior exiting.
Basement
The story or level of a building that is partially or totally below ground level.
Base Flood
A flood that has a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year, and is synonymous with "one percent flood" and "100-year flood." Designation on maps always include the letters A or V.
Base Zone District
The zone district classification that is in effect on any given land for which standards are included in this Code.
Bee
Any stage of the life cycle of the common domestic honey bee.
Berm
A raised landform designed to provide visual interest, screen undesirable views, and/or decrease noise.
CHAPTER 11-012: Definitions
Section 11-012-05: Other Terms Defined
Subsection 6: Temporary Uses
March 2013
Boise Development Code
Page 367
Block
A space along one side of a street that is the lesser of that between the two nearest intersecting streets, or that between an intersecting street and a right-of-way, waterway, or other similar barrier, but excluding alleys.
Boise City Foothills Planning Area
The area defined in the Foothills Policy Plan and the Boise City Comprehensive Plan within the Boise City Area of Impact Boundary.
Boise City Comprehensive Plan
The most current comprehensive plan officially adopted for Boise City and as subsequently amended.
Boise River Plan
That portion of the Boise City Comprehensive Plan titled Boise River Plan that includes both text and river maps.
Boise River System Overlay Districts
See Section 11-05-06.1, Boise River System Overlay Districts.
Buildable Parcel
A recorded lot, parcel, or tract that is eligible for a building permit, based on compliance with this Code, and that is not encumbered by an easement, plat note, or other restriction that prohibits building on the lot, parcel, or tract.
Buildable Site (Boise River System Overlay)
A residential, commercial, industrial or office construction site that does not require dikes or rip-rap for protection against flooding.
Building
Any structure with substantial walls and roof securely affixed to the land and entirely separated on all sides from any other structure by space or by walls in which there are no communicating doors, windows, or openings, and that is designed or intended for the shelter, enclosure, or protection of persons, animals, chattel, or property of any kind.
Building, Accessory
A building that is subordinate and incidental to the principal building or use on the same lot, but not including any building containing a dwelling unit.
Building, Completely Enclosed
A building enclosed by a permanent roof and by exterior walls pierced only by windows and normal entrance or exit doors.
Building, Detached
A building located on its own lot and physically separated from other buildings by required yards or open space.
Building Envelope
The designated area on a lot within which a building or other structure (including footings) must be contained.
Building, Existing
Any building erected prior to the effective date of this Code or one for which a legal building permit has been issued.
Building, Nonconforming
Any building that does not conform to the requirements of this Code.
Building, Principal
A building in which the principal use of the lot is conducted.
Building, Unfinished
A structure where construction has commenced but has been discontinued for a period of six months or has not been finished in accordance with the approved building permit and cannot be certified for occupancy or final building inspection.
CHAPTER 11-012: Definitions
Section 11-012-05: Other Terms Defined
Subsection 6: Temporary Uses
March 2013
Boise Development Code
Page 368
Bulk
The size and mutual relationships of buildings and other structures as to size, height, coverage, shape, and location of exterior walls in relation to lot lines, to the center lines of the streets, to other walls of the same building, to other buildings or structures, and to all open spaces relating to the building or structure.
Business
The purchase, sale, exchange, or other transaction involving the handling or disposition of any article, substance, or commodity for profit or livelihood; the ownership or management of office buildings, offices, recreation, or amusement enterprises; or the maintenance and use for offices; or professions and trades rendering services.
Caliper
A measurement in inches of the diameter of the trunk of a deciduous tree. The caliper of the trunk shall be measured six inches above the ground for all trees up to and including four inch caliper size, and twelve inches above the ground for larger sizes.
Canopy
A permanent roof-like shelter extending from part or all of a building face and constructed of some durable material such as metal, glass, fabric, or plastic.
Carport
A structure open on at least two sides used to house or protect motor vehicles that are owned or operated by the occupants of the principal building.
Cellar
A storage room(s) located under the main floor or floors of a building and partly or totally below ground level.
Channel
The bed and banks of a river, stream, tributary, waterways, etc.
Class A, B, and C Lands and Waters
As used in Section 11-05-06.1, Boise River System Overlay District, lands and waters that provide habitats for fish, birds, and other wildlife.
Class 1, II, and III Trees
The classes of trees are defined for the purposes of this ordinance by the Tree Selection Guide, published by the Community Forestry Unit of the Boise Parks & Recreation Department (latest edition). Generally, Class I trees reach a mature height of no more than 30 feet, Class II trees mature to a height of no more than 60 feet, and Class III trees mature to 60 feet or greater in height.
Co-location
The use of a single support structure or site by more than one wireless communications provider.
Colony
As used in Section 11-06-07.4.B, Bee Keeping, bees in any hive including queens, workers and drones.
Commercial
Any activity conducted with the intent of realizing a profit from the sale of goods or services.
Common Area/Space
Land within a subdivision or development that is not individually owned or dedicated for public use that is designed and intended for the common use or enjoyment of the residents of the development. It may include complementary structures and improvements i.e., recreation area, parking, landscaping, or others.
Common Driveway
A shared access that serves for ingress and egress that serves multiple residential parcels or lots, each having public or private street frontage.
CHAPTER 11-012: Definitions
Section 11-012-05: Other Terms Defined
Subsection 6: Temporary Uses
March 2013
Boise Development Code
Page 369
Compensation
As used in Section 11-05-06.1, Boise River System Overlay Districts, restoration of degraded, appropriate enhancement of existing, or creation of new natural resource functions and values.
Compensation, In-kind
As used in Section 11-05-06.1, Boise River System Overlay Districts, restoration of degraded, appropriate enhancement of existing, or creation of new natural resource functions and values that are the same as those natural resource functions and values that are impacted by a proposed action.
Compensation, Out-of-kind
As used in Section 11-05-06.1, Boise River System Overlay Districts, restoration of degraded, appropriate enhancement of existing, or creation of new natural resource functions and values that differ from those impacted by a proposed action.
Compost
A humus-like material, produced from composting, that has been stabilized to a degree that is potentially beneficial to plant growth and that is usable as a soil conditioner, top soil, growing medium amendment, or other similar uses to buffer the soil Ph, improve soil aggregation and tilth, reduce erosion, enhance water infiltration and retention, increase soil porosity and aeration, slow the rate of temperature change in soil, provide food for soil microorganisms, or enhance availability of micronutrients in soils.
Concentrated Feeding Area
That part of a site in which animals are raised or kept in a confined area at some location within the parcel or reserve area. A concentrated feeding area may include any feeding or holding operation where animals are concentrated in an area that is:
A. Not normally used for pasture or growing crops and in which animal waste may accumulate, or
B. Any trough or similar feeding apparatus.
Conditional Use
A use that, because of special requirements or characteristics, may be allowed in a particular zoning district only after review by the Planning and Zoning Commission and granting of conditional use approval imposing such conditions as necessary to make the use compatible with other uses permitted in the same zone or vicinity. Conditional uses are issued for uses of land and, unless otherwise conditioned, are transferable from one owner of the land to another.
Conditional Use Concept Plan
An approval of a generalized development plan that does not include the details of proposed development. A detailed conditional use approval must be obtained for each phase of a concept conditional use plan.
Condominium
Real estate, portions of which are designated for separate ownership and the remainder of which is designated for common ownership solely by the owners of those portions. Real estate is not a condominium unless the undivided interests in the common elements are vested in the unit owners.
Cubic Feet Second (CFS)
Measurement of the rate of flow of water in the river or tributary.
Cul-de-sac
A dead-end street with turnaround space at its terminus.
Cut
To grade into a hillside in order to create a flat area or to steepen a bank. The mechanical removal of earth material.
Cut and Fill
The excavating of earth material in one place and depositing of it as fill in a different place.
CHAPTER 11-012: Definitions
Section 11-012-05: Other Terms Defined
Subsection 6: Temporary Uses
March 2013
Boise Development Code
Page 370
Cut-off Date
A deadline for submittal of applications to be heard by the Planning and Zoning Commission or Design Review Committee at a public hearing.
Damaged or Dilapidated Building
A structure that has suffered significant damage or deterioration either from age, lack of care, or abandonment, or natural or manmade calamity to the degree that the exterior of the building walls, roof, doors, and windows are burnt out, falling down, significantly patched or boarded, or are structurally unsound.
Dead-end Street
A street connecting to another street at one end only and not having provision of vehicular turnaround at its terminus.
Decision-making Body
An officer or elected or appointed body with the authority to approve, modify, or deny a development application pursuant to this Code.
Dedication
The setting apart of land or interests in land for use by the public. Land becomes dedicated when accepted by the applicable governmental body as a public dedication, either by Code or entry in the official minutes of that body.
Deep-rooted Plants
Shrubs and grasses that have an extensive root system and are useful for soil stabilization.
Development Pockets
The buildable areas, designated on the site plan and plat map, where the structures and appurtenances will be clustered. These areas will be largely less than 25 percent slope but may contain fragments of steeper areas as needed to accommodate the site design.
Development, Existing
Any development for which approval was given prior to the effective date of this Code such as concept plans entitling the applicant to proceed with preliminary or final platting, or a conditional use or building permit, and for which such approval has not expired. An extension of an existing approval after the effective date of this Code does not make a development an existing development.
Development, New
Any development for which an application has been filed on or after the effective date of this Code or approval of which has been extended on or after the effective date of this Code.
Director
The Director of the Planning and Development Services Department. This definition includes the Director's designated representative, e.g., the Planning Director, Zoning Administrator, Planning Official, Review Analyst, and other similar titles.
Director, Planning
The Director of the Planning Division of the Planning and Development Services Department.
Display, Outdoor
Placement of items out-of-doors (i.e., not within a building) for show and sale to the general public. Examples of this use include garden supplies placed in commercial parking lots by home and garden or other stores during spring and summer time. This use is distinct from “outdoor storage” or junk as elsewhere defined and may be approved on a temporary basis.
District, Zone
A section or part of the incorporated portion of Boise City, as set forth in Chapter 11-04, for which the use regulations are uniform.
District, Overlay
A zone district that adds a requirement(s) to the standards of the underlying zone district(s).
CHAPTER 11-012: Definitions
Section 11-012-05: Other Terms Defined
Subsection 6: Temporary Uses
March 2013
Boise Development Code
Page 371
Driveway
A private access connecting a building such as a house or garage, with a street.
Dwelling
A building or portion a building containing one or more dwelling units. The term "dwelling" does not include any recreational vehicle, motel, hotel, guest house, or boarding house as defined in this Code.
Dwelling Unit
One or more rooms designed for or used as a residence for not more than one family, constituting a separate and independent housekeeping unit, with a single kitchen permanently installed. A dwelling unit may be occupied by a family by up to five unrelated individuals, or by persons with a disability or elderly persons living in a group home as defined in this ordinance. The term does not imply or include types of occupancy such as lodging or boarding house, club, sorority, fraternity, or hotel.
Easement
A grant by the landowner of the right to use the owner’s land for specific purposes.
Enhancement
As used in Section 11-05-06.1, Boise River System Overlay Districts, improvement of natural resource functions and values beyond the minimum required for mitigation.
Erosion
The process by which the soil and rock components of the earth's crust are worn away and removed from one place to another by natural forces such as wind and water.
Essential Grading
The minimum amount of grading required to complete the project proposed and still provide safe access and development of building sites consistent with the concept of the development.
Family
A group of individuals related by blood, marriage, civil union, adoption, or guardianship functioning as a single and independent housekeeping unit or persons occupying a group home as defined in this ordinance.
Facade Modulation
Stepping back or extending forward a portion of a building facade.
Feedlot
A lot or parcel on which livestock are fed intensively in order to fatten them for market. Does not include short-term holding pens for auction facilities or meat packing establishments.
Fill
A deposit of earth material placed by mechanical means.
Floodplain
The lands within Boise City that are subject to flooding from the base flood (100-year flood).
Floodplain District
Collectively, the Floodway, Floodway Fringe, and Area of Shallow Flooding Districts.
Floodplain Regulations
The portion of this Code regulating developments that fall within the 100-year floodplain of the Boise River or the tributaries as described on the Flood Boundary and Floodway maps as provided by the Federal Emergency Management Agency and adopted by the city.
Floodplain Schematic
See Appendix 1/Diagram a, Stream Corridor Schematic.
Fraternal Hall
The social use of a building or of any premises by a nonprofit association, where such use is restricted to enrolled members and their guests.
CHAPTER 11-012: Definitions
Section 11-012-05: Other Terms Defined
Subsection 6: Temporary Uses
March 2013
Boise Development Code
Page 372
Girdling
Damaging or removing the bark and cambium layer around a tree trunk in a manner that usually kills the tree.
Grading
Any excavation, filling, or movement of earth for purposes of changing the shape or topography of the land.
Grading, Limits to
The maximum extent of grading allowed on an individual lot or parcel. Includes but is not limited to height and depth of cut or fill or both, side slope, amount of excavated material, engineering requirements, area of disturbance, and location (when the lot is restricted by a building envelope).
Greenbelt, Boise River
Land within 70 feet of the 6500 c.f.s flow line of the Boise River that may be owned by the city or over which the city may have a right of possession or use and that
A. Is designated by the Council to be retained in perpetuity for public use for purposes compatible with the aesthetic, wildlife, educational, and recreational values of the Boise River;
B. Will provide unrestricted access to the river; and
C. Will be developed and used to minimize water pollution, provide continuity of the public parks system, and create a buffer where necessary between conflicting land uses.
Gulches, Foothills
Regulated gulches located in the foothills surrounding Boise City that are subject to flash flooding, where the Federal Emergency Management Agency or the Public Works Department have determined floodway and floodway fringe zones. Foothill gulches include, but are not limited to:
A. Seaman's Gulch,
B. Stuart Gulch,
C. Pierce Park Gulch,
D. Polecat Gulch,
E. Crane Creek,
F. Hulls Gulch,
G. Cottonwood Gulch, and
H. Warms Springs Gulch.
Gulch floodplains and associated alluvial fans (AO zones) are regulated under the floodplain regulations of this Code when specific flood studies or determinations have been approved by Boise City.
Head-to-Head Spacing
Placement of sprinkler heads such that one sprinkler head sprays to the next (spacing is 50 percent of the sprinkler’s spray diameter.)
Hearing Examiner
A city official that may be appointed pursuant to the authority granted in the Local Planning Act, specifically Idaho Code Section 67-6520, to conduct public hearings on matters before the Planning and Zoning Commission and to report to the Planning and Zoning Commission with proposed findings of fact and conclusions of law, a proposed order, and such other information as the Planning and Zoning Commission may require.
Hearing, Legislative
A public hearing that does not involve a specific application, but rather is global in nature, including but not limited to hearings on amendments to, or enactments of, any code or enactment, revisions or amendments to the Boise City Comprehensive Plan, or applications to establish a new zoning or overlay district. In legislative hearings, the record is not limited to the record developed by the review body. Any and all new evidence may be received by Council during a legislative hearing regardless of whether the evidence was introduced below. However, recommendations from the review bodies will be strongly considered. Therefore, interested persons are encouraged to make their arguments before the reviewing body.
CHAPTER 11-012: Definitions
Section 11-012-05: Other Terms Defined
Subsection 6: Temporary Uses
March 2013
Boise Development Code
Page 373
Hearings, Quasi-judicial
A public hearing in which the review body or Council hears or makes decisions on the development of a specific property, such as conditional use and variance applications. On such applications the review body acts as the final decision maker and the Council sits as an appeals body. Quasi-judicial hearings do not include amendments to or enactments of any code, or enactments or revisions or amendments to the Boise City Comprehensive Plan.
Helipad/Heliport
A level area or pad, either at ground level or on a roof-top, where helicopters land and take off.
Heritage Sites
Sites within the Foothills Planning Area with historic, geologic, or cultural value, including threatened or endangered species habitat, as listed in the publication Potential Public Preservation Sites, by the Boise City Heritage Preservation Committee, 1993, and other sites designated as historic by city, state, or federal agencies.
Hillside and Foothill Areas
Areas with topographical slopes of 15 percent or greater, or where adverse slope stability, erosion, or sedimentation are likely to cause damage.
Historic Institutional Use
As used in Section 11-05-02, Conservation Overlay Districts, any school (public or private), church or other place of religious worship, commercial service use, or office use within a conservation district that is significant to the history, architecture, or culture of the district.
Hive
A structure intended for the housing of a bee colony.
Horticulture
The activity of growing fruits, vegetables, flowers, or ornamental plants.
House, Apartment
Any building or portion of a building that is designed, built, rented, leased, let, or hired out to be occupied, or that is occupied as the home or residence of three or more families living independently of each other and doing their own cooking in the building, including flats and apartments.
Impervious Surface
A surface that has been compacted or covered with a layer of material so that it is highly resistant to infiltration or absorption by water. Surfaces may include, but are not limited to, compacted sand or clay as well as most conventionally surfaced streets, roofs, sidewalks and parking lots.
Infill Site
Any lot or parcel within developed areas of the city, where at least 80 percent of the land within a 300-foot radius of the site has been developed, and where water, sewer, streets, schools, and fire protection have already been developed and are provided. Annexed areas located on the periphery of the city limits shall not be considered as infill sites. An infill site may be vacant or occupied. Where “infill” status is used as a criterion for an entitlement or permit, redevelopment or improved utilization of occupied land shall be permitted provided that other applicable standards, policies, and objectives are met or supported.
Interstate
One of a system of highways connecting the major cities of the 48 contiguous United States. No direct access to a property is provided.
Kitchen
Any room or portion of a room within a building that is designed and intended to be used primarily for cooking or preparation of food.
Landscaping
Any combination of living plants such as trees, shrubs, plants, vegetative ground cover or turf grasses, and may include structural features such as walkways, fences, benches, works of art, reflective pools, fountains or the like.
CHAPTER 11-012: Definitions
Section 11-012-05: Other Terms Defined
Subsection 6: Temporary Uses
March 2013
Boise Development Code
Page 374
Landscaping shall also include irrigation systems, mulches, topsoil use, soil preparation, revegetation or the
preservation, protection and replacement of existing trees.
Loading Space, Off-street
An open, off-street, hard-surfaced area of land other than a street or public way, the principal use of which is for
the standing, loading, and unloading of motor vehicles, tractors, and trailers as the purpose is to avoid undue
interference with public streets and alleys.
Lot
A tract or land that has been platted as a portion of a recorded subdivision and is intended as a unit for transfer
of ownership or for development.
Lot, Corner
A lot that is bounded on two or more sides by streets; where the angle of intersection of the streets does not exceed
135 degrees.
Lot, Double Fronted
A lot other than a corner lot having frontage on 2 parallel or nearly parallel streets.
Lot, Flag or Key
A lot or parcel of land that includes a narrow projection or "flagpole" to the public right-of-way. The “flagpole”
serves as a private or privately shared access to the buildable area of the lot or parcel and is not considered when
calculating the lot area.
Lot, Frontage
That portion of a lot that abuts a public right-of-way or other access.
Lot, Interior
A lot other than a corner lot or reversed corner lot.
Lot Line
The boundary property line encompassing a lot.
Lot, Non-conforming
A lot of record that does not meet the dimensional requirements of this Code.
Lot, Reversed Corner
A corner lot, the rear of which abuts upon the side of another lot, whether across an alley or not.
Figure 11-12.4: Lot types
CHAPTER 11-012: Definitions
Section 11-012-05: Other Terms Defined
Subsection 6: Temporary Uses
March 2013
Boise Development Code
Page 375
Lot Line, Front
The front lot line for a regular-shaped lot is the property boundary that abuts a public or private street; the front
lot line for an undeveloped corner lot is either one of the property boundaries that abuts a public or private street,
as selected by the property owner; the front lot line for a flag lot may be either:
A. The closest line, parallel or most nearly parallel to the public or private street at the end of the
flagpole, or
B. A line perpendicular or nearly perpendicular to the public or private street at the end of the
flagpole, depending upon which orientation provides for the closest matching of like yards of adjoining
properties.
Lot Line, Rear
The boundary line of a lot that is opposite and most distant from the front lot line. For the purpose of establishing
the rear lot line, the following shall apply:
A. In the case of a lot with a rear boundary formed by a single line that is parallel or nearly parallel
to the front lot line, such rear boundary is the rear lot line.
B. In the case of a lot with a rear boundary formed by two or more lines, the rear lot line shall be a
line at least ten feet in length within the lot that is furthest removed from and most parallel to the front lot
line.
Lot Line, Side
Any property line that is not a front or rear lot line.
Lot of Record
A lot that has been recorded in the records of Ada County.
Lot of Record, Original
Any single recorded platted lot or parcel of land that was of record and a buildable lot or parcel before August
16, 1966, and that has not had subsequent boundary changes.
Lot of Record, Original Substandard
Any single recorded platted lot held in one ownership that was of record and a legal buildable lot or parcel
before August 16, 1966, or at annexation, whichever occurred first, and that has not had subsequent boundary
changes but that does not meet a minimum width of 50 feet and minimum area of 5,000 square feet for interior
lots or minimum width of 70 feet and minimum area of 7,000 square feet for corner lots.
Figure 11-12.5: Reversed corner lot
CHAPTER 11-012: Definitions
Section 11-012-05: Other Terms Defined
Subsection 6: Temporary Uses
March 2013
Boise Development Code
Page 376
Main Channel
As used in Section 11-05-06.1, a portion of the Boise River that is not defined as a side channel. This includes lands and waters below the high water mark and the 6500 c.f.s. setback line, connection with the main channel of the Boise River and all islands claimed by the State of Idaho.
Maps, Zoning
The map or maps designating zoning districts.
Matched Precipitation Rates
Sprinklers that are designed to work together on the same irrigation valve to deliver an equivalent rate of water, regardless of the arc of the nozzle.
Mediator
As used in Section 11-03-03.11, Mediation, “mediator” means an attorney, land use consultant, or other professional person with experience in land use issues and mediation, retained by the City of Boise to conduct the mediation process.
Micro-pathway
A pathway providing access by way of a short travel link between points of destination. The length of a micro-pathway is generally less than 250 feet, or two lot depths. A micro-pathway may function alone or in conjunction with a pathway system such as the Boise River Greenbelt.
Minor Land Division
A Record of Survey for the division of a lot, tract or parcel of land into 2 to 4 parcels for the purpose of sale or building development that contains all elements required by this Code.
Mitigation
As used in Section 11-05-06.1, Boise River System Overlay Districts, measures to avoid impacts, minimize impacts, restore impacted areas, and compensate for impacts to a natural resource attributable to a proposed action.
Mitigation, Appropriate
Mitigation that avoids impacts to, minimizes impacts to, restores, or replaces the functions and values of a natural resource, and is consistent with the scope and degree of those impacts attributable to a proposed action.
Mitigation, Practical
Mitigation that is available and capable of being done after taking into consideration cost, existing technology, and logistics in light of overall project purposes.
Mitigation Sequence
As used in Section 11-05-06.1, Boise River System Overlay Districts, a prescribed procedure for planning mitigation that requires negative impacts to a natural resource attributable to a proposed action to be mitigated.
Mobile Home, Rehabilitated
Any mobile home constructed prior to June 15, 1976 (the effective date of the National Manufactured Housing and Safety Standards Act of 1974), that are currently sited within Idaho or that may be brought into the state after July 1, 1998, that have been upgraded to comply with Chapter 25, Title 44, Idaho Code and received a “Certificate of Compliance” from the Division of Building Safety of the State of Idaho.
Modular Lotting
Narrow parcels of land, with a minimum width of 18 feet that can be built upon singly as an attached (row house) product, or combined to 36 feet or more for a single family detached product. Modular lotting has historically encouraged a mix of housing size and product types ranging from large single family homes to small attached townhomes.
Motor Vehicle Junked/Abandoned
Any automobile, truck, or other vehicle that is inoperable or in some obvious state of disrepair or abandonment. The following factors, among others, shall be considered individually in determining whether or not a vehicle is inoperable, junked, or abandoned:
CHAPTER 11-012: Definitions
Section 11-012-05: Other Terms Defined
Subsection 6: Temporary Uses
March 2013
Boise Development Code
Page 377
A. The vehicle is currently inoperable. This shall include, but is not limited to the vehicle not having body parts to be in working condition; such as missing engine, transmission, tires, windshield, mirror, taillight, head light, or battery;
B. The vehicle has been parked for at least 30 days on property not owned or rented by the vehicle owner;
C. The vehicle has not been licensed or registered for at least 30 days; and
D. The vehicle has been parked for 30 days on property where the premises have been vacated.
Mulch
A protective covering placed around plants to prevent the evaporation of moisture, the freezing of roots, and the growth of weeds.
Natural Resources
As used in Section 11-05-06.1, Boise River System Overlay Districts, all of the plants, animals, and environmental and ecological processes that occur in aquatic, wetland, riparian, and upland environments associated with the Boise River.
Natural Resource Functions and Values
As used in Section 11-05-06.1, Boise River System Overlay Districts, environmental, ecological, recreational, historic, and cultural benefits attributable to natural resources that occur in aquatic, wetland, and riparian, and upland environments associated with the Boise River. They are further described in the Federal Highway Administration publication titled A Method for Wetland Functional Assessment and the US Army Corps of Engineers publication titled Wetland Evaluation Technique (WET) II.
Nonconforming Use
Any use, parcel or structure that was legally established but that is not in compliance with this Code due to a subsequent ordinance amendment, annexation, change of zoning, eminent domain or similar action as of [the effective date of this Code]
Non-residential Structure
A building other than a residential structure. The term includes but is not limited to buildings used for places of assembly, education, child care, business, maintenance, storage, manufacturing, government, hospitals, sanitariums, nursing homes, hotels, and motels.
No Net Loss
As used in Section 11-05-06.111-05-06.1, Boise River System Overlay District, a measure of the success of mitigation that requires avoidance, minimization, restoration, and compensation of all functions, and values of a natural resource impacted by a proposed action.
Notice of Buildable Parcel
A recorded notice executed by the parcel owners and the Director evidencing compliance with the provisions of Section 11-09-01.2 creating public notice in the real property records of Ada County of the establishment of a buildable parcel with boundaries different from any underlying plat or other division of land.
Nucleus Colony
A smaller colony used for educational purposes, queen maintenance and rearing, or for use in the capture and future integration of a swarm into a viable colony. A nucleus colony is comprised of significantly fewer bees than a conventional colony and is contained in a structure that is approximately one-half the size of a normal hive.
Nuisance, Attractive
Any property condition, instrument, property structure, or machine that is unsafe, unprotected, and that presents a health or safety hazard to the general public, whether in a building, on the premises of a building, or on an unoccupied lot. This includes, but is not limited to, abandoned wells, shafts, basements, or excavations; abandoned refrigerators and motor vehicles; structurally unsound fences or structures; or any lumber, trash, fences, debris, or vegetation that may prove hazardous or dangerous to inquisitive minors.
CHAPTER 11-012: Definitions
Section 11-012-05: Other Terms Defined
Subsection 6: Temporary Uses
March 2013
Boise Development Code
Page 378
Nuisance, Public
The following shall be defined as a public nuisance. The owner or person in control shall maintain all property, premises, or rights-of-way in a nuisance-free manner.
A. Abandoned, dismantled, wrecked, inoperable, unlicensed, and discarded objects, equipment, or appliances such as, but not limited to vehicles, boats, water heaters, refrigerators, furniture not designed for outdoor use, household fixtures, machinery, equipment, cans, or containers standing or stored on property, sidewalks, alleys, and streets that can be viewed from a public street, walkway, alley, or other public property and are readily accessible from such places, or are stored on private property in violation of any other law or Code;
B. Discarded putrescibles, garbage, rubbish, refuse, or recyclable items that have not been recycled within 15 days of being deposited on the property;
C. Oil, grease, paint, other petroleum products, hazardous materials, volatile chemicals, pesticides, herbicides, fungicides, or waste (solid, liquid, or gaseous) that could constitute a fire or environmental hazard, or to be detrimental to human life, health, or safety;
D. Lumber (excluding lumber for the construction project on the property with a valid building permit), salvage materials, including but not limited to auto parts, scrap metals, tires, other materials stored on premises in excess of 30 days and visible from a public street, walkway, alley, or other public property;
E. Receptacles for trash, discarded materials, and recyclables that are left in the front yard or on public rights-of-way on any day except the day of the regularly scheduled refuse pick-up for the property;
F. Swimming pool, pond, spa, other body of water, or excavation that is abandoned, unattended, unsanitary, empty, that is not securely fenced, or that poses a threat to be detrimental to human life, health, or safety; and
G. Weeds, grasses or other vegetation which (1) cover 50 percent or more of any lot or yard; (2) average 12 inches or more in height; and, (3) could become a fire hazard.
H. Trees, shrubs or other vegetation blocking public rights-of-way or clear vision triangles lower than a height of 8 feet above the rights-of-way or clear vision triangle.
One and One-Half Story Structure
A structure that does not exceed 18-feet in height to the midline of the roof. The structure also provides the second story within a basement that is sunk into the ground a minimum of 4-feet or is located within a pitched roofline located within a front gable, the exterior second floor wall height shall not exceed 2-feet 6-inches in height and contains a maximum of one dormer on each side of the structure that does not exceed 8-feet in width.
Example of second story within a basement
CHAPTER 11-012: Definitions
Section 11-012-05: Other Terms Defined
Subsection 6: Temporary Uses
March 2013
Boise Development Code
Page 379
Example of a second story within a pitched roofline
Occupancy Permit
The approval to occupy a building that is granted after zoning and building requirements and conditions of approval, if any, have been met or bonded for.
One-hundred Year Flood
The flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year, and is synonymous with "Base Flood."
Open Space
An open area for a visual amenity, passive recreation, or active recreation.
Open Space, Eligible
An area of one acre or greater in size with a slope of 25 percent or less and a minimum average width of 30 feet, that is set aside as preserved open space in return for an increase in density on other buildable areas of the site, according to the density bonus formula. Other open space areas that do not meet these criteria may also be counted as open space eligible for the density bonus if they meet the criteria established in 11-07-09.4.B for priority open space and are approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission.
Open Space, Preserved
Land dedicated on the plat and defined in the conditional use permit for the very limited uses of undeveloped natural open space, wildlife habitat, and recreational uses, and applied toward the granting of a density bonus based upon such open space preservation. Preserved open space may be either public or private, or any combination of the two, and shall be permanent.
Open Space, Priority
Unique lands that exhibit at least four of the 12 characteristics or factors listed in Section 11-07-09.4.D(3)(a). These lands may not meet the size, slope, or dimensional criteria for eligible open space, but may still be allowed to be set aside as preserved open space for purposes of the granting of a density bonus. The type, location, and amount of priority open space eligible for a density bonus is to be determined by the Planning and Zoning Commission based upon how many of the priority open space factors they exhibit, as well as upon a demonstration that the public value of the open space will be enhanced by such allowance.
Open Space, Private
An open area for passive or active recreation developed, designated, and protected for the benefit and private use of the employees or residents within a planned development or residential development.
Ordinary High Water Mark
The Ordinary High Water Mark (OHWM) is the line that the water impresses on the soil by covering it for sufficient periods to deprive the soil of its vegetation and destroy its value for agricultural purposes. The location of the OHWM is determined on-site by the Idaho Department of Lands for purposes of determining land ownership only.
CHAPTER 11-012: Definitions
Section 11-012-05: Other Terms Defined
Subsection 6: Temporary Uses
March 2013
Boise Development Code
Page 380
Organic Matter
Plant materials including: leaves, grass, brush, weeds, tree or shrub trimmings, garden debris, and vegetative kitchen garbage.
Original Tract
A lot, parcel, or tract in existence prior to or on October 30, 1965, without subsequent change of boundaries or size. Conveyance of an external portion of the original tract for public right-of-way to a governmental entity such as the Idaho Transportation Department or Ada County Highway District subsequent to October 30, 1965, does not constitute a change of boundaries or sizes for purposes of a determination of original tract status.
Owner
The fee owner of the real property subject to this regulation. The owner may assign, in writing, application submittal and subdivision development authority to an applicant who is not the owner. To the extent an owner is applying for subdivision of property in its own name, such owner shall be the “applicant” for purposes of this Code.
Parcel
A lot or tract of land. Parcels are generally described by a metes and bounds legal description or references to quadrangular survey measurements utilizing sections, townships and ranges, or government lots.
Parcel, Landlocked
A tract of land that does not abut a public or private street.
Park and Ride Facilities
Parking lots or structures located along public transit routes designed to encourage transfer from private automobile to mass transit or to encourage carpooling for purposes of commuting, or for access to recreation areas.
Partial Two-Story Structure
A structure that limits the second story floor plate to reduce the height, bulk and massing of the structure. This can be achieved by increasing the second story setbacks by a minimum of 3-feet beyond the minimum front, side and rear setbacks required by the zone. It may also contain the second story within a pitched roofline located within a front gable and the building height is a maximum of 18-feet to the midline of the roof that has an exterior second floor wall height no greater than 2-feet six-inches in height and a maximum of two dormers with a maximum width of 8-feet located on each side of the structure. It may also contain the second story within a pitched roofline within a side gable and the building height is a maximum of 25-feet to the peak of the roof and 18-feet to the midline of the roof with any dormers on the front or rear of the structure no greater than 10-feet in width.
Example of a second story contained within a pitched roofline with two side dormers
CHAPTER 11-012: Definitions
Section 11-012-05: Other Terms Defined
Subsection 6: Temporary Uses
March 2013
Boise Development Code
Page 381
Example of a second story contained within a pitched roofline with front and/or rear dormers
Example of setbacks increased by a minimum of three feet
Parking Court
A clustered parking area located off the main roadway and near the building that it serves and designed to preclude cut-through vehicular travel except for by emergency vehicles.
Parking, Covered
A carport that provides full overhead protection from the elements with ordinary roof coverings.
Parking Lot Replacement
A protective covering placed around plants to prevent the evaporation of moisture, the freezing of roots, and the growth of weeds
Parking, On-site
Any required parking space that is located on the same site as the principle use that the parking is intended to serve.
Parking Space
A usable space for the storage of one passenger automobile or commercial vehicle, exclusive of access drives, aisles, or ramps, within a public or private parking area or a building that meets the parking standards of this Code.
Parking Space, Tandem
A parking space designed to accommodate two vehicles parked in tandem (one behind the other) that meets all the parking space dimensional standards as outlined in Section 11-07-03.4.A, Dimensional Standards.
CHAPTER 11-012: Definitions
Section 11-012-05: Other Terms Defined
Subsection 6: Temporary Uses
March 2013
Boise Development Code
Page 382
Parkway
A landscaped area located between the edge of a street section or curb and a sidewalk dedicated to separate pedestrian and vehicular traffic.
Parties of Record
The applicant, property owner, Planning Director, and those who testified orally or in writing at the lower hearing.
Parties to the Appeal
The appellant(s), the applicant, and the property owner.
Paths, Bicycle and Pedestrian
Specifically refers to paved bicycle paths or unpaved pedestrian paths built within the Boise River System Management District. Paved bicycle paths shall meet the requirements of the Bicycle/Pedestrian Design Manual for Ada County (1978) and other appropriate and relative design manuals.
Pathway
Any sidewalk, route, lane, path, corridor, open space, or trail designated to move people by non-motorized means for transportation or recreation, including micro-pathways.
Participating Parties
As used in Section 11-03-03.11, Mediation, and “participating parties” means those individuals who have agreed or have been directed to participate in the mediation process, including the applicant and affected persons.
Person
A natural person, heirs, executors, administrators, or assigns - including a firm, partnership, or corporation - its or their successors or assigns, or the agent of any of the aforesaid.
Petitioner(s)
As used in Section 11-03-03.11, Mediation, “petitioner(s)” means the person or persons who submit the request for mediation to the City of Boise. This may be the Planning and Zoning Commission, Council, applicant, or other affected person.
Planned Unit Development (PUD)
A use or a combination of uses planned for a tract of land to be developed as a unit under single ownership or control and that may include two or more principal buildings.
Plat, Preliminary
A preliminary plan of a proposed subdivision or condominium that contains all elements required by this Code and provides sufficient information to allow for public review and evaluation.
Plat, Final
The plat map of a subdivision, cemetery, condominium, or a replatting of such, prepared by a State of Idaho licensed land surveyor for filing and recording by the County Recorder and containing those elements required by this Code, including certification, descriptions, and final approvals. A final plat, upon its being filed and recorded by the County Recorder, shall be known as an authorized plat.
Plot Plan
A "to scale" drawing of a lot or lots showing the actual measurements, the size and location of any existing building(s) to be erected, the location of the lot in relation to abutting streets, use and development of the land, and other such information. “Site plan” is a term that is often used interchangeably with plot plan.
Pressurized Irrigation Systems for Individual Lots
A pressurized water distribution system that distributes non-potable water to individual lots for irrigation purposes. Typical sources of water include non-treated Boise River water, canal water, irrigation return water or well water.
Principal Dwelling
The primary building designed and used for human habitation on a property.
CHAPTER 11-012: Definitions
Section 11-012-05: Other Terms Defined
Subsection 6: Temporary Uses
March 2013
Boise Development Code
Page 383
Principal Use
The main use of land or buildings, as distinguished from a subordinate or accessory use.
Project Engineer
Professional engineer registered in the State of Idaho retained by the developer to supervise a specific development or phase of a development.
Public Pathway
A public path used by walkers or bicyclists.
Quasi-public Use
A use that is essentially public, although it is under private ownership or control.
Quorum
A majority of the authorized members of a board or commission.
Recreational Vehicle (RV)
A portable vehicle or structure used primarily for recreation, hobbies, vacations, extended travel, camping, sports, and aquatic use. An RV may be self-propelled, towed, or transported by trailer. Includes, but is not limited to, motor homes, converted buses, camping, and travel trailers, light-duty trailers and transporters, horse and cattle trailers, boats, rafts and their trailers, and off-street vehicles such as snowmobiles, dune buggies, all-terrain vehicles, and any type of three or four-wheeled sport racing or drag vehicle.
Regulatory Taking
A regulatory or administrative action resulting in deprivation of private property that is subject of such action, whether such deprivation is total or partial, permanent, or temporary, in violation of the state or federal constitution.
Repair
The reconstruction or renewal of any part of an existing building for the purpose of its maintenance. The word "repair" or "repairs" shall not apply to any other change in a structure such as would be required by additions to or remodeling of such structure.
Residential Floor Area
Amount of all livable space including basements and bonus rooms.
Residential Structure
A building used as a dwelling for one or more persons. The term includes, but is not limited to houses, mobile homes, apartment buildings, lodging homes, and dormitories. The term also includes accessory use areas that are used in conjunction with and form an integral part of a residential structure.
Re-striping (Parking Lot)
Any change in the configuration, size or distribution of existing painted stripes designed to create spaces for motorized vehicles.
Revegetate
To replant an area with vegetation (e.g., trees, shrubs, or grasses).
Review Body
The Planning and Zoning Commission, the Historic Preservation Commission, the Hearing Examiner, or the Design Review Committee, when designated to review the application.
Riparian Area
Relating to or living or located on the bank of a natural water course as a stream or river; or the stream corridor consisting of riparian vegetation, stream carved topography, and features that define a continuous corridor on either side of a stream or pond; or all lands within and adjacent to areas of groundwater discharge, or standing and flowing surface waters where the vegetation community is significantly affected by the temporary, seasonal, or permanent presence of water. Examples include springs, seeps, creeks, streams, rivers, ponds, and lakes and their margins.
CHAPTER 11-012: Definitions
Section 11-012-05: Other Terms Defined
Subsection 6: Temporary Uses
March 2013
Boise Development Code
Page 384
Riparian Community
All plant and animal species within a given riparian area.
Riparian Habitat
A riparian area where a plant or animal lives; the sum total of environmental conditions in the area. It may also refer to the place occupied by an entire community of plants or animals.
Roof
The outside top covering of a building or structure.
Roof, Flat
A roof that is not pitched and the surface of which is parallel to the ground.
Roof, Gable
A ridged roof forming a gable at both ends of the building or structure.
Roof, Gambrel
A ridged roof with two or more slopes on each of two sides and forming a gable at both ends of the building or structure.
Roof, Hip
A roof with sloping ends and sides.
Roof, Mansard
A roof with two slopes on each of four sides, the lower slope being steeper than the upper slope.
Roof, Shed
A roof with one slope.
Service Drive
A privately owned and maintained drive that provides access to parking lots and spaces, loading spaces, drive-up windows, or other areas that need a provision of access. Types of service drives include: individual private driveways, common driveways, entry drives, drive-through lanes, and parking aisles.
Setback
The space on a lot or parcel that is required to be left open and unoccupied by buildings or structures, either by the requirements of this Code or by delineation on a recorded subdivision map.
Sewer Entity
The public agency having the jurisdictional responsibility for providing sanitary sewer service.
Sexually Oriented Business Employee
Any person who performs any service on the premises of a sexually oriented business, on a full time, part time, or contract basis, whether or not the person is denominated as an employee, independent contractor, agent, or otherwise. Employee does not include a person exclusively on the premises for repair or maintenance of the premises or for the delivery of goods to the premises.
Sexual Encounter Premises
A premises other than a hotel, motel, or similar premises offering public accommodations, that, for any form of consideration, provides a place where two or more persons may congregate, associate, or consort in connection with specified sexual activities or the exposure of specified anatomical areas. This definition does not include a premise where an Idaho licensed medical practitioner, psychologist, psychiatrist, or similar professional person engages in medical or sexual therapy.
Figure 11
Figure 11--12.12.66: : Roof types Roof types
CHAPTER 11-012: Definitions
Section 11-012-05: Other Terms Defined
Subsection 6: Temporary Uses
March 2013
Boise Development Code
Page 385
Shared Reserve Areas
Are those areas on a given lot on which the animals on neighboring lots are allowed, on a weekly or more frequent basis, to occupy for grazing or other activities.
Side Channel
A stream or watercourse, either natural or manmade, that generally flows from or into the Boise River. This includes waterways developed as amenities in residential or commercial developments.
Sign
Any display or device consisting of attached or painted letters, symbols, or designs, and including any moving parts, lighting, sound equipment, framework, background material, or structural support, that display or device is intended to communicate business identification, an advertisement, announcement, direction, or other message or attract, distract, hold, direct, or focus public attention. The term shall not include commodities and their attached labels and price tags.
Site Plan
See Plot Plan.
Slope Protection Area
A non-buildable area with a slope greater than 25 percent that does not qualify as buildable area for the density bonus within either a development pocket or preserved open space, and is designated as such on the conditional use site plan and the subdivision plat.
Special Exception
A special approval granted by the Council for a use that is not identified as an allowed or conditional use within the zoning district subject to conditions set forth in this Code.
Specified Anatomical Areas
Any of the following parts of the human body with less than full opaque coverings: the human genitals, anus, cleft of the buttocks, or the female breast.
Specified Sexual Activities
Shall mean and include any of the following whether actual or simulated:
A. The fondling or other erotic touching of any specified anatomical areas;
B. Masochism, erotic, or sexually oriented torture, beating, or the infliction of pain;
C. Sexual intercourse, masturbation, sodomy, oral copulation, coitus, ejaculation;
D. Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the activities set forth in (A) through (C) above;
E. Erotic or lewd touching, fondling, or other contact with an animal by a human;
F. The exposure of display of human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation, arousal, or tumescence; or
G. Erotic dancing or rhythmic movements with a device, instrument, object, or pole.
Under no circumstance shall the issuance of conditional use permit be considered an affirmative defense or consent by the City of Boise for any activity that is prohibited by federal or state law, or any other prohibition not a part of this section of the Boise City Code.
Stable, Private
A detached accessory building or structure for the keeping of one or more horses or cows that is owned and used by the occupant of the premises and not for remuneration, hire, or sale.
Stable, Riding
A building or structure used or designed for the boarding or care of riding horses.
Street
The public right-of-way or private property and related improvements that provides vehicular and pedestrian access to adjacent properties. The term "street" also includes the terms highway, thoroughfare, parkway, thruway, road, avenue, boulevard, lane, place, and other such terms.
CHAPTER 11-012: Definitions
Section 11-012-05: Other Terms Defined
Subsection 6: Temporary Uses
March 2013
Boise Development Code
Page 386
Street, Arterial
Any street as designated by the ACHD, whether existing or proposed, with a primary purpose of carrying through traffic and designed with limited access to abutting property. Direct lot access is restricted.
Street, Collector
Any street, as designated by the ACHD, existing or proposed, with a primary purpose and design to intercept traffic from the local street system and carry it to the nearest arterial street, while provided limited access to abutting property. Direct lot access is restricted.
Street, Frontage
A minor street, parallel to and adjacent to an arterial street, that has the primary purpose of providing access to abutting properties.
Street Frontage
Distance measured along the property line that fronts upon a street or alley. To constitute frontage, the subject street or alley must provide access to abutting properties.
Street, Gateway
Streets within Boise City as listed below:
A. Broadway Avenue, from I-84 to Warm Springs Avenue,
B. Capitol Boulevard,
C. Federal Way, from Capitol Boulevard to Bergeson Street,
D. Front Street,
E. Myrtle Street,
F. Parkcenter Boulevard,
G. State Street, from the State Capitol to State Highway 55,
H. Vista Avenue, from I-84 to Capitol Boulevard, and
I. Warm Springs Avenue.
Street, Local
Any public street, other than an arterial or collector, designed to provide access to abutting property and principally serves local traffic.
Street, Private
A street approved by the Council in conformance with the subdivision regulations of this Code that provides both access and street frontage for individual lots. Private streets are owned and maintained by private individual(s) or entities. Governmental entities do not own nor maintain private streets.
Street, Public
A right-of-way that provides vehicular and pedestrian access to adjacent properties, the dedication of which has been officially accepted by the ACHD. The term “street” includes also the terms highway, thoroughfare, parkway, road, avenue, boulevard, place, and other such terms.
Street Vista
The view, framed by buildings, at the termination of the axis of a thoroughfare.
Structure
Anything constructed or erected, except a fence, that requires location on the ground or is attached to something having location on the ground including, but not limited to, buildings, platforms, frame work, antennas, portable carport or cover, prefabricated metal, or plastic sheds and tents.
Subdivision
The division of a lot, tract, or parcel of land into two or more lots for the purpose of transfer of ownership or for the construction of improvements thereon, whether immediate or future, including dedication of streets.
Surveyor
A person authorized by the State of Idaho to practice the profession of land surveying.
CHAPTER 11-012: Definitions
Section 11-012-05: Other Terms Defined
Subsection 6: Temporary Uses
March 2013
Boise Development Code
Page 387
Theater, Adult
See Adult Motion Picture Theater.
Topping
“Rounding” or any other term that can be described as severe cutting back of limbs within a tree crown to buds, stubs or laterals not large enough to assume a terminal role or as defined in ANSI A300. Other common terms for topping include stubbing, heading, heading-back, stubbing off, tipping, lopping or roundover.
Townhouse
An attached single family dwelling unit located on a platted lot and for which the individual owner may acquire title to the unit and lot. An estate consisting of a fee simple interest in the structure and specific identified land. A townhouse may have an undivided common interest in the common areas including but not limited to sidewalks, open spaces, and recreational facilities and private drives.
Tract
A generic term for an area of land that does not denote a specific condition. Used when speaking of both platted lots and unplatted parcels.
Trailer, Travel
A vehicular portable structure designed as temporary living quarters for travel, recreational, and vacation uses.
Triangular Spacing
Placement of sprinkler heads in an equilateral triangular pattern. The distance between heads in each row must be head-to head spacing as per the definition in this section.
Tributary
A stream or watercourse, excluding manmade waterways exclusively used for irrigation, that flows into the Boise River that flows for all or a portion of the year.
Undisturbed Land
Land whose topography has not been changed by acts of man.
Upland Areas
Areas within the floodplain that are not defined by the Code as wetlands or riparian areas. See also Natural Resource Functions and Values.
Urban Farm
Land used to grow plants and harvest food or ornamental crops for educational purposes, donation, and use by those cultivating the land, or for sale locally. Gardens that are accessory to a home are not considered urban farms.
Utilities
Water, sewage, gas, telephone, cable television, pressure irrigation, electricity, and similar facilities normally providing individual customer service to a building site.
Utility, Public
Any person, company or municipal department that is duly authorized to furnish to the public under public regulations electricity, gas, steam, telephone, transportation, or water.
Use
The purpose for which land or a building thereon is designed, arranged, or intended or for which it is occupied, maintained, or leased.
Variances
A modification of the requirements of this Code as to lot size, lot coverage, lot width, street frontage, setback requirements, parking requirements, loading requirements, or other code provisions affecting the size or shape of a structure or the placement of the structure upon lots, or the size of lots.
CHAPTER 11-012: Definitions
Section 11-012-05: Other Terms Defined
Subsection 6: Temporary Uses
March 2013
Boise Development Code
Page 388
Vehicle, Commercial
A vehicle or trailer with a gross vehicle weight of over 8,000 pounds and designed for commercial use, construction equipment; any standard type vehicle with commercial or industrial attachments or modifications including but not limited to lifts, tanks, spray equipment, cranes, and extension platforms utilized for commercial use or constructive equipment.
Wetland
An area that is inundated or saturated by surface or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances supports a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include saturated swamps, marshes, bogs, and similar areas.
Wetland, Emergent
Characterized by erect, rooted, herbaceous hydrophytes, excluding mosses, and lichens. This vegetation is present for most of the growing season in most years. These wetlands are usually dominated by perennial plants. Other common names are “marsh” and “slough.”
Wetland, Forested
Wetland areas characterized by wood vegetation over 20 feet tall and possessing an overstory of trees, an understory of young trees or shrubs, and an herbaceous layer.
Wetland, Riparian Functions and Values
As used in Section 11-05-06.1, Boise River System Overlay Districts, includes water quality protection and improvement, habitat for fisheries and wildlife, nutrient retention and removal, channel stability, food chain support, flood storage, and desynchronization, groundwater recharge and discharge, active, and passive recreation, aesthetics, and cultural resources. See also, Natural Resource Functions and Values.
Wetland, Scrub-shrub
Wetland areas that are dominated by woody vegetation less than 20 feet tall. The species include true shrubs, young trees, and trees, and shrubs that are stunted because of environmental conditions. Includes types such as alder, willows, dogwood, and red maple.
Wet-line Sewer
An operating public sewer capable of serving a structure immediately upon connection.
Wireless Communications
Wireless communications shall mean any personal wireless services as defined in the Federal Telecommunications Act of 1996 that includes Federal Communications Commission licensed commercial wireless telecommunications services including cellular, personal communications services (PCS), specialized mobile radio (SMR), enhanced specialized mobile radio (ESMR), paging, and similar services that currently exist or that may in the future be developed.
Wireless Communication Facility (WCF)
An unstaffed facility for the transmission and reception of radio or microwave signals used for commercial communications. WCF’s are composed of two or more of the following components:
A. Antenna,
B. Support structure,
C. Equipment enclosure, and/or
D. Security barrier.
Wireless Communication Facility, Attached (Attached WCF)
An antenna array that is attached to an existing building or structure (attachment structure) with any accompanying pole or device (attachment device) that attaches the antenna array to the existing building or structure, transmission cables, and an equipment facility that may be located either inside or outside of the attachment structure. Such structures shall include, but are not limited to, utility poles, signs, and water towers.
CHAPTER 11-012: Definitions
Section 11-012-05: Other Terms Defined
Subsection 6: Temporary Uses
March 2013
Boise Development Code
Page 389
Yard
An open space on the same lot with a principal building or group of buildings, that is unoccupied and unobstructed from its lowest level upward, except as otherwise permitted in this Code, and that extends along a lot line and at right angles to the lot line to a depth or width specified in the yard regulations for the district in which the lot is located.
Yard Sale
The on-premise sale of new or used household or related goods from a residential lot; also known as a garage sale or rummage sale. The duration of yard sales shall not exceed 72 hours. A maximum of two such sales shall be permitted from any one residence within the same calendar year.
Zero Lot Line Development
Single family dwellings arranged on individual lots as either detached structures with one or more side walls on a side property line or attached sidewalls on a property line.
Zoning Certificate
A notation attached to a building permit, occupancy permit, or business license or that is issued separately by the city, certifying that the building, structure, use, or occupancy specified is in compliance with relevant zoning regulations and approvals.
CHAPTER 11-013: Adopted Specific Plans
Section 11-013-01: Harris Ranch
Subsection 1: Interpretation of District
March 2013
Boise Development Code
Page 390
CHAPTER 11-013: ADOPTED SPECIFIC PLAADOPTED SPECIFIC PLANSNS 11-013-01. HARRIS RANCH
1. INTERPRETATION OF DISTRICT
A. Specific Plan District Established
The area of Boise City commonly known as Harris Ranch is identified as the Harris Ranch Specific Plan District, as shown on the map hereinafter included by reference. The legal description of the Harris Ranch Specific Plan District is attached to Boise City Ordinance No. 6626, adopted December 11, 2007 (the “Effective Date”), and hereinafter included by reference.
B. Boundary of Specific Plan District Established
The location and boundaries of the Specific Plan District established for Harris Ranch is shown on the map entitled "Specific Plan District – Harris Ranch, Boise City, Idaho," which is hereby incorporated into and made a part of this Section by reference. The original copy of the Harris Ranch Specific Plan Map shall be filed with the City Clerk and the Planning & Development Services Department. The Harris Ranch Specific Plan Map, together with all notations, references and other information shown thereon, and all amendments thereto, are a part of this Chapter and shall have the same force and effect as if the Harris Ranch Specific Plan Map was fully set forth herein.
C. Interpretation of District Boundaries
Wherever uncertainty exists as to the boundary of any portion of Harris Ranch, the following rules shall apply:
(1) Where any such boundary line is indicated as following a street, alley or public way, it shall be construed as following the center line thereof. Where a boundary line is indicated as approximately following a lot line, such lot line shall be construed to be such boundary line.
(2) Where a boundary line divides a lot or crosses unsubdivided property, the location of such boundary shall be as indicated upon the Harris Ranch Specific Plan Map.
(3) Where a boundary line divides a lot or crosses unsubdivided property, the location of such boundary shall be as indicated upon the Harris Ranch Specific Plan Map.
2. PURPOSE
The purpose of this Chapter is to define general procedures for review of land use proposals within the Harris Ranch Specific Plan District. All proposed uses and development within the District will require review for compliance of the use or development with the Harris Ranch Specific Plan, to be known as a “Notice of Specific Plan Compliance.”
3. CONFORMITY REQUIRED
Except as otherwise provided herein, land, buildings, structures and uses in the Harris Ranch Specific Plan District shall hereafter be used and developed in accordance with the Harris Ranch Specific Plan 2007, Volumes I and II (the “Harris Ranch Specific Plan”), the regulations herein established for the Harris Ranch Specific Plan District known as the Harris Ranch Specific Plan Code (hereinafter sometimes referred to as the “Code”) and, as applicable, Title 11, Chapter 6, Section 05.07 Foothills Planned Development Ordinance, and Title 11, Chapter14 (Hillside and Foothill Areas Development Ordinance) in force and effect on the date of application for the Harris Ranch Specific Plan as may be amended by applicable
CHAPTER 11-013: Adopted Specific Plans
Section 11-013-01: Harris Ranch
Subsection 4: Administration
March 2013
Boise Development Code
Page 391
state and/or federal laws or regulations (collectively, the “Ancillary Ordinances”), which Ancillary Ordinances are reprinted in their entirety below. The Harris Ranch Specific Plan and the Ancillary Ordinances are hereby incorporated into and made a part of this Chapter by reference. The Ancillary Ordinances, as the same shall apply to Harris Ranch, shall not be amended, except as may be required by applicable state or federal laws or regulations, for a period of thirteen years from the Effective Date.
4. ADMINISTRATION
A. Harris Ranch Review Board
(1) The Harris Ranch Review Board (hereinafter sometimes referred to as the “Board”) is comprised of members and/or representatives of Harris Family Limited Partnership and private owners within the Harris Ranch Specific Plan District. Restrictive use covenants and design guidelines will be prepared by Harris Family Limited Partnership, its successors and/or assigns, to control, without limitation, architecture, landscape, walls, parking, signage and lighting. The restrictive use covenants and design guidelines meet at least the minimum standards for, without limitation, architecture, landscape, walls, parking, signage and lighting contained in the Code. The Board administers and enforces the restrictive use covenants and design guidelines.
(2) All proposed development within the Harris Ranch Specific Plan District shall be subject to review by the Harris Ranch Review Board prior to an applicant’s submission for City approval. The Board shall provide City with a synopsis of that review and a recommendation. A list of the information required by the Board prior to the Board’s review is contained in the Board’s restrictive use covenants and design guidelines, a copy of which can be obtained from the Board, or the Board’s designee.
B. Planning Director
The Planning Director, or designee, shall perform the duties and functions as provided in the Code. These duties and functions include the day-to-day and long-range administration of the Code, the acceptance and processing of all permit applications, and confirmation of compliance with the Harris Ranch Specific Plan and Code.
C. Design Review Committee
The Design Review Committee is authorized to review and hear appeals of decisions made by the Planning Director in connection with design review within the Harris Ranch Specific Plan District. The Design Review Committee shall review information provided by the Planning Director and other available sources.
D. Planning & Zoning Commission
The Planning & Zoning Commission is authorized to hear appeals of decisions made by the Planning Director or the Design Review Committee, as applicable, in connection with the Harris Ranch Specific Plan District. The Planning & Zoning Commission shall review information provided by the Planning Director and other available sources.
E. City Council
The City Council is authorized to hear appeals of decisions made by the Planning & Zoning Commission in connection with the Harris Ranch Specific Plan District. The City Council shall review information provided by the Planning Director and other available sources.
CHAPTER 11-013: Adopted Specific Plans
Section 11-013-01: Harris Ranch
Subsection 5: Administrative Review - Use
March 2013
Boise Development Code
Page 392
F. Annual Review
The Applicant is required to attend and document meetings with Planning Director on a yearly basis to analyze: 1) administration of plan; 2) trip generation and traffic service levels on surrounding roads; 3) the relative mix of land uses; and 4) infrastructure related improvements. Specific issues to be addressed are: the Boise School District elementary school site and agreement; development and installation of the Greenbelt and other public trails included in the Harris Ranch Specific Plan; and the implementation and performance of the Transit Management Plan. The meeting will require other commenting agency involvement as needed. If amendments to the Specific Plan are deemed necessary through this periodic review, then the Harris Ranch Applicant or the City of Boise may request revisions to the Specific Plan through an amendment process.
G. Phasing Plan Modifications
The phasing plan described in Section (A)(2)(d)(vi) of Volume I of the Harris Ranch Specific Plan (2010) (the “Phasing Plan”) is the current best estimate of the expected orderly progression of development and infrastructure improvements throughout the life of the project. Because infrastructure availability may impact public-service facilities, substantial consistency with the Phasing Plan is an element of the findings for ongoing permit approval. Future on-the-ground conditions and considerations may dictate modifications to the Phasing Plan. The Planning Director may make staff-level allowances to the Phasing Plan upon application by the Harris Ranch Applicant, contingent upon the following findings:
(1) That all affected public service providers have been notified of the proposed Phasing Plan modification and the proposed Phasing Plan modification will not adversely affect public service providers. Additional affected property owners may be noticed at the Planning Director’s discretion;
(2) That an alternative schedule has been presented to the Planning Director for when the infrastructure will be provided; and
(3) That the proposed modification complies with and supports the goals and objectives of the Harris Ranch Specific Plan.
5. ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW - USE
A. Uses Specified Within the Harris Ranch Specific Plan
(1) The City Council, having reviewed and approved the Harris Ranch Specific Plan, has delegated to the Planning Director the authority to administratively review every application for a Notice of Specific Plan Compliance or modification to a Notice of Specific Plan Compliance. Every application seeking confirmation of conformity with the Code and/or a permit affecting the use of land or of a structure and/or a request for a variance shall be deemed to be also an application for a Notice of Specific Plan Compliance. The Planning Director shall ensure that the proposed use complies with the Harris Ranch Specific Plan and the standards described in the Code. The determination of the Planning Director shall be a final decision. The findings to be made by the Planning Director are as follows:
(a) The land use is consistent with the land use matrix, prototypical block plans and special use standards.
(b) The land use, supporting infrastructure and other elements are consistent with the improvements and timelines identified within the phasing plan.
CHAPTER 11-013: Adopted Specific Plans
Section 11-013-01: Harris Ranch
Subsection 5: Administrative Review - Use
March 2013
Boise Development Code
Page 393
(c) The land use and related transportation improvements are consistent with the circulation plan and Ada County Highway District (ACHD) recommendations.
(d) The land use includes all public facilities required in the Community Services Plan.
(e) Harris Ranch has maintained an annual monitoring review as required by subsection 11-013-01.4.F.
(2) Upon such determination that the proposed use is in compliance with the Harris Ranch Specific Plan, the Planning Director shall issue a Notice of Specific Plan Compliance.
B. Uses Not Specified Within the Harris Ranch Specific Plan
(1) Uses not specified in the Harris Ranch Allowed Uses, pages 51 to 62 of the Harris Ranch Specific Plan, are prohibited unless determined by the Planning Director to be similar in nature to those specified as allowed uses herein. The Planning Director shall give due consideration and deference to the decision of the Harris Ranch Review Board, for the purpose of determining whether a use complies with the Harris Ranch Specific Plan. Upon such determination the Planning Director shall issue a Notice of Specific Plan Compliance. Approval may be made contingent upon such conditions as are reasonably necessary to secure the public welfare. The determination of the Planning Director shall be final unless an appeal is made as provided in the Code. The findings to be made by the Planning Director in determining compliance of such proposed uses with the Harris Ranch Specific Plan are as follows:
(a) That the location of the proposed use is compatible to other uses in the general neighborhood.
(b) That the proposed use will not place an undue burden on transportation and other public facilities in the vicinity.
(c) That the site is large enough to accommodate the proposed use and all yards, open spaces, pathways, walls and fences, parking, loading, landscaping and such other features as are required by the Harris Ranch Specific Plan and Harris Ranch Specific Plan Code.
(d) That the proposed use will not adversely affect other property in the vicinity.
(e) That the proposed use is in compliance with and supports the goals and objectives of the Harris Ranch Specific Plan.
(2) Whenever there is doubt as to the classification of a use not specifically referenced in the Harris Ranch Allowed Uses, the determination shall be made by the Planning Director. Such determination shall be based upon a recommendation by the Harris Ranch Review Board, a detailed description of the proposed use and such other information as may be required by the Planning Director. The Planning Director shall make such investigations as are necessary to compare the nature and characteristics of the proposed use with those of listed uses in the Harris Ranch Specific Plan District, and shall determine whether the use is, in all essentials, pertinent to the objectives of the Code and of the same character as a use listed as allowed in the Harris Ranch Specific Plan District. Upon such determination and the findings provided above, the Planning Director shall issue a Notice of Specific Plan Compliance. The determination of the Planning Director shall be final unless an appeal is made as provided in the Code.
CHAPTER 11-013: Adopted Specific Plans
Section 11-013-01: Harris Ranch
Subsection 5: Administrative Review - Use
March 2013
Boise Development Code
Page 394
C. Application
The Planning Director is authorized to review an application against all required approval standards and/or criteria for allowed uses and designs, and issue final approval or withhold final approval. Every person seeking a Notice of Specific Plan Compliance as herein defined shall submit an application to the Planning Director on a prescribed form, accompanied by the appropriate filing fee as approved by the City Council. Application forms shall be accompanied by supporting information as defined by the application form and as required by the Code and will include the recommendation of the Harris Ranch Review Board.
D. Fees
The Planning Director shall maintain a current list of fees for all applications. The fees for zoning applications may be revised only by the City Council. Current fee schedules may be obtained from the Planning Director.
E. Review Period
The Planning Director must approve or deny any application requested within 30 calendar days of receipt and acceptance of a complete application and shall submit the findings, conclusions and any required conditions in writing to the applicant. The Planning Director's decision shall be based upon the findings required within the applicable Sections of the Code. For good cause, such as, for example, receipt of review from other applicable governmental entities, the Planning Director may extend the time period for review to 45 days.
F. Term
Unless otherwise stated, the term of a Notice of Specific Plan Compliance shall not exceed 18 months, unless, upon request of the holder, the Planning Director grants successive extensions or
Figure 11-013.1: Harris Ranch Specific Plan code process
CHAPTER 11-013: Adopted Specific Plans
Section 11-013-01: Harris Ranch
Subsection 6: Administrative Review - Design
March 2013
Boise Development Code
Page 395
renewals for such term or period not to exceed one year for each such extension or renewal. The Planning Director may also fix the time or period within which the permit shall be exercised or perfected, otherwise said approval shall lapse. A maximum of 3 such extensions may be granted by the Planning Director. Within this period, the holder of the permit must:
(1) Acquire construction permits and commence placement of permanent footings and structures on or in the ground. The definition of structures in this context shall include sewer lines, water lines, streets, or building foundations; or
(2) Commence the use permitted by the administrative approval in accordance with the conditions of approval.
G. Revocation
Upon violation of the Notice of Specific Plan Compliance issued pursuant to Section 11-013-01.5.A of the Code, the Planning Director may cause the certificate to be revoked. Upon violation of any of the conditions or terms of the Notice of Specific Plan Compliance issued pursuant to Section 11-013-01.5.B of the Code, the Planning Director may cause the certificate to be revoked.
6. ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW - DESIGN
All structural and open space improvements except single family detached homes will be subject to design review approval. The Planning Director, while giving due consideration and deference to the decision of the Harris Ranch Review Board, shall make such investigations as are necessary to compare the nature and characteristics of the proposed design with the design guidelines of the Harris Ranch Specific Plan and Code, and shall determine whether the design is, in all essentials, pertinent to the objectives of the Plan and Code for the Harris Ranch Specific Plan District. Upon such determination the Planning Director shall issue a Notice of Specific Plan Design Review Compliance. The determination of the Planning Director shall be final unless an appeal is made as provided in the Code. The findings, as applicable, to be made by the Planning Director in this regard are as follows:
A. That the site plan minimizes impact of traffic on adjacent streets and that the pedestrian and bicyclist have been provided for by requiring sidewalks, paths, micro-pathways, landscape and safe parking lot design as appropriate.
B. That the proposed site's landscape screens are adequate to protect adjacent uses, provide sound and sight buffers and can be adequately maintained; slope and soil stabilization have been provided for; and, that unsightly areas are reasonably concealed or screened.
C. That on-site grading and drainage have been designed so as to minimize off-site impact and provide for erosion control.
D. That signage for any proposed project provides for business identification and minimizes clutter and confusion on and off the site, and is in compliance with Harris Ranch Specific Plan Code.
E. That utility service systems do not detract from building design and that size and location of all service systems are appropriate and maintainable.
F. The mass of the building(s) or structure(s) is consistent with existing development in the immediate surrounding area and with the allowed use proposed by the applicant.
CHAPTER 11-013: Adopted Specific Plans
Section 11-013-01: Harris Ranch
Subsection 6: Administrative Review - Design
March 2013
Boise Development Code
Page 396
G. The height to width relationship of new structures is compatible and consistent with the architectural character of the area and the proposed use.
H. Openings in the facade are consistent with the architectural character of the area (for example, balconies, bays and porches are encouraged with a minimum of monotonous flat planes), to provide shadow relief.
I. Exterior materials are appropriate as they relate to building mass, shadow relief and existing area development; color is used to provide natural blending of materials with the surrounding area, shadow relief and building use; there is functional appropriateness of the proposed building design as it relates to the proposed use.
J. Multi-family building(s) are designed to include features which add to the visual and aesthetic appearance of the structure and prevent a sterile, box-like appearance; specific design features have been added to enhance the physical appearance of such multi-family residential buildings.
K. Commercial buildings adjacent to residential uses are designed to minimize impacts on adjoining (including across a street or alley) residential uses.
L. Design is compatible with design guidelines of the Harris Ranch Specific Plan.
CHAPTER 11-013: Adopted Specific Plans
Section 11-013-01: Harris Ranch
Subsection 7: Hearing Process
March 2013
Boise Development Code
Page 397
7. HEARING PROCESS
A. Procedure Before the Review Body
For purposes of this section, the Design Review Committee, the Planning & Zoning Commission and the City Council, as applicable, are referred to as the “Review Body.” The Planning Director shall provide the Review Body with information and technical assistance. The Review Body shall prepare and conduct public hearings as required by the terms of the Code according to a schedule determined and approved by the Planning Director. The timing of all hearings and the public notice in connection with such hearings shall be in conformity with the Boise City Code and with the Local Land Use Planning Act.
8. GENERAL AND SPECIFIC USE STANDARDS
A. Purpose
These standards are designed to ensure that development within the Harris Ranch Specific Plan District will produce an environment of stable, desirable character which is harmonious with existing and future development and is consistent with the intent and purpose of the Harris Ranch Specific Plan and Harris Ranch Specific Plan Code.
Figure 11-013.2: Design review process
CHAPTER 11-013: Adopted Specific Plans
Section 11-013-01: Harris Ranch
Subsection 8: General and Specific Use Standards
March 2013
Boise Development Code
Page 398
B. General Standards
(1) Minimum setbacks are outlined in the summary found on each Block Prototype (see pages 65 – 107 of the Harris Ranch Specific Plan). More restrictive setbacks may be established through the Harris Ranch Design Guidelines prepared by Harris Family Limited Partnership, its successors and/or assigns, and enforced by the Harris Ranch Review Board.
(2) Setbacks shall be measured from the exterior wall of a building or garage face to the setback line. The front and corner setback lines shall be the back of sidewalk or back of curb if no sidewalk exists, or edge of pavement if no curb exists.
(3) Residential front loading driveway length shall be 20 feet minimum beyond the sidewalk line to allow vehicles to park completely outside the vehicle corridor or pedestrian streetscape. Alley loaded driveway length from garage door to the alley shall be 6 feet or greater than 20 feet for side-loaded garages, 20 feet of full-width driveway shall be provided behind the sidewalk.
(a) Bay windows, architectural appendages, fireplaces, cabinets designed to screen utility meters and similar architectural features may encroach no more than 2 feet into the applicable yard, provided they remain at least 3 feet from the side lot lines and do not increase the living space within a dwelling unit. The maximum width of such structures shall not exceed 6 feet.
(b) Roof overhangs, cornices and similar architectural features may encroach no more than 2 feet into the applicable yard.
(c) Balconies must maintain the setback required for the structure to which the balconies are attached and may not extend into the required yard.
(d) Detached accessory structures including those such as pool houses, gazebos and storage structures may be located in the side or rear yard. Such accessory structures must be located at least 5 feet from the lot line.
(e) Attached patio covers, awnings, trellises and similar structures may encroach no more than 3 feet into the front yard and may encroach into the side and rear yard provided they remain at least 3 feet from the applicable lot line. Such structures must remain open without the use of siding, screens or other enclosures. Enclosed structures must conform to the setback standards for the principal dwelling unit.
(f) In-ground swimming pools which are 1 feet or less in height, as measured from the property’s finished grade, may occupy any rear or interior side yard, provided a minimum 15 feet setback is maintained from the pool apron or splashguard. Decks and other features that are more than 2 ft. above grade shall be located outside of yards (within the building envelope). Above ground pools are not allowed in single-family townhouse, or 4-8 unit buildings.
(g) Courtyard walls up to 36 in. in height may exist within the front and corner side yard setbacks so long as they remain a minimum of 3 feet from the lot line.
(h) Height exceptions to allow form elements that are uninhabited such as turrets and towers. Habitable roof gardens are accepted from height limitations including accessory elements of such roof gardens. Accessory elements include, without limitation, open-sided pergolas, pavilions, and trellises, along with enclosed garden equipment spaces measuring a maximum of 100 sq. ft. Such accessory
CHAPTER 11-013: Adopted Specific Plans
Section 11-013-01: Harris Ranch
Subsection 8: General and Specific Use Standards
March 2013
Boise Development Code
Page 399
elements shall not exceed 16 feet above the height limit and be comparable in color and materials to the principal building. Mechanical and elevator-related equipment shall be screened as provided further herein.
(i) Common Driveways. The Planning Director shall approve common driveways that meet all of the following requirements: The common driveway provides access to no less than 2 lots or parcels, and no more than 6 lots that are each occupied with a single-family or a townhouse dwelling unit. The length of the common driveway shall not exceed 80 feet, and shall not be less than 10 feet wide for the entire length of the common driveway. Unless limited by geographical features, all lots or parcels that abut a common driveway shall take access from the common driveway, and all individual private driveways shall originate from the common driveway and not from the public right-of-way. A perpetual ingress/egress access easement shall be provided which shall include a requirement for a concrete or asphalt paved surface and provisions for maintenance of the common driveway including any required landscape. The required easement shall be placed of record prior to the issuance of any certificate of occupancy for any lot utilizing the common driveway. If a final plat or Record of Survey is associated with the creation of a common driveway, the easement area shall also be clearly depicted on the plat or survey. Required off-street parking shall be set back a minimum of 3 feet from the edge of the common driveway, 0 feet for parallel parking and 13 feet for perpendicular parking. The use of the common driveway benefits the design of the driveway and reduces the number of accesses onto the public street.
(4) Transportation Standards
(a) Updated traffic impact studies will be required with each preliminary plat.
(b) Existing Warm Springs Avenue will not be reclassified until the parkway arterial is fully built and accepted by ACHD.
(c) Alterations to the existing Warm Springs arterial may be made prior to the construction of the new arterial if approved by the City of Boise and ACHD.
(d) Particular street sections regarding internal street and alley intersections will be redesigned or request for modification to ACHD policy will be made with preliminary plat applications.
C. Specific Use Standards
In addition to the other requirements of the Code, the following standards apply to the uses listed in this section. Where applicable, the Planning Director shall obtain a review and recommendation from ACHD. The Planning Director will review and make a determination of approval or denial within 15 calendar days of receipt of a complete application. A notice will be sent informing owners within 300 feet of the property, of the decision of the Planning Director and of such other property owners’ right to appeal the Director’s decision as provided by the Code.
CHAPTER 11-013: Adopted Specific Plans
Section 11-013-01: Harris Ranch
Subsection 8: General and Specific Use Standards
March 2013
Boise Development Code
Page 400
(1) Accessory Building or Structure
(a) The location of accessory buildings or structures shall be restricted as follows: Accessory buildings or structures shall not be located in any required setback or on any publicly-dedicated easements. Accessory buildings or structures shall not block the view of the main entrance to the principal building.
(b) Size Standards: The size of accessory structures shall be restricted as follows: Accessory structures such as sheds, barns, and workshops shall not exceed 1000 sq. ft. Accessory dwelling units shall not exceed 1000 sq. ft.
(c) The height of an accessory structure shall not exceed 24 feet. In a residential block, accessory buildings or structures may be located in the front yard or within a side yard if any portion of the structure lies between the front property line and a distance of 15 ft. behind the front wall of the principal dwelling and shall not exceed the height of the principal dwelling.
(d) All accessory buildings or structures shall meet all of the following design standards: The roof and finish materials shall be similar in color to the principal building; The roof shall have a similar pitch to that of the principal building; The accessory building or structure shall portray the architectural character of the principal building.
(2) Amusement or Recreation Facility, Outdoor
(a) General Standards All structures or outdoor recreation areas shall maintain a minimum setback of 50 feet from all abutting predominantly residential blocks. Any outdoor speaker system associated with the amusement or recreation facility shall not exceed a noise measurement of 65 decibels at the lot or parcel line of any adjoining lot or parcel. All outdoor activities and events shall be scheduled so as to complete all activity before or as near to 9:30 P.M. as practical. Illumination of the outdoor amusement or recreation facility shall not be permitted after 10:00 P.M. except to conclude a scheduled event that was in progress before 10:00 P.M. and circumstances prevent concluding before 10:00 P.M. All illumination shall be terminated no later than 1 hour after conclusion of the event.
(b) Golf Driving Range
Accessory sales and rental of golf equipment shall be allowed. The golf driving range shall be designed to protect abutting property and roadways from golf balls.
CHAPTER 11-013: Adopted Specific Plans
Section 11-013-01: Harris Ranch
Subsection 8: General and Specific Use Standards
March 2013
Boise Development Code
Page 401
(c) Swimming Pool
Any outdoor swimming pool shall be completely enclosed within a 6-foot barrier that meets the requirements of the Boise City building code.
(3) Automobile Repair and Service, Minor
Minor automobile repair and service facilities shall comply with the following standards and limitations:
(a) The use shall be located a minimum of 200 feet from any predominantly single-family residential block and a minimum of 100 feet from any predominantly multi-family residential block.
(b) The operating hours shall be limited to between 7:00 A.M. and 8:00 P.M.
(c) All repair and service work shall be done within a completely enclosed building.
(d) No used or discarded automotive parts or equipment may be located in any open area outside of an enclosed building.
(e) All disabled vehicles shall be stored in an area that is screened from view from the surrounding lots and/or parcels and adjoining streets. Such vehicles shall not be stored on-site longer than 5 days.
(f) Permitted minor automobile repair and service facilities shall be limited to the following kinds of activities: electronic tune ups; brake repairs (including drum turning); air conditioning repairs; generator and starter repairs; tire installation and repairs; front end alignments; battery recharging; lubrications; selling/installing minor parts and accessories; repairing and installing other minor elements of an automobile such as windshield wipers, hoses and windows, but excluding engine, transmission and differential repair or installation.
(4) Bar, Brew Pub, or Nightclub
(a) The facility shall comply with all applicable governmental regulations, including regulations regarding the sale, manufacturing, or distribution of alcoholic beverages.
(b) For properties abutting a predominantly residential block, no outside activity or event shall be allowed on the site, except as provided for a "Temporary Use."
(5) Bed and Breakfast Inn
(a) Any such facility shall be an owner occupied dwelling. For the purposes of this subsection, an "owner" shall be defined as a person with a 50 percent or greater interest in the bed and breakfast inn.
(b) The exterior appearance of the building shall be that of a single-family dwelling. Fire escapes and other features may be added to protect public safety; however, structural alterations may not be made that would prevent future use of the structure as a single-family dwelling.
(c) No more than 20 occupants (including, without limitation, the owner, the owner's family, and any resident or nonresident employees) shall be permitted to occupy the facility at any one time (daytime, evening, or night).
(d) The maximum stay shall be 2 weeks for any guest.
CHAPTER 11-013: Adopted Specific Plans
Section 11-013-01: Harris Ranch
Subsection 8: General and Specific Use Standards
March 2013
Boise Development Code
Page 402
(e) Breakfast may be served on the premises only for guests and employees of the facility. No other meals shall be provided on the premises. Guestrooms shall not be equipped with cooking facilities.
(f) Only business signs referring to the principal use as a bed and breakfast inn are permitted.
(6) Car Wash
(a) A 100-foot separation shall be maintained between any car wash facility and any predominantly residential block.
(b) Any outdoor speaker system associated with the car wash shall not exceed a noise measurement of 65 decibels at the lot or parcel line of any adjoining lot or parcel.
(c) Vehicle stacking lanes shall be available on the property but outside the car wash facility entrance. Stacking lanes shall have sufficient capacity to prevent obstruction of the public right of way by patrons. Such stacking lanes shall be separate from areas required for access and parking. The stacking lanes shall not be located within 10 feet of any predominantly residential block.
(7) Club/Lodge
(a) All structures which contain this use shall meet Block Prototype setback requirements in which this use is allowed.
(b) Any food service shall be licensed by all applicable governmental agencies.
(8) Convenience Stores
All structures which contain this use shall meet Block Prototype setback requirements in which this use is allowed.
(9) Daycare Facility or Residence
(a) General Standards for Childcare and Adult Care Facilities The applicant shall secure and maintain a license from all applicable governmental agencies and shall provide the Planning Director with proof that such licenses have been granted. There shall be a minimum of 35 sq. ft. of net floor area indoors per client. This space shall be measured wall to wall in rooms that are regularly used by the clients, exclusive of halls, bathrooms, and kitchen. Off-street parking shall be provided as per this Code. There shall be an off-street client pick up area in addition to the required off-street parking. On arterial or collector streets, a circular driveway or an off street turnaround (which does not involve any space from a required off-street parking space) shall be provided for the client pick-up area. Hours of client pick up and/or drop off shall be between 7:00 A.M. and 10:00 P.M. No portion of the facilities used by clients may be within 300 ft. of explosive or hazardous material storage including, without limitation, the following uses: flammable substance storage or gasoline or diesel fuel station.
CHAPTER 11-013: Adopted Specific Plans
Section 11-013-01: Harris Ranch
Subsection 8: General and Specific Use Standards
March 2013
Boise Development Code
Page 403
(b) Additional Standards for Child Daycare Facility The applicant shall provide a minimum outdoor play area of 100 sq. ft. per child. The minimum play area requirement may be waived if:
A. there is greater or equal area of a park that abuts the facility or residence that can be used by the children; or
B. the program is designed such that the number of children using the play area at any one time conforms to the 100 sq. ft. per child criteria. All outdoor play areas shall be completely enclosed by minimum 6 ft. barriers to secure against exit/entry by small children and to screen abutting properties. Outdoor play equipment over 6 feet high shall not be located in a front yard or within any required yard.
(10) Drive-through Retail
Certain types of drive-through window establishments may be reviewed and allowed by the Planning Director subject to the following approval criteria:
(a) The use shall be located a minimum of 200 feet from any predominantly single-family residential block and a minimum of 100 feet from any predominantly multi-family residential block within the SP01 plan.
(b) That the number of drive-through lanes is limited to allow for adequate on-site circulation of pedestrians and vehicles, and that the internal circulation on the site provides for pedestrians to walk from parking lots to the lobby entrance(s) without traversing the waiting lane(s) for the drive-through window.
(c) That the waiting lane(s) be of sufficient length to provide for anticipated average monthly peak volumes.
(d) That design, signage or operational characteristics of the establishment prevent or discourage vehicles from waiting for service on public sidewalks or streets.
(e) That drive-through waiting lanes be designed so that curbs, gates or other devices do not prevent a vehicle from leaving a waiting lane.
(f) That all lights and other illuminated materials shall be designed, positioned, shielded, directed and located to minimize glare from falling on adjoining lots or parcels.
(g) Landscape shall be used to minimize the visual impact of vehicle lights and signs.
(h) That all communication systems shall not exceed a noise measurement of 65 decibels at the lot line.
(11) Drug and Alcohol Treatment Facility
The owner of the facility shall secure and maintain licenses from all applicable governmental agencies and shall provide the Planning Director with proof that such licenses have been granted.
(12) Dwelling, Accessory
The applicant must submit, with the application, a list of signatures of residents of adjacent lots and/or parcels, including lots and/or parcels across streets and alleys, indicating that such residents have been notified of the applicant's intention to construct an accessory dwelling at a specified location. The applicant shall reference which neighbors were
CHAPTER 11-013: Adopted Specific Plans
Section 11-013-01: Harris Ranch
Subsection 8: General and Specific Use Standards
March 2013
Boise Development Code
Page 404
unwilling or unable to sign. The Planning Director must make the following findings to approve an accessory dwelling:
(a) That the footprint of the accessory dwelling is not larger than 10 percent of the lot area or 750 sq. ft., whichever is less, and that the accessory dwelling has not more than 1 bedroom. Where practical, the 10 percent or 750 sq. ft. standard may be altered to accommodate logical expansions or internal conversions. Examples of this include, without limitation, the addition of a second floor to a detached garage or the separation of a basement as an accessory dwelling.
(b) That an accessory dwelling is created through: Internal conversion of an existing living area, basement or attic; An addition to the principal dwelling; The conversion of an existing detached accessory structure such as a detached garage or shop; An addition to an existing accessory structure such as a detached garage or shop; Construction of a new single-family detached house on a vacant lot or parcel with an internal or detached accessory dwelling; or The construction of a detached accessory dwelling.
(c) That the accessory dwelling meets all of the development standards of the Harris Ranch Specific Plan and all applicable life-safety codes.
(d) That the design of the accessory dwelling is compatible with the existing neighborhood by taking into account height, bulk, and site location, and incorporating materials, colors and a design motif that is compatible with and complements the architectural theme and style of the principal dwelling. The principal and the accessory dwellings shall be designed to portray the character of a single-family dwelling. Only 1 entrance into the principal dwelling shall be located on the front building elevation of the principal dwelling unless multiple entrances are already in existence.
(e) That 1 parking space is provided for the accessory dwelling in addition to the existing minimum parking requirement for the principal dwelling. The driveway apron may be used for this requirement.
(f) Conversion of a garage is not permitted unless required parking can be sited legally elsewhere on the lot or parcel. However, a waiver to the parking requirements may be granted by the Planning Director upon a determination that unusual circumstances of the occupancy will result in a reduced need for parking and will not negatively impact the neighborhood. The waiver and the circumstances allowing for the waiver will be documented in a deed restriction referenced immediately below.
(g) That on-going owner-occupancy of either the principal or the accessory dwelling is required and shall be enforced through recordation of a deed restriction to that effect with the Ada County Recorder. A temporary waiver of this requirement may be granted by the Planning Director in the case of a documented need for the owner-occupant to leave the premises for up to 1 year due to employment, illness or other circumstances.
CHAPTER 11-013: Adopted Specific Plans
Section 11-013-01: Harris Ranch
Subsection 8: General and Specific Use Standards
March 2013
Boise Development Code
Page 405
(h) That the accessory dwelling also meets the applicable specific standards for accessory buildings and structures.
(13) Foundry
All structures or outdoor activity areas shall be located a minimum of 50 feet from any property line. The use shall be located a minimum of 200 feet from any predominantly single family residential block.
(14) Gasoline Station
(a) The use shall be located a minimum of 200 feet from any predominantly single-family residential block and a minimum of 100 feet from any predominantly multi-family residential block. The distance shall be measured from lot line to lot line in a straight line.
(b) The use shall be located on a block(s) developed predominantly as commercial development.
(c) Installation and operation of underground fuel tanks shall require compliance with all applicable governmental agencies.
(d) Structures and pump station canopies on corner lots or parcels shall observe a minimum setback of 35 feet from any public street.
(e) The total height of any overhead canopy or weather protection device shall not exceed 20 feet.
(f) Vehicle stacking lanes shall be available on-site but outside the fueling areas. Stacking lanes shall have sufficient capacity to prevent obstruction of the public right of way by patrons. Such stacking lanes shall be separate from areas required for access and parking.
(g) All trash and waste materials shall be stored within a separate enclosure behind the principal structure of the gasoline station.
(15) Greenhouse/Nursery
(a) Outdoor mechanical equipment (including, without limitation, heaters and fans) shall not be located within 50 feet of a lot or parcel line. To reduce noise, permanently mounted mechanical equipment shall be enclosed to the maximum extent possible.
(b) Outdoor storage areas for materials shall comply with Section 11-013-01.8.C(22) of this Code. The following nursery materials shall be exempt from this requirement: Growing plants in ground or in containers; and Wood chips, bark, rock, gravel, or similar ground cover material where such storage piles do not exceed 6 feet in height.
(c) Any outdoor speaker system associated with the nursery shall not exceed a noise measurement of 65 decibels at the lot or parcel line of any adjoining lot or parcel.
(d) The application of fertilizer or process wastewater at agronomic rates shall be deemed a component of the nursery use.
(e) Additional standards for wholesale and/or retail nursery within a predominantly residential block or adjoining a predominantly residential block:
CHAPTER 11-013: Adopted Specific Plans
Section 11-013-01: Harris Ranch
Subsection 8: General and Specific Use Standards
March 2013
Boise Development Code
Page 406
All proposed lighting shall be downward cast to minimize impact on adjacent property. No aerial spraying of the property shall be allowed.
(f) Retail nurseries shall also comply with the following: The total amount of enclosed retail space shall not exceed 5,000 sq. ft. Greenhouses shall not be considered retail space. The property shall have frontage on an arterial or collector street.
(16) Group Home
(a) The applicant shall secure and maintain a license from all applicable governmental agencies and shall provide the Planning Director with proof that such licenses have been granted.
(b) Off-street parking shall be provided as per this Code.
(c) The applicant shall provide a minimum outdoor play area of 100 sq. ft. per child. The minimum play area requirement may be waived if: There is greater or equal area of a park that abuts the facility or residence that can be used by the children; or The program is designed such that the number of children using the play area at any one time conforms to the 100 sq. ft. per child criteria. All outdoor play areas shall be completely enclosed by minimum 6 ft. barriers to secure against exit/entry by small children and to screen abutting properties. Outdoor play equipment over 6 feet high shall not be located in a front yard or within any required yard.
(d) No portion of the facilities used by clients may be within 300 feet of explosive or hazardous material storage including, without limitation, the following uses: flammable substance storage or gasoline or diesel fuel station.
(17) Home Occupation
(a) Any gainful occupation within a dwelling or accessory building or structure must receive administrative approval from the Planning Director. Applicants must submit, with their application, a list of signatures of residents of adjacent lots and/or parcels, including lots and/or parcels across streets and alleys, indicating they have been notified of the applicant's intention to conduct a home occupation at a specified location. The applicant shall reference which neighbors were unwilling or unable to sign. More than one home occupation may be approved for the same property address provided that the combined activities and uses of the home occupations do not exceed the approval criteria as set forth herein. For example, the aggregate total of floor space devoted to one or more occupations at a given address may not exceed 750 sq. ft.
(b) Home occupations may not be approved for uses that are prohibited by the Code or would violate the intent of the Harris Ranch Specific Plan as determined by the Planning Director. Home occupations may be approved provided they meet all of the following criteria:
CHAPTER 11-013: Adopted Specific Plans
Section 11-013-01: Harris Ranch
Subsection 8: General and Specific Use Standards
March 2013
Boise Development Code
Page 407
The use is clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the lot or parcel for dwelling purposes. The use is conducted entirely within a dwelling or accessory structure and the aggregate of all space within any or all buildings devoted to one or more home occupations shall not exceed 750 sq. ft. No activities shall be allowed which involve the use, storage, repair, milling or manufacture of highly combustible materials or internal combustion engines. Dimensions, power rating or weight of equipment and tools used in the conduct of the home occupation shall not exceed that of normal household equipment and tools. Any home occupation that causes abnormal automotive or pedestrian traffic or which is objectionable due to unsightliness or emission of odor, dust, smoke, noise, glare, heat, vibration or similar disturbances to the outside of any building containing such home occupation shall be prohibited. The dwelling shall at all times be maintained as residential in appearance, cleanliness and quietness. Any materials used or any item produced or repaired in the dwelling or accessory structure shall not be displayed or stored so as to be visible from the exterior of the dwelling or accessory structure. Articles may be offered for sale and sold in the dwelling provided that the occupant produces the product or that the sale of an article is not the essential nature of, but is instead incidental to, the home occupation. For example, sales of shampoo and other beauty supplies at a home beauty salon may be considered incidental to the home occupation. Furthermore, the home occupation shall not constitute a retail store, in terms of traffic, appearance and other impacts. Instruction in music, crafts and dance studios shall be limited to no more than 3 students at one time. Home beauty salons or barbershops shall be limited to one chair and/or nail table, which are commonly referred to as stations. One employee, in addition to the occupant, may be allowed if an off-street parking space meeting the standards of the Code is provided. Required off-street parking spaces for the residence may not be displaced by the home occupation. Limitations placed on home occupations in this Section shall not be construed as prohibiting home occupations which make use of computers, modems, telephones, faxes, or other similar devices. There shall be no signs identifying the home occupation. One vehicle, in addition to that used by an employee, may be used in conjunction with the home occupation provided the vehicle is within the parameters of a normal vehicle, which parameters include and describe cars, pickup trucks, and vans unless outfitted with excessive amounts of tools, equipment and supplies. Large commercial vehicles, trailers, construction equipment, and regular vehicles with commercial and/or
CHAPTER 11-013: Adopted Specific Plans
Section 11-013-01: Harris Ranch
Subsection 8: General and Specific Use Standards
March 2013
Boise Development Code
Page 408
industrial attachments are not allowed. Generally, any vehicle exceeding one ton in weight shall be regarded as outside the allowed parameters.
(18) Hotel
(a) Accessory retail uses including, without limitation, restaurants, retail shops, food or beverage service, and personal service shops, may be allowed if such facilities are completely within the hotel structure. A bar, brew pub or nightclub must meet separate specific standards.
(b) No outdoor recreation area associated with the hotel shall be within 100 feet of a predominantly residential block. An outdoor swimming pool shall be enclosed with a 6 foot barrier that meets the requirements of the Boise City building code.
(19) Kennels, Animal Boarding
Animal boarding kennels and pet shops shall conform to the following standards:
(a) The use shall be located a minimum of 200 feet from any predominantly single-family residential block and a minimum of 100 feet from any predominantly multi-family residential block. The distance shall be measured from lot line to lot line in a straight line.
(b) All animals shall be confined within an enclosed area or on a leash at all times.
(c) The facility shall be designed to provide reasonable sound barriers and odor protection for adjacent lots or parcels.
(20) Laundry Self Service
If abutting a predominantly residential block, the hours of operation shall be 7:00 A.M. to 10:00 P.M.
(21) Live/Work Units
This subsection provides standards for the development of live/work units. Live/work units are intended to be occupied by business operators who live in the same building that contains the commercial or light industry activity. A live/work unit is intended to function predominantly as residential accommodations with incidental work space.
(a) Permitted uses in a live/work dwelling include: Child Care (Small; 6 or fewer children); Professional Office; Medical Office; Personal Service (hair salon, massage, etc.); Photo Studio; Specialty Retail (fly shop, bike tuning, woodworking, etc.); Restaurant (bakery, etc.); Education (tutoring, music, etc.).
(b) Any other use may be allowed if such use is determined, in writing, by the Planning Director to be of the same general character as those uses listed above, compatible and not objectionable or detrimental to surrounding properties and the neighborhood. To determine compatibility, the following characteristics, without limitation, of the uses shall be reviewed relative to other potentially-
CHAPTER 11-013: Adopted Specific Plans
Section 11-013-01: Harris Ranch
Subsection 8: General and Specific Use Standards
March 2013
Boise Development Code
Page 409
affected uses, dwellings or structures: location, orientation, operation, vibration, odor, electrical interference, fire hazard, visual privacy and sound privacy.
(c) Live/work dwellings must receive an administrative permit issued by the Planning Director. Restrictions on such use shall include, without limitation: At least 1 person working in the live/work dwelling shall also reside in the live/work dwelling; no portion of the live/work dwelling shall be leased as a work space to any person not living in the live/work dwelling or as a residential space for any person not working in the live/work dwelling. The first floor of any live/work dwelling shall not be converted to an additional dwelling unit without Planning Director approval. Each live/work dwelling is limited to 1 employee. Resident(s) of the live/work dwelling are not considered to be an employee. The owner of the live/work dwelling or the employee shall be responsible for the work activity performed. The work/business component of the live/work dwelling shall be conducted entirely within the live/work dwelling, including the front porch of the live/work dwelling. The work/business component of the live/work dwelling shall not be located in the garage of the live/work dwelling. No activities shall be allowed in the live/work dwelling or the lot or parcel of such live/work dwelling that involves the use, storage, repair, milling or manufacture of highly combustible materials, paint, or internal combustion engines. Vehicle-oriented businesses requiring multiple vehicles are prohibited. As an example, without limitation, limousine services, taxis, towing companies and cleaning companies would be prohibited. If a sign is desired in connection with the work/business component of the live/work dwelling, such sign shall be limited to 1 in number and limited to a size of 2 sq. ft. and shall be attached flat on the live/work dwelling or on an awning below the eave of the live/work dwelling. Any work/business that creates excessive emissions of odor, dust, smoke, noise, glare, heat, vibration or similar disturbances shall be prohibited. Hours of operation for any work/business shall begin no earlier than 7:00 A.M. and end no later than 10:00 P.M. Any work/business shall obtain any and all applicable governmental licenses, permits and tax identification numbers and shall comply with any and all applicable employment laws. Each live/work dwelling shall conform to all life-safety codes and regulations and disabled persons access requirements. Outdoor storage is not permitted. The volume of deliveries of truck or other vehicular traffic shall not be in excess of what is normally associated with residential use.
CHAPTER 11-013: Adopted Specific Plans
Section 11-013-01: Harris Ranch
Subsection 8: General and Specific Use Standards
March 2013
Boise Development Code
Page 410
(22) Outdoor Storage
(a) Screening
Outdoor storage areas shall be screened. Outdoor storage of chemicals and/or fertilizers shall be prohibited.
(b) Prohibited Locations
Materials shall not be stored within the required yards. Stored items shall not block sidewalks or parking areas and may not impede vehicular or pedestrian traffic.
(c) Use of Site
Use of the site shall not constitute a "pit, mine, or quarry" or "contractor's shop."
(d) Prohibited Uses
The site shall not be used as a "junkyard," "automobile wrecking yard," or vehicle impound yard.
(e) Additional Standards for Outdoor Storage as an Accessory Use
Accessory outdoor storage shall be allowed for approved uses subject to the following standards: The location of the outdoor storage area shall be noted on the master site plan and reviewed as part of that application. Storage areas shall not be rented, leased, let, or otherwise used as a commercial business. Outdoor storage for commercial or industrial uses shall be limited to those items owned or used by the business. Outdoor storage for a multi-family development shall be only for recreational vehicles or personal recreation items of the tenants.
(23) Package and Letter Delivery Service:
(a) No structure, facility, drive lane, parking area, nor loading area shall be located within 20 feet of a predominantly residential block.
(b) If abutting a predominantly residential block, the facility hours of operation shall be limited to 7:00 A.M. to 10:00 P.M.
(c) No outdoor storage shall be allowed.
(24) Recycling Center
(a) Outdoor storage areas shall comply with Section 11-013-01.8.C(22) of this Code. No storage, excluding truck trailers, shall be visible above the required screening material.
(b) Except for after-hours donation containers, no unsorted material shall be stored outdoors.
(c) Any container provided for after-hours donation of recyclable materials shall be a minimum of 50 feet from a predominantly residential block, shall be of sturdy, rustproof construction, and shall have sufficient capacity to accommodate materials collected.
(d) Power driven processing (including, without limitation, aluminum foil and can compacting, baling, plastic shredding, or other light processing activities necessary
CHAPTER 11-013: Adopted Specific Plans
Section 11-013-01: Harris Ranch
Subsection 8: General and Specific Use Standards
March 2013
Boise Development Code
Page 411
for efficient temporary storage and shipment of materials) may be allowed when located within an enclosed structure.
(e) All recycling center grounds and facilities shall be maintained in an orderly manner so as not to create a public nuisance.
(25) Sawmill or Planing Mill
(a) The use shall be conducted within an enclosed structure.
(b) There shall be a 1,000 foot separation from the mill structure and any predominantly residential block.
(c) Outdoor storage areas shall comply with Section 11-013-01.8.C(22) of this Code.
(26) Schools
General Standards for Schools:
(a) Off-street parking shall be provided as per this Code.
(b) There shall be an off-street client pick up area in addition to the required off-street parking. On arterial or collector streets, a circular driveway or an off street turnaround (which does not involve any space from a required off-street parking space) shall be provided for the client pick-up area.
(c) Hours of client pick up and/or drop off shall be between 7:00 A.M. and 10:00 P.M.
(27) Special Events
Special events such as musical and dance performances, arts and craft shows, artifact displays, carnivals, special holiday events, and charitable events shall comply with the following standards:
(a) No such use shall be located closer than 100 feet from a predominately residential block, except at the Neighborhood Greens with Homeowner’s Association approval.
(b) The special event shall not operate for longer than 1 week.
(c) Parking shall be provided as required by City Event Permit.
(d) Incidental sales of hand crafted items and goods which are reasonably related to the special event program may be permitted.
(e) A temporary use permit is required from the Planning Director.
(28) Temporary Uses
(a) Any temporary use must be administratively approved by the Planning Director. A temporary use permit shall be required for temporary buildings, temporary display and sale of merchandise, model homes, trailers, activities, and/or uses incidental to the construction of a building or group of buildings on the same or adjacent lot(s) or parcel(s). A temporary use permit shall also be required for seasonal uses (such as, for example, fireworks stands, Christmas tree lots, fruit and vegetable stands marketing locally grown produce). Other uses which clearly are not associated with a holiday, the growing season, or a construction project may be considered for approval by the Planning Director, such as a home sales office in a residential structure. Temporary uses may be approved upon compliance with the following criteria:
CHAPTER 11-013: Adopted Specific Plans
Section 11-013-01: Harris Ranch
Subsection 9: Parking Standards - General
March 2013
Boise Development Code
Page 412
Are operating for a set time period as requested by the applicant and agreed to by the Planning Director. For most uses, such time period shall not exceed 180 calendar days. Temporary home sales offices may request longer time periods as approved by the Planning Director. The proposed temporary use shall not allow for placement of, for example, any structure, vehicle or sign, within a clear vision triangle, required setback, required parking space (except as permitted for temporary, outdoor display sale of merchandise), service drive, dedicated trash dumpster location, sidewalk, or any other position on a lot or parcel that may interfere with vehicle or pedestrian circulation or the normal functions of other uses on the property, or otherwise be potentially hazardous to the public. The proposed use must be in conformance with the other applicable requirements of the Code, and applicable state and federal regulations. No temporary use permit, except in the case of seasonal uses or uses incidental to construction, shall be issued for structures or uses that are intended to be placed upon an unimproved lot or parcel. The Planning Director shall require guarantees to assure removal of temporary uses and of any debris or refuse resultant there from, so as to restore the premises to its prior condition and shall establish the date of such removal.
(b) The applicant shall obtain from the lot or parcel owner a signed and notarized affidavit acknowledging that the property owner shall be accountable for any debris or refuse left on the lot or parcel more than 3 days after the applicant vacates such lot or parcel and shall be responsible for any additional cleanup costs incurred by the City. A cash bond or cash deposit in the amount of not less than $125, or such other security as may be reasonably acceptable to the Planning Director, shall be placed by the applicant with the City Clerk. Such deposit or security shall be returned to the applicant only in the event the applicant ensures such debris or refuse has been removed from the applicable lot or parcel to the satisfaction of the Planning Director. Moreover, an applicant who fails to clean such debris or refuse from the applicable lot or parcel shall be guilty of a misdemeanor which is punishable by a fine not to exceed $300 and/or 6 months confinement in jail.
9. PARKING STANDARDS - GENERAL
A. Purpose
This section is intended to: provide accessible, attractive, secure, properly lighted, well-maintained and screened off-street parking facilities; reduce traffic congestion and hazards; protect neighborhoods from the effects of vehicular noise and traffic generated by adjacent non-residential land uses; assure the maneuverability of emergency vehicles; and provide appropriately designed parking facilities in proportion to the needs generated by varying types of land use.
B. Use
(1) Parking garages and/or parking lots shall be used for vehicle parking only.
(2) The use allowed in the building and the corresponding parking spaces required and fixed shall be noted on the Notice of Specific Plan Compliance or Notice of
CHAPTER 11-013: Adopted Specific Plans
Section 11-013-01: Harris Ranch
Subsection 9: Parking Standards - General
March 2013
Boise Development Code
Page 413
Specific Plan Design Review Compliance, hereinafter referred to individually and/or collectively as “Notice of Compliance”, received by the applicant. See Table 11-013.1. Any enlargement or addition to a building, or any change in use of a building, or an enlargement or increase in intensity of use of a building, shall require an amendment to the Notice of Compliance or Notice of Specific Plan Design Review Compliance stating the nature of the enlargement of the building or use, or the change in use of the building, and the number of parking spaces required and established as a result of such change.
C. Fractional Requirements
Any fractional requirement of a parking space shall be rounded up to require one additional parking space.
TABLE 11-013.1: OFF-STREET PARKING REQUIREMENTS USE CATEGORY NUMBER OF PARKING SPACES
Residential: Single Family Detached, town homes, and multifamily (including live/work and work/live units)
2 per d.u.> 950 sf;
1 per d.u.< 950 sf
Lodging
1 per room or suite (no additional parking is required for accessory uses such as restaurants or meeting rooms)
Office
1 per 500 sq. ft. of gross floor area
Retail
1 per 500 sq. ft. of gross floor area
Educational
Elementary School:
Junior, Middle, and Senior High School:
College:
as per Boise City Code:
1 per 6 students
1 per 4 students
per full time student
Industrial
½ per employee
Civic/Cultural
1 per 500 sq. ft. of gross floor area
Civil Support
1 per 500 sq. ft. of gross floor area
D. Reduction of Parking Requirements (Single Use)
(1) Parking requirements for a single use as established by Table 11-013.1 may be reduced upon determination by the Planning Director based on a specific showing by the applicant that the intensity of the particular use will need fewer parking spaces. On-street parking along the frontage line of the lot or parcel may be counted toward fulfilling the parking requirements. In the event a determination is made that the parking requirements shall be reduced, the reduced off-street parking spaces requirements shall be noted on the Notice of Compliance or Notice of Specific Plan Design Review Compliance. The Planning Director shall have the authority to reduce the parking requirement by up to 10 percent if one or more of the following circumstances exist:
(a) Expected automobile ownership or use patterns of employees, tenants, or other users vary from what is typical in the community or typical for the use.
(b) The parking demand varies throughout the day in relation to parking supply.
(c) The nature of operational aspects of the use warrants unique parking arrangements.
CHAPTER 11-013: Adopted Specific Plans
Section 11-013-01: Harris Ranch
Subsection 9: Parking Standards - General
March 2013
Boise Development Code
Page 414
(d) Actual parking practice in the community demonstrates that the parking standard may be too high or too low.
(e) The development contains a pedestrian walkway and/or bicycle lane that connects to existing, adjacent or future walkways and/or bicycle lane(s), including pedestrian and bicycle connections to residential subdivisions.
(2) The Planning Director may also consider the reduction of off-street parking requirements to: (1) avoid the visual intrusion and heat build-up that results from large paved areas; (2) ensure the efficient use of land; and/or (3) create an incentive to provide pedestrian-oriented development.
E. Distance for Private Off-Street Parking When Off-Site
Required off-street parking shall be located on the same lot or parcel as the use being served by the parking, wherever practical. No off-site parking is allowed for single-family detached residential. Parking may be located off-site not more than the following distances measured along the sidewalk or a walkway available for public use from the primary entrance or elevator bank of the premises to the nearest entrance of the parking garage or parking lot:
(1) For retail or commercial customer or office client: 600 feet.
(2) For employee parking on a daily basis where the car is used occasionally regardless of the nature of the employment: 1,500 feet.
(3) When off-site parking is provided, a directional sign shall be erected on-site advising the public of the distance and direction to additional parking.
(a) Required parking spaces that are off-site shall be committed by a recordable lease or other agreement acceptable to the City Attorney. The parties to such recordable document shall include the owner(s) or lessee(s), if applicable, of the off-site parking area, and the owner(s) and lessee(s), if applicable, of the lot or parcel being served by the off-site parking, with covenants reflecting the conditions of approval for off-site parking.
(b) The parties to the recordable document referenced above shall immediately notify the Planning Director of any change of ownership or use of the lot or parcel for which the off-site parking is required, and notify the Planning Director of any termination or default of the agreement between the parties. Upon notification that the required off-site parking spaces are or will be reduced in number, the Planning Director shall determine a reasonable time in which one of the following shall occur: substitute parking is provided that is acceptable to the Planning Director; or the size or capacity of the use served by the off-site parking is reduced in proportion to the parking spaces lost.
F. Restricted Parking
Off-street parking space requirements are based on each parking space being available on a first-come, first-use basis. If a parking space is to be restricted by assignment of one or more parking spaces to a particular individual or user, such parking spaces shall be so designated and such restriction shall be noted on the Notice of Compliance. Off-street parking requirements shall be increased by 20 percent of the number of such restricted parking spaces.
CHAPTER 11-013: Adopted Specific Plans
Section 11-013-01: Harris Ranch
Subsection 9: Parking Standards - General
March 2013
Boise Development Code
Page 415
G. Compact Spaces
A maximum of 35 percent of the total parking spaces provided may be designed, designated and used for compact-size vehicles. Parking areas immediately adjacent to or within close proximity to building entrances shall be designated for compact parking spaces. Full-size vehicle parking spaces shall be located along the perimeter of the parking lot or in those areas most distant from the building being served. Compact parking spaces shall be clearly marked as such on the pavement or curb. The percentage of compact parking spaces may be increased by the Planning Director following a showing by the applicant that the routine use of the parking lot or parking garage will exceed the 35 percent standard.
H. Tandem Parking
Tandem parking outside all required yards may be used on detached single-family residential lots. The Planning Director may allow tandem parking for duplexes, town homes, and multifamily lots upon determination that all of the following are true:
(1) The tandem parking does not have a negative impact on adjacent properties;
(2) Tandem parking is required because of physical limitations of the site;
(3) The standard parking design(s) would have a negative impact on the functional and/or aesthetic value of the site; and
(4) The tandem parking will accommodate no more than 2 vehicles per row within the parking envelope.
I. Drive-through Facilities
Stacking lanes shall have a minimum width of 10 feet.
J. Access to Parking
Parking, including parking garages, shall be accessed from an alley or secondary frontage when possible. The opening of a parking lot or parking garage on a frontage shall not exceed 2 lanes in width. Pedestrian entrances to all parking lots and parking garages shall be directly from a frontage line. Only underground parking garages may be entered directly from a building. Applicants are encouraged to provide off-street vehicle access to parking areas on adjacent properties to provide for convenience, safety and efficient circulation. Shared pedestrian access between adjacent lots or parcels is also strongly encouraged.
K. Bicycle Parking
One bicycle parking space within a bicycle rack shall be required for every 30 required automobile parking spaces for non-residential developments. Multi-family residential developments shall provide one bicycle rack space per each 2 dwelling units.
L. Parking Garage Screening
On the ground floor, a parking garage shall be located to the rear of the lot or parcel wherever practical and masked by a liner building.
M. Accessible Parking Spaces
This Section applies to the quantity, dimensional standards, and location of accessible parking spaces. This section does not supersede and is not a substitute for the International Building Code (IBC), but rather provides for zoning-related standards consistent with the purpose of the IBC. The more restrictive of the two - the IBC and this Section - shall prevail in the event of any discrepancies. All other provisions not addressed in this Section that are related to accessible parking spaces shall be governed by the IBC. Note also that this Section does not take the place of the Federal Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 requirements, as amended (ADA).
CHAPTER 11-013: Adopted Specific Plans
Section 11-013-01: Harris Ranch
Subsection 9: Parking Standards - General
March 2013
Boise Development Code
Page 416
Variances and interpretations can only be reviewed by the U.S. Department of Justice, Office of the Americans with Disabilities Act.
CHAPTER 11-013: Adopted Specific Plans
Section 11-013-01: Harris Ranch
Subsection 9: Parking Standards - General
March 2013
Boise Development Code
Page 417
(1) Quantity
TABLE 11-013.2: REQUIRED NUMBER OF ACCESSIBLE PARKING SPACES TOTAL NUMBER OF PARKING SPACES IN LOT REQUIRED MINIMUM NUMBER OF ACCESSIBLE SPACES
1-25
1
26-50
2
51-75
3
76-100
4
101-150
5
151-200
6
201-300
7
301-400
8
401-500
9
501-1,000
2% of Total
1,001 and Over
20 plus 1 for each 100 Parking Spaces over 1,000
N. Exceptions
(1) At facilities providing medical care and other services for persons with mobility impairments, parking spaces must be provided and must comply with Table 11-013.2 except as follows:
(a) Outpatient units and facilities: 10 percent of the total number of parking spaces provided shall be accessible parking spaces to serve each such outpatient unit facility.
(b) Units and facilities that specialize in treatment or services for persons with mobility impairments: 20 percent of the total number of parking spaces provided shall be accessible parking spaces to serve each such unit or facility.
(2) Valet Parking: Valet parking facilities shall provide a passenger loading zone located on an accessible route to the entrance of the facility being served with valet parking. subsections 11-013-01.9.N(1)(a) and (b) do not apply to valet parking facilities.
O. Dimensions
(1) All accessible parking spaces shall be a minimum of 8 feet in width plus a 5-foot wide adjacent access aisle to provide clearance appropriate for use by physically disabled people. No access aisle is required if all required parking spaces are designed with 11-foot wide parking space with an adjacent 5-foot wide access aisle.
CHAPTER 11-013: Adopted Specific Plans
Section 11-013-01: Harris Ranch
Subsection 9: Parking Standards - General
March 2013
Boise Development Code
Page 418
(2) 1 in every 8 accessible parking spaces, but not less than 1 parking space, shall have an adjacent access aisle 8 feet in width and shall be designated as "van accessible."
(3) All accessible parking spaces shall be a minimum of 20 feet in length.
P. Design
(1) Access aisles shall not be restricted by planters, curbs, or wheel stops.
(2) Access aisles shall be level with the parking spaces.
(3) Accessible parking spaces may utilize the same adjacent access aisle.
(4) Accessible parking spaces shall be designated as reserved for the disabled by a sign showing the symbol of accessibility. Such sign shall not be obscured by a vehicle parking in the parking space.
Q. Location
(1) Access aisles shall be connected to an accessible route to the accessible entrance of a building. The parking access aisle must either blend with the accessible route or have a curb ramp. Such ramp opening must be located within the access aisle boundaries and not within the parking spaces boundaries.
(2) Parking spaces for disabled people and accessible passenger loading zones that serve a particular building shall be the parking spaces or loading zones located closest to the nearest entrance on an accessible route.
(3) At least ½ of the accessible parking spaces are encouraged to be located adjacent to the building so that disabled persons will not have to cross traffic aisles.
R. Common Facilities for Joint and Mixed Uses
(1) Mixed Uses
In those instances where there are clearly identified accessory or multiple uses within a building or multiple buildings, the minimum standards shall apply to each use or building, resulting in a total parking requirement when summed, except as provided in Section 11-013-01.9.R(2), below.
(2) Reduction in Parking (Multiple Uses)
Parking spaces required under the provisions of this subsection may be provided cooperatively for 2 or more uses, subject to arrangements that will assure the permanent availability of such parking spaces. The Planning Director may reduce the number of parking spaces required where the Planning Director finds that the cooperating uses have different hours of normal activity. The applicant shall provide adequate information by which the proposal can be reviewed, including, without limitation: types of uses; number of employees; building design capacity; square feet of sales area and service area; parking spaces proposed on-site; parking spaces proposed to be provided off-site; and hours of operation. The Planning Director may reduce the amount of required parking in accordance with the following methodology: (1) determine the minimum parking requirements in accordance with Table 11-013.3 for each land use as if it were a separate use; (2) multiply each amount by the corresponding percentages for each of the 5 time periods set forth in columns (B) through (F) of Table 11-013.3; (3) calculate the total for each time period; and (4) select the highest total as the required minimum number of parking spaces.
CHAPTER 11-013: Adopted Specific Plans
Section 11-013-01: Harris Ranch
Subsection 9: Parking Standards - General
March 2013
Boise Development Code
Page 419
TABLE 11-013.3: MINIMUM PARKING REQUIREMENTS OVER 24-HOUR PERIOD (A) LAND USE WEEKDAY WEEKEND (F) NIGHTTIME (MIDNIGHT - 6 A.M.) (B) DAYTIME (9 A.M. - 4 P.M.) (C) EVENING (6 P.M. - MIDNIGHT) (D) DAYTIME (9 A.M. - 4 P.M.) (E) EVENING (6 P.M. - MIDNIGHT)
Office/Industrial
100%
10%
10%
5%
5%
Retail
60%
90%
100%
70%
5%
Restaurant
50%
100%
100%
100%
10%
Entertainment/ Commercial
40%
100%
80%
100%
10%
(3) Determination
The Planning Director will review the application relative to the approval criteria and make a determination of approval or denial within 10 calendar days of receipt of an application and will submit the findings and conclusions in writing to the applicant.
S. Public and Private Parking Areas
(1) Ingress and Egress
Access driveways providing reasonable access to parking areas, including parking garages, may extend through the front or street-side set back in a perpendicular manner provided the Planning Director finds that such access driveways comply with this subsection. Driveways that extend through the setback in other than a perpendicular manner may be approved if due to physical limitations of the site or for aesthetic or safety purposes, and upon a determination that the following are true:
(a) The driveway is clearly for access to a parking garage or parking lot; and
(b) The proposed driveway does not have a negative impact on adjacent properties; and
(c) The driveway is required because of physical limitations of the site; or
(d) The driveway is required to enhance the aesthetics of the site such as preserving existing trees; or
(e) The driveway is required for safety reasons such as avoiding backing into a busy street or a street with limited motorist visibility.
(2) Residential Parking in Yards
Parking shall not be permitted in any required yard of any residential land use district, except as follows:
(a) Trailers, camp trailers, boats, boat trailers, recreational vehicles and all other vehicles not in daily use are restricted from parking in the front and street-side setbacks of alley loaded garage lots; these vehicles are restricted from parking in the front and street-side setbacks of front loaded garage lots or any adjacent street for more than 24 hours.
(b) Open air public or private parking areas and service drives, that are utilized in conjunction with any building or use permitted in a predominantly residential block shall be permitted in side yards that do not abut a street provided that a minimum 5-foot wide landscape and screening area is constructed and maintained
CHAPTER 11-013: Adopted Specific Plans
Section 11-013-01: Harris Ranch
Subsection 9: Parking Standards - General
March 2013
Boise Development Code
Page 420
adjacent to the adjoining property line. No vehicle or the parking thereof shall be permitted in such minimum 5-foot wide landscape and screening area.
(c) No commercial vehicle or trailer shall be parked, stored or otherwise left unattended at any place in a predominantly residential block whether on a lot or on the public right-of-way for over 2 hours except while actually engaged in pickup or delivery activities, or during the course of actual construction, alteration or repair of buildings and structures or any other permitted use in the immediate vicinity.
(d) All parking areas, driveways and other vehicular access for single-family or two-family residential uses shall be paved with asphalt, concrete or other hard surface material that shall be approved by the Planning Director.
(e) Driveways for single-family or two-family residential uses shall be a minimum of 9 feet wide and a maximum of 12 feet of width from curb to back of sidewalk, then tapering to the allowed width.
(f) The minimum unobstructed interior width of a two-car private residential garage shall be 20 feet, 10 feet if tandem. The minimum unobstructed depth of the stalls must be 20 feet for the first stall and may be 16 feet for the second stall. These dimensions must be kept clear of any permanent obstructions, including, without limitation, mechanical units.
(g) For single-family residential uses, individual driveways in the front setback shall not exceed a width of 33 feet within the setback with a maximum of 12 feet of width from curb to back of sidewalk, then tapering to the full allowed width. Individual driveways are to be separated from any other vehicular accessway by a minimum of 5 feet of landscape or similar material not designed to accommodate vehicles.
(h) The Planning Director may permit up to ½ of the parking required for a single-family or two-family residential use to conform to compact parking stall dimensional standards on lots having topographic or other physical constraints. However, interior garage dimensions must comply with the requirements of Section 11-013-01.9.S(2).
(3) Service Drives
(a) Service drives may not adversely affect access or good public transportation planning to adjacent property and to the area travel networks. Service drives may not landlock adjacent property due to topographic or parcel layout and may not interfere with the continuity of public streets. When public streets are feasible and necessary for the proper development of the public street system as determined by ACHD, then public streets, as opposed to service drives, shall be required.
(b) Service drives shall be designed and constructed to facilitate the flow of traffic, provide maximum safety for traffic ingress and egress, and provide maximum safety for pedestrian and vehicular traffic on-site.
(c) Service drives must not encourage or promote the use of the service drive as a "pass-through" between public streets.
(d) Maximum grade for service drives shall be 10 percent unless specifically approved by the City Engineer and the Boise City Fire Chief. A maximum grade of 2 percent shall be allowed for the initial 80 feet from the intersecting curb to
CHAPTER 11-013: Adopted Specific Plans
Section 11-013-01: Harris Ranch
Subsection 9: Parking Standards - General
March 2013
Boise Development Code
Page 421
provide a landing at the junction of the service drive and the public right-of-way, unless specifically approved otherwise by ACHD and the City Engineer.
(e) Where determined by the City Engineer to be necessary for drainage control, vertical curbing is required.
(f) Except single-family or two-family dwellings on a single lot or parcel, parking spaces in groups of 3 or more shall be served by a service drive designed to prevent backing onto a street.
(g) Service drives shall comply with the requirements of the City’s fire department. To the extent that any Boise City requirement conflicts with this Section, fire department requirements will control.
(h) Service drives shall be designed to intersect the public right-of-way at a 90° angle or as near to that angle as possible. Discrepancies shall require review and approval by both the City Engineer and ACHD.
(i) A service drive that provides access from a local street shall be set back a minimum of 50 feet from an intersection of streets. Under unusual circumstances, the Planning Director may waive this requirement.
(j) Service Drive Widths: Drive-through lanes and associated escape lanes shall each be a minimum of 10 feet. wide. One-way service drives without parking on either side shall be a minimum of 10 feet. wide. Two-way service drives without parking on either side shall be a minimum of 20 feet wide. Garages shall be set back from service drives such that 22 feet of back up distance is provided to the far side of the service drive. Except at the intersection of a service drive and public road, the service drive shall be narrowed to 20 feet where occupied by a crosswalk. 24 feet of clear width shall be maintained between building appurtenances, such as carport overhangs, that border service drives. Service drives and parking lots shall allow public access to places of public use and/or interest.
(k) Service drives that serve more than 40 dwelling units will be designed based upon the standards of this Section and by an on-site traffic circulation plan for the interior roadway and parking system, and submitted to and approved by the Planning Director and the Public Works Department.
T. Parking Lot and Service Drive Improvements
(1) All public or private parking lots shall be designed and laid out to conform to the minimum standards required by this Section including the minimum standards for parking lot design set forth in Tables 11-013.4 and 11-013.5. See also Figure 11-013.3. Vehicle backup areas shall be provided, which backup area may include the width of a service drive or alley.
CHAPTER 11-013: Adopted Specific Plans
Section 11-013-01: Harris Ranch
Subsection 9: Parking Standards - General
March 2013
Boise Development Code
Page 422
TABLE 11-013-4: MINIMUM STANDARDS FOR PARKING LOT DESIGN--STANDARD VEHICLES
Parking
Angle
See Figure 3-1,
A
Stall Width
See Figure 3-1, B
Curb Length
Per Car
See Figure 3-1, C
Stall Depth
See Figure 3-1, D
Driveway
Width
See Figure 3-1, E
0° 9'- 0" 23'- 0" 9'- 0" 12'- 0"
20° 9'- 0" 26'- 4" 15'- 3" 11'- 0"
30° 9'- 0" 18'- 0" 17'- 8" 11'- 0"
40° 9'- 0" 14'- 0" 19'- 6" 12'- 0"
45° 9'- 0" 12'- 9" 20'- 5" 13'- 0"
50° 9'- 0" 11'- 9" 21'- 0" 14'- 0"
60° 9'- 0" 10'- 5" 21'- 10" 16'- 0"
70° 9'- 0" 9'- 8" 21'- 10" 18'- 0"
80° 9'- 0" 9'- 2" 21'- 4" 20'- 0"
90° 9'- 0" 9'- 0" 20'- 0" 22'- 0"
TABLE 11-013.5: MINIMUM STANDARDS FOR COMPACT-SIZE VEHICLES
Parking
Angle
See Figure 3-1,
A
Stall Width
See Figure 3-1, B
Curb Length
Per Car
See Figure 3-1, C
Stall Depth
See Figure 3-1, D
Driveway
Width
See Figure 3-1, E
45° 7'- 6" 10'- 6" 16'- 0" 11'- 0"
60° 7'- 6" 8'- 9" 16'- 9" 14'- 0"
75° 7'- 6" 7'- 10" 16'- 4" 17'- 5"
90° 7'- 6" 7'- 6" 15'- 0" 20'- 0"
(2) Surfacing: All parking lots, service drives, vehicle storage areas, and vehicle sales
lots shall be paved and constructed to meet ACHD and Boise City Fire Code
standards, whichever is more restrictive, for base course and asphalt or concrete
mat thickness; and curbs and gutters where applicable. The design shall be
prepared by a licensed, professional engineer.
Figure 11-013.3: Minimum standards for parking lot design
CHAPTER 11-013: Adopted Specific Plans
Section 11-013-01: Harris Ranch
Subsection 9: Parking Standards - General
March 2013
Boise Development Code
Page 423
(3) Grading: Parking lots shall be graded to prevent storm water runoff from crossing any sidewalk or from running onto adjacent properties or rights-of-way.
(4) Bumper: All parking areas shall be provided with a substantial wheel restraint that will prevent cars from encroaching upon abutting private and public property or overhanging beyond the designated parking stall dimensions. The requirements of this subsection may be waived by the Planning Director for proper cause.
(5) Bumper Overhang: When the Planning Director approves parking stall dimensions that allow bumper overhang onto a sidewalk or landscape strip, the parking stall dimension may be reduced 2 feet in length if 2 feet in width is added to the required sidewalk or landscape strip. Bumper overhang shall not damage landscape.
(6) Screening: All parking lots, including vehicle sales areas, truck parking areas and bus parking areas, shall be masked by a street wall and/or landscape from public right of way and/or adjacent property. The parking lot and service drives shall meet the following standards:
(a) Along all streets there must be a continuous landscaped area in accordance with the Landscape Design Guidelines A.3)b, and the following standards: Street trees with a minimum size of 2-in. caliper. Tree type to be in accordance with “Boise City Street Tree Planting and Selection Guide.” Shrubs, lawn or other ground cover shall be installed in all landscape areas. Landscape plants shall not include plastic or other artificial materials. All landscaped areas shall contain an underground irrigation system.
(b) A minimum 5 or 6-foot high solid screen shall be provided when a parking lot is adjacent to residential land uses. This screen may include fencing, walls and/or landscape combinations that will provide a dense barrier.
(c) The Planning Director may approve a transfer of all or part of the required interior landscape to other areas of the site.
(d) Existing healthy trees should be retained as approved by the City Forester and the Planning Director and be considered in the design and grading of the property. The Planning Director may grant up to a 10 percent reduction in the required number of parking spaces in order to preserve an existing tree(s).
(7) Clear Vision Triangle: A clear vision triangle shall be maintained with regard to all visual barriers, including, without limitation, all vegetation (except deciduous trees pruned to at least 8 feet in height above the sidewalk and 14 feet above the roadway), walls, signs, vehicles, solid fences or other sight obstructions exceeding 3 feet in height.
(8) Lighting: Parking lot lighting shall comply with the following requirements:
(a) Outdoor light fixtures shall be limited to a maximum height of 15 feet or the height of the nearest building, whichever is less.
(b) Lighting shall be energy-efficient and shielded or recessed so that: the light source (that is, the bulb) is not visible from off-site; and glare and reflections are confined to the maximum extent feasible within boundaries of the parking lot. Each light
CHAPTER 11-013: Adopted Specific Plans
Section 11-013-01: Harris Ranch
Subsection 9: Parking Standards - General
March 2013
Boise Development Code
Page 424
fixture shall be directed downward and away from adjoining properties and rights-of-way.
(c) No lighting shall produce an illumination level greater than 1 footcandle on adjacent residential lots or parcels. No permanently installed lighting shall blink, flash or be of unusually high intensity or brightness, as determined by the Planning Director.
(9) Marking: Parking spaces shall provide understandable markings to indicate where drivers should park. Subtle markings, such as contrasting colors/paving stones, are encouraged. The restriping of any parking space or parking lot shall require the approval of a restriping plan by the Planning Director.
(10) Ingress and Egress: Ingress and egress of parking garages shall be designed with due regard for visibility and safety.
(11) Pedestrian Access: Sidewalks and crosswalks must completely link transit stations, parking areas, buildings, open spaces and adjacent paths. Sidewalks shall be at least 4 ft. wide, sited and illuminated to provide safe passage and observation of the path route. Sidewalk crossings of service drives shall be provided and clearly distinguished from the service drive.
U. Short Term Parking
Upon the determination of the Planning Director that the particular building use has a substantial demand for short-term parking immediately adjacent to the business, and upon the conditions that short-term parking will be restricted to a period of not more than 20 minutes and that the limit will be enforced by the business, the amount of parking spaces required may be reduced up to 20% to correspond to the number of parking spaces assigned to short-term parking. Any such reduction shall be noted on the Notice of Compliance.
V. Loading Requirements
Where loading and unloading of commercial vehicles cannot be accommodated from a public street within 20-minutes time, there shall be provided on the same lot with each commercial or industrial building or structure adequate space for off-street loading, unloading and the maneuvering of commercial vehicles. Off-street maneuvering space shall be provided so that no backing onto or from a public street is required. All loading and maneuvering areas shall:
(1) Be provided with an asphalt or cement surface or any other surface with comparable durability and strength.
(2) Be properly drained.
(3) Be designed with regard to pedestrian safety.
(4) Have direct access to public streets or alleys.
(5) Be screened from adjacent single family residentially zoned property.
(6) No delivery, loading, trash removal or compaction, or other such operations shall be permitted between the hours of 10:00 P.M. and 7:00 A.M. when adjacent to an area that is predominantly residential, unless sound barriers are used and such barriers effectively reduce noise emissions to a level of 65 decibels, as measured at the lot or parcel line of any adjoining lot or parcel.
(7) All loading spaces and related access areas shall be graded, improved and maintained in a manner permitting safe and convenient use under normal weather conditions, so as to avoid adverse effects on neighboring property.
CHAPTER 11-013: Adopted Specific Plans
Section 11-013-01: Harris Ranch
Subsection 9: Parking Standards - General
March 2013
Boise Development Code
Page 425
(8) Loading spaces shall be marked as such and reserved for loading purposes, and shall not be used for general off-street parking nor computed as part of required off-street parking.
(9) No loading docks, service bays, or service windows shall face any street.
(10) Loading Facilities: Loading spaces as hereinafter defined and set forth shall be provided.
(a) Definitions and Standards: Type A Space: Not less than 65 feet in length. Type B Space: Not less than 35 feet in length. All spaces shall be not less than 12 feet wide and have a minimum clear height of 15 feet.
(b) Quantity and type of loading space as determined by the gross floor area of any commercial or industrial building are found in Table 11-013.6 below. The Planning Director may modify the requirements of Table 11-013.6 if it is demonstrated that alternative loading methods/facilities will be adequate for the business(es) being served.
TABLE 11-013.6: QUANTITY AND TYPE OF LOADING SPACES BASED ON GROSS FLOOR AREA GROSS FLOOR AREA (SQ. FT) NUMBER OF LOADING SPACES TYPE OF LOADING SPACE
14,000 – 36,000
1
B
36,001 – 60,000
2
B
60,001 – 100,000
2
B
For each additional 75,000 sq. ft., or fraction thereof, an additional Type A space shall be required.
1
A
W. Temporary Parking Lots
(1) Term of Permit: Temporary parking lots for non-required parking may be permitted where new building construction is planned. Temporary parking lots may be permitted for up to 2 years if the following criteria are met:
(2) The parking lot shall be located within 600 feet of the building or use the parking lot serves.
(3) The parking lot shall include adequate land to accommodate parking spaces, drives, and a general circulation pattern that complies with the standards of this section in connection with permanent parking lots.
(4) A minimum 20-foot width of direct access to the parking lot from a public road right-of-way shall be provided.
(5) Existing mature landscape shall not be displaced by the parking lot unless prior written approval is received from the Planning Director.
(6) A detailed grading and drainage plan shall be submitted for review and approval by ACHD and the City’s Public Works Department.
CHAPTER 11-013: Adopted Specific Plans
Section 11-013-01: Harris Ranch
Subsection 10: Sign Standards
March 2013
Boise Development Code
Page 426
10. SIGN STANDARDS
A. Purpose
This section of the Harris Ranch Specific Plan Code creates the framework for sign regulation that is intended to create an identifiable theme for Harris Ranch and to facilitate communication between people and businesses recognizing the need for both a well-maintained and attractive community and the need for adequate business identification, advertising and communication. The purpose of this section is:
(1) To provide reasonable and enforceable provisions for the location, design and construction of signs;
(2) To safeguard and enhance property values and to protect public and private investment in buildings and open spaces;
(3) To promote those qualities in the visual environment that bring economic value to the community;
(4) To encourage the design of signs that are in harmony with the principal activities and structures that the signs serve and that are compatible with the overall street setting and neighborhood character;
(5) To ensure that the maintenance of a sign continues throughout the life of the sign; and
(6) To promote the public safety, welfare, convenience and enjoyment of travel and the free flow of traffic within the City and Harris Ranch.
B. General Provisions and Requirements
(1) Design: Signs shall incorporate design and materials that complement the architectural theme of the building with which the sign is identified. Pole support structures, if any, shall be covered.
(2) The type, materials, colors and shapes of signs should be architecturally compatible with the buildings and the surrounding area of the sign’s location.
(3) The sign shall not be the dominant feature of the sign’s location.
(4) A uniform sign plan shall be required for all office and/or retail complexes and multi-family buildings. The sign plan shall denote maximum total sign area permitted for the development. All tenants shall comply with the uniform sign plan.
(5) The Planning Director shall review and approve all sign designs and uniform sign plans.
(6) These standards are to provide general guidance. The Harris Ranch Review Board must approve all signs and sign design plans and may reduce sizes if deemed appropriate.
C. Sign Orientation
All free-standing signs shall be oriented to the street(s) on which the building the sign is identifying has frontage. Free-standing signs shall be located on the front half of the lot or parcel or in front of all buildings on the property that the sign is intended to identify.
CHAPTER 11-013: Adopted Specific Plans
Section 11-013-01: Harris Ranch
Subsection 10: Sign Standards
March 2013
Boise Development Code
Page 427
D. Sign Area
The sign area shall be the area of smallest geometric figure that encompasses the facing of the sign including the copy, insignia, logo, symbol, photograph, background and borders. In the case of signs mounted back-to-back, only one side of the sign is to be used for computation of the sign area. Otherwise, the surface area of each sign is to be separately computed. In the case of cylindrical signs, signs in the shape of cubes, or other signs that are substantially three-dimensional with respect to their display surfaces, the entire display surface or surfaces is included in computations of sign area. If a sign is attached to an entrance wall or fence, only that portion of that wall or fence onto which the sign face or letters are placed shall be calculated in the sign area. Entrance wall or fence area outside of the sign area width shall not be considered a part of the sign. The entrance wall or fence outside of the sign area width shall not exceed 3 feet in height.
E. Street Address
All free-standing signs shall include the street address(es) of the lot or parcel of the building that the sign is identifying. The placement of the street address on the sign shall be in addition to any address required to be placed on the building. Numbering shall be a minimum of 3½ in. tall, and be of a contrasting color. Street addresses shall not be included in the calculation for sign background area, except for those portions that exceed 5 sq. ft.
F. Blanketing of Signs
No sign shall be erected in the same horizontal plane with other signs unless spaced at least 25 feet apart.
G. Signs Adjacent to Predominantly Residential Areas
No sign shall be designed or located such that more than ½ foot-candle of light fall occurs at ground level at the property line of a lot or parcel within a predominantly residential block.
H. Signs in Areas Where a Use Exception Has Been Approved
Where a use exception has been approved pursuant to the Code, such uses that are office in nature shall be subject to the sign standards of Tier II blocks (see Table 4-1, Tier II), and uses that are commercial/retail in nature shall be subject to the sign standards of Tier III blocks (see Table 4-1, Tier III).
I. Gateway Streets
As provided in this Section, a sign oriented to Warm Springs Avenue and/or Park Center Boulevard may be regulated differently than a sign oriented to any other street in Harris Ranch.
J. Special Sign District
Properties occupying 60 percent or more of the street frontage on both sides of a street in any defined area, with prior approval from the Harris Ranch Review Board, may petition for the formation of a special sign district. A special sign district might be created to evoke, for example, an area with a particular atmosphere, to simulate a historic period, identify a theater or entertainment area, or other similar purpose. The petition shall be filed with the Planning Director and shall be accompanied by a designated filing fee and sufficient evidence that the petition and the particulars of the proposed sign district have been approved by the Harris Ranch Review Board. The petition shall specify the reasons for the creation of the special sign district and shall contain the signatures and addresses of not less than 60 percent of the owners of all properties proposed for inclusion in the special sign district. The petition shall be accompanied by a map of the proposed district and a complete description of the recommended criteria for signs in the district. A complete list of all property owners and persons in possession of such properties to be included in the district shall be submitted along with the petition and all such parties shall be sent notices of the Planning Director’s decision to create the special sign district.
CHAPTER 11-013: Adopted Specific Plans
Section 11-013-01: Harris Ranch
Subsection 10: Sign Standards
March 2013
Boise Development Code
Page 428
K. Sign Maintenance and Repair
All signs shall be maintained in a state of good appearance, security, safety and repair throughout the life of the signs. Maintenance shall be such that a sign continues to conform to the conditions imposed by the particular sign permit. Nothing in the Code shall relieve the owner or user of any sign, or the owner of property on which a sign is located from maintaining a sign in a safe condition and in a state of good repair. Maintenance requirements include, without limitation: any metal pole covers and sign cabinets shall be kept free of rust and rust stains; and any sign that has been damaged to such extent that the sign may pose a hazard to passersby shall be repaired or removed immediately.
L. Abandoned Signs
Except as otherwise provided in the Code, any on-site sign located on property that has been vacant and unoccupied for at least 6 months, or any sign that pertains to a time, event or purpose that no longer applies, shall be deemed to have been abandoned and the sign permit shall become void. An abandoned sign is prohibited and shall be removed by either the owner of the abandoned sign or the owner of the property on which the abandoned sign is located.
M. Clear Vision Triangles
Signs shall not be permitted in the clear vision triangle except at a height of less than 3 feet or at a height greater than 8 feet to the bottom of the sign display surface area.
TABLE 11-013.7: SUMMARY OF SIZE AND LOCATION OF SIGNS PERMITTED IN HARRIS RANCH Sign Type Maximum Background Area Maximum Height Location Illumination Number Allowed Projection Clearance (from above) Public Right-of-Way Tier I Blocks: NW4-16; NW18-24; NW26-30; NE1-7; NE9-10; SE14C-F; SE17
Rent; Lease; Sale
4 sq. ft.
4 ft.
5 ft. from back of sidewalk (minimum)
None
1 per Lot
Home Occupation; Live-Work
2 sq. ft.
Not higher than eave line for projecting roof and parapet line for Flat Roof
Attached flat on Building, or on an awning
Indirect
1 per Lot
None
Apartment, Condominium Complex Identification
4 sq. ft.
3 ft.
5 ft. from back of sidewalk (minimum)
Indirect
1 per street frontage
All Other Signs
PROHIBITED Tier II Blocks: SW2-3; SW5; SW7; SW9-10; NW31; TC8; SE1-6
Rent; Lease; Sale
4 sq. ft.
4 ft.
5 ft. from back of sidewalk (minimum)
None
1 per Lot
Home Occupation; Live-Work; Work-live
2 sq. ft.
Not higher than eave line
Attached flat on Building
Indirect
1 per Lot
None
CHAPTER 11-013: Adopted Specific Plans
Section 11-013-01: Harris Ranch
Subsection 10: Sign Standards
March 2013
Boise Development Code
Page 429
TABLE 11-013.7: SUMMARY OF SIZE AND LOCATION OF SIGNS PERMITTED IN HARRIS RANCH Sign Type Maximum Background Area Maximum Height Location Illumination Number Allowed Projection Clearance (from above) Public Right-of-Way
Apartment, Condominium Complex Identification
4 sq. ft.
4 ft.
5 ft. from back of sidewalk (minimum)
Indirect
1 at each entrance point
Business Identification Signs
(attached; 50% maximum background area for awning Sign)
1 sq. ft. per 3 lineal ft. of Building wall facing a Street; maximum 50 sq. ft.
Not higher than eave line
On wall face facing Street
Indirect
1 per Lot
On-site Signs: Wall or Canopy or Marquee
20 sq. ft. (maximum).
Not to exceed height of wall
On wall face facing Street
Indirect
1 or more not to exceed total sq. ft. allowed
3 ft. from wall; may not project above Building
All Other Signs
PROHIBITED Tier III Blocks: SW11; SW12-14; TC1-7; SE7-14B; SE14G; SE16-17; SE18A; SE18B
Rent; Lease; Sale
16 sq. ft.
10 ft.
On wall face
None
1 per Street Frontage
On-premise Wall or Company or Marquee*
20 sq. ft. (maximum)**
Not to exceed height of wall
On wall face facing Street
Indirect
1 or more; not to exceed total sq. ft. allowed 1 per Alley
3 ft. from wall if a projecting sign
12 ft.
Marquee/ Canopy/ Awning
50% (None for Alley or Parking Lot)
15 ft.
Indirect
1 per business
10 ft. with less than 2/3 projection from property line to curb; 12 ft. with more than 2/3 projection from property line to curb
Under Marquee/ Canopy
Length not to exceed 75% of marquee width
Indirect
1 per business
3 ft. if projecting sign
10 ft.
* When combination of wall and free-standing signs are used, total area for signs must be reduced by 50%.
** A sign on a building wall that does not face a street may be permitted when:
(1) the sign background area is a maximum of 10% of the building wall; and
(2) The adjoining block is predominantly commercial.
CHAPTER 11-013: Adopted Specific Plans
Section 11-013-01: Harris Ranch
Subsection 10: Sign Standards
March 2013
Boise Development Code
Page 430
N. Further Regulation of Particular Sign Types
(1) Permitted by Planning Director
Balloons and other inflated devices, and other temporary signs which exceed the free-standing sign height allowances in this Section may be permitted by the Planning Director provided that: (1) no more than 1 such sign is allowed per year; and (2) the sign is securely fastened.
(2) Projecting Signs
Projecting signs are prohibited except for those blocks listed in subsections (b) and (c), below.
(a) Maximum background area:
(b) 5 percent of building face facing a street in Blocks SW2-3; SW5; SW7; SW9-10; NW31; TC8; SE1-6; SE14C-14F;
(c) 15 percent in Blocks SW11; SW12-14; TC1-7; SE7-14B; SE14G; SE16-17.
Figure 11-013.4: Types of attached signs
Figure 11-013.5: Types of ground signs
CHAPTER 11-013: Adopted Specific Plans
Section 11-013-01: Harris Ranch
Subsection 10: Sign Standards
March 2013
Boise Development Code
Page 431
(d) For the purpose of calculating background area, the lesser of: the height of the lower level including parapet walls, or 20 feet.
(e) Projection above building height: Prohibited.
(f) Clearance over public property must be a minimum of 10 feet. Evidence of permission obtained from the governmental entity with authority over such public property must be provided to the Planning Director.
(g) Lighting can be direct or indirect.
(h) Number allowed: 1 for each use located at grade level.
(i) Projection from wall: the lesser of 10 feet or to within 3 feet of the face of the curb.
(j) Location: attached to the building facing a street.
(3) Accessory Signs for Public Parking Lots
(a) In blocks that are predominantly residential or office or a mixture of the two uses, 1 identification sign for each street frontage of a parking lot is permitted. Each sign shall not exceed 9 sq. ft. in area or 6 feet in height and shall be located not closer than 5 feet to any property line unless attached to a building. All signs shall be stationary, and if lighted, may be indirectly illuminated only.
(b) In blocks that are predominantly commercial, the immediately above provisions shall apply, except that the background area of each sign may be a maximum of 16 sq. ft. in area.
(4) Temporary Signs
(a) Unless otherwise specified by this Section, 1 temporary sign may be displayed on a lot or parcel for a maximum of 30 consecutive days in a calendar year.
(b) A permit application, together with appropriate fee, is required for temporary signs.
(c) The maximum height for a temporary sign is 6 feet; the maximum background area is 9 sq. ft.
(d) Temporary signs shall not be permitted either in clear vision triangles or over any public rights-of-way. Temporary signs shall not be located in any manner so as to cause a danger or threat to the public.
(e) No street banner stretched over public property that pertains to civic affairs shall be allowed over such public property for longer than 14 days. A substantial rope at least 1 in. in diameter (not wire cable or other metallic rope or wire) shall be used as the main support for banners, and 2½ in. ropes shall be used for securing each lower corner. The banner shall have sufficient wind holes.
(f) Searchlights will be permitted when: (1) they are used by a business or enterprise once yearly for a maximum period of 7 consecutive days, or for purposes of a grand opening of a new enterprise or an enterprise under new management for a maximum period of 7 consecutive days; and (2) in no case shall the beam of the searchlight flash against any building or sweep an arc greater than 45° from vertical.
CHAPTER 11-013: Adopted Specific Plans
Section 11-013-01: Harris Ranch
Subsection 10: Sign Standards
March 2013
Boise Development Code
Page 432
(5) Off-site Signs
A business may request an off-site advertising sign because of excessive distance from a public street, special access or street frontage issues, unusual topography or other special circumstances. Upon a determination that such circumstances exist, and after receiving written permission from the property owner of the property on which the sign would be located, the Planning Director may issue a permit for a sign. The dimensional and square feet allowances for the block within which the sign will be located shall apply. Such sign shall be in lieu of, and not in addition to, on-site free-standing signs. Off-premise signs are prohibited in Blocks: NW4-16; NW18-24; NW26-30; NE1-7; NE9-10, SE14C-14F; SW12; SW15-16; TC1; TC8; NE8; NE11.
O. Signs for Which a Permit is Not Required
(1) Construction Signs: Construction signs, provided that such signs are erected no more than 30 days prior to the beginning of construction for which a valid building permit has been issued, are confined to the site of construction, and must be removed 5 days after completion of construction and prior to occupancy. Each sign shall not exceed 9 sq. ft. in area or 6 feet in height and shall be located not closer than 5 feet to any property line unless attached to a building.
(2) Real Estate Signs: One real estate sign may be allowed on any lot or parcel, provided the real estate sign is removed within 7 days after the sale, rental or lease has been consummated.
(3) Political or Campaign Signs
(a) There is permitted 1 or more temporary, unlighted, on a lot or parcel on behalf of candidates for public office or measure on the ballot, or announcing a campaign, drive or event of a civic, philanthropic, educational or religious organization or nature, provided that the property owner grants permission for the erection of the sign.
(b) Political or campaign signs shall be erected not earlier than 60 days prior to the applicable election, campaign or event and shall be removed within 10 days after such election, campaign or event.
(c) Political or campaign signs shall not exceed: 6feet in height or a total of 10 sq. ft. in area for Blocks NW4-16; NW18-24; NW26-30; NE1-7; NE9-10; SE14C-14F. 10 feet in height or a total of 16 sq. ft. in area in Blocks SW2-3; SW5; SW7; SW9-10; NW31; TC8; SE1-6; SW11; SW12-14; TC1-7; SE7-14B; SE14G; SE16-17. If attached to a building, campaign signs shall not exceed the height of the eave line of the building.
(d) No political or campaign sign shall be located closer than 5 feet to any property line unless attached to a building that is closer than 5 feet from the property line.
(4) Window Signs: Temporary or permanent commercial window signs for on-site commercial activity provided that the signs shall not exceed 25 percent of the total window area and the combined total copy area of temporary and/or permanent window signs shall not exceed 50 percent of the total window area.
(5) Hand-held Signs.
CHAPTER 11-013: Adopted Specific Plans
Section 11-013-01: Harris Ranch
Subsection 10: Sign Standards
March 2013
Boise Development Code
Page 433
(6) Public Notices: Public notices posted by public officials in the performance of their duties.
(7) Residential Yard/Garage/Estate Sale Signs: Display is not to exceed 3 days prior to the date of the sale with removal within 24 hours following the last day of the sale. Such signs may be of any number and type provided that each sign does not exceed 9 sq. ft. in area.
(8) Directional Signs: Directional or public service information signs shall be no greater than 4 sq. ft. in area and no more than 4 feet in height. If business identification is included, the information shall be secondary in all aspects to the primary use of these signs for directional purposes.
(9) Flags: Conventional flags, emblems or insignia of any national or political subdivision or corporation.
(10) Government Signs: Governmental signs for the control of traffic or other regulatory purposes, or authorized public signs of public service companies indicating danger.
(11) House Numbers: House numbers and name plates.
(12) Interior Signs: Interior signs located within the interior of any buildings or structures that are not visible from the public right-of-way.
(13) No Trespassing: "No Trespassing" or similar signs not to exceed 1½ sq. ft. in area per sign and not exceeding 4 in number per lot or parcel.
(14) Memorial Signs: Memorial signs or tablets, names or buildings and date of erection when cut into any masonry surface or inlaid so as to be part of the building.
(15) Plaques: Plaques or nameplate signs of not more than 2½ sq. ft. in area which are fastened directly to a building.
(16) Display Windows: Signs in the display windows of a business that are incorporated in a display of merchandise.
(17) Symbols or Insignia: Religious symbols, commemorative plaques of recognized historical agencies, or identification emblems of religious orders or historical agencies, provided that no such symbol, plaque or identification emblem shall exceed 4 sq. ft. in area, and provided further that all such symbols, plaques and identification emblems shall be placed flat against a building.
(18) Warning Signs: Signs warning the public of the existence of danger, but containing no advertising material, of a size as may be necessary, to be removed upon subsidence of danger.
(19) Orientation from Street: Any sign which is oriented only to the property on which it is located and is not visible from the public right-of-way.
(20) Change in Sign Copy: A permit shall not be required for a change of copy on any sign, nor for the repainting, cleaning or other normal maintenance or repair of a sign or sign structure for which a permit has previously been issued in accordance with this Harris Ranch Specific Plan Code, provided that the sign or sign structure is not substantially altered in any way.
CHAPTER 11-013: Adopted Specific Plans
Section 11-013-01: Harris Ranch
Subsection 10: Sign Standards
March 2013
Boise Development Code
Page 434
(21) Portable Signs: In blocks that are predominantly commercial or mixed use, an A-frame, T frame and similar “sandwich” signs placed on public sidewalks for promotion of businesses and products are to be considered portable signs. Portable signs shall be placed to allow for unobstructed pedestrian traffic, to prevent pedestrian-vehicular conflicts and tripping hazards. At a minimum, signs shall be placed to provide a 5-foot clear zone for pedestrians on the sidewalk between the building and curb and, if possible, portable signs shall be located outside the pedestrian zone. Portable signs are allowed without a permit from City. However, evidence of permission from the governmental entity with authority over the public sidewalks must be provided to the Planning Director.
P. Non-Conforming Signs
(1) Legal Non-conforming Signs: A legal non-conforming sign is any sign that does not conform to the requirements of the Code, but which was legally erected in any of the following circumstances:
(a) A valid permit was issued for the sign prior to the adoption of the Code;
(b) The sign needed no permit but was a legal sign prior to the adoption of the Code; or
(c) The sign was lawfully occupying a building or land at the effective date of the Code.
(2) No temporary or prohibited signs shall be eligible for "legal non-conforming" status. A legal non-conforming sign shall lose its legal non-conforming status if:
(a) The sign is altered in any way in structure or copy (except for copy changes and normal maintenance) which violates provisions of the Code other than those violated before the alterations; or
(b) The sign is moved to a position that violates the Code; or
(c) The sign is replaced; or
(d) The use of the property on which the sign is located is changed.
(3) If a non-conforming sign loses its legal status, the sign owner shall remove the sign or bring the sign into compliance with the Code within 60 days.
(4) The Planning Director may require the removal of non-conforming signs as a condition for granting a new sign. Factors to consider include the degree of non-compliance, the relation of the proposed sign to the non-conforming sign(s), the number of non-conforming signs, and any other factors that the Planning Director deems reasonably significant.
Q. Prohibited Signs
(1) Miscellaneous Signs and Posters
No signs or posters that are visible from a public right-of-way and are tacked, pasted or otherwise affixed to or upon, without limitation, the walls of buildings or upon trees, poles (including, but, not limited to power poles), posts, fences, bridges or other structures shall be allowed.
(2) Public Area Signs
Except as permitted by the governmental entity with authority over such public property, no signs placed on, without limitation, any street right-of-way, curb, sidewalk, post, pole,
CHAPTER 11-013: Adopted Specific Plans
Section 11-013-02: Barber Valley
Subsection 1: Applicability of Ordinance
March 2013
Boise Development Code
Page 435
hydrant, bridge or tree, except official public notices posted by an authorized public officer shall be allowed.
(3) Banners
No banners, pennants, portable signs, strings of lights, ribbons, streamers, spinners, twirlers or propellers, balloons, bubble machines and similar devices of a carnival nature shall be allowed.
(4) Confusion with Other Signs
No signs which, by reason of their size, location, movement, content, coloring or manner of illumination may be confused with or construed as a traffic control sign, signal or device, or the light of an emergency or road equipment vehicle or that obstructs the visibility of any traffic or street sign or signal device shall be allowed. This shall include strobe lights and animated signs.
(5) Roof Sign
Roof signs are not allowed. 11-013-02. BARBER VALLEY
1. APPLICABILITY OF ORDINANCE
This Barber Valley Specific Plan Zoning Ordinance applies to all property designated on the Barber Valley Specific Plan Zoning Map (Figure 11-013.6 below) and the Barber Valley Specific Plan Land Use Sub-Districts Map (Figure 11-013.7 below) in lieu of Chapter 11-04, Zoning Districts, except where noted herein. All remaining chapters of this Code still apply, except where noted herein. If any provision of this section conflicts with any provision of the Code, the provisions of this section shall control.
2. INTERPRETATION OF DISTRICTS
A. Sub-Districts Established
(1) Low-density Residential (SP02-LR)
(2) Medium-density Residential (SP02-MR)
(3) High-density Residential (SP02-HR)
(4) Mixed Use: Office and Medium-density Residential (SP02-OMR)
(5) Mixed Use: Office and Commercial (SP02-OC)
(6) City Park (SP02-P)
B. District Boundaries
The location and boundaries of the Barber Valley Specific Plan (SP02) District are shown on the Barber Valley Specific Plan Zoning Map (Figure 11-013.6 below). The location and boundaries of the Barber Valley Specific Plan Sub-Districts established herein are shown on the Barber Valley Specific Plan Land Use Sub-Districts Map (Figure 11-013.7 below). Where any uncertainty exists as to the boundary of any such district, the following rules shall apply:
(1) Where any such boundary line is indicated as following a street, alley or public way, it shall be construed as following the centerline thereof.
(2) Where a boundary line is indicated as approximately following a lot line, such lot line shall be construed to be such boundary line.
CHAPTER 11-013: Adopted Specific Plans
Section 11-013-02: Barber Valley
Subsection 3: Conformity Required
March 2013
Boise Development Code
Page 436
(3) Where a boundary line divides a lot or crosses unsubdivided property, the location of such boundary shall be as indicated upon the Barber Valley Zoning Map.
3. CONFORMITY REQUIRED
A. General
Except as otherwise provided herein, all land, buildings and premises in any district established herein shall be used only in accordance with the regulations established herein for that district. Additionally, no property shall be allowed to maintain an attractive or public nuisance as defined by this Code and/or state code at any time.
B. Purpose of SP02-LR Sub-District
The purpose of the SP02-LR Sub-District is to provide for the development of diverse urban housing products at a net density of approximately 2 to 6 units per acre. This area may include a variety of lot sizes, with lots as small as 3500 square feet allowed, but overall gross density cannot exceed 6 units per acre. Attached units are allowed within the overall density limitations. Accessory dwelling units and uses are also allowed, along with community uses such as parks, community centers and recreational facilities.
C. Purpose of SP02-MR Sub-District
The purpose of the SP02-MR Sub-District is to (a) accommodate medium density residential uses at a net density of approximately 6 to 18 units per acre; (b) provide an orderly transition from more intensive, higher density uses to less intensive, lower density uses; and (c) allow limited cottages and quasi-residential uses, including senior housing and care facilities. The SP02-MR Sub-District includes significant flexibility in lot sizes and restrictions, and anticipates residential uses ranging from row houses and townhouses to condominiums and multi-story apartments. A range of civic and recreational facilities is allowed, along with office, medical and personal service commercial uses that are ancillary to senior housing and care facilities.
D. Purpose of SP02-HR Sub-District
The purpose of the SP02-HR Sub-District is to (a) accommodate higher density residential uses at a net density of approximately 18 to 40 units per acre; and (b) encourage residential uses that are convenient to shopping, recreation, cultural and other concentrated community facilities. The range of uses is similar to the SP02-MR Sub-District, with the addition of hotels, restaurants, cafés, coffee shops and theaters as allowed uses.
E. Purpose of SP02-OMR Sub-District
The purpose of the SP02-OMR Sub-District is to accommodate medium density residential uses, business and professional office uses, and complementary commercial uses such as hotels, restaurants and theaters, together with necessary off-street parking facilities. The SP02-OMR Sub-District will emphasize high quality design, pedestrian orientation, and flexible development standards.
F. Purpose of SP02-OC Sub-District
The purpose of the SP02-OC Sub-District is to provide a significant commercial and office component in Barber Station, together with necessary off-street parking facilities. The SP02-OC Sub-District will emphasize high quality design, pedestrian orientation, and flexible development standards. Large office buildings are allowed in this area, along with retail, shopping, service, lodging, and civic uses.
CHAPTER 11-013: Adopted Specific Plans
Section 11-013-02: Barber Valley
Subsection 3: Conformity Required
March 2013
Boise Development Code
Page 437
G. Purpose of SP02-P Sub-District
The purpose of the SP02-P Sub-District is to accommodate City park uses, including indoor and outdoor recreational facilities and any necessary parking. The SP02-P Sub-District may also include dedicated open spaces, protected environmental sites such as wetlands and riparian areas, and hazardous areas such as floodways and steep slopes.
H. Design Review
(1) Creation of BVD Design Review Overlay District
This section creates an overlay district within portions of Barber Valley called the Barber Valley Design District (“BVD District”). The BVD District overlays the SP02-MR, SP02-HR, SP02-OMR and SP02-OC Sub-Districts.
(2) Applicability
Any visible exterior improvements to a site, building or structure (including new facilities, remodeling, rehabilitation projects and expansion projects) within the BVD District shall require submittal of a Design Review application and fee in accordance with Section
11-03-04.12, except where expressly modified herein.
(3) BVDR Board Review
Development applications within the BVD District must be submitted to the Barber Valley Design Review Board (“BVDR Board”) prior to submission to the City for design review approval. The BVDR Board shall forward their decisions on to the City for their consideration for all projects.
(4) Application Content
Any BVD District application to the City shall be accompanied by the information required by SectionError! Reference source not found. and by the findings, conclusions and any conditions of approval issued by the BVDR Board.
(5) Level of Review
The Planning Director shall determine whether an application shall be processed at the administrative level or Design Review Committee (“Committee”) level; provided, however, (i) all applications for projects that have less than 5,000 square feet of gross building area and less than 20,000 square feet of site improvements shall be administratively reviewed by the Planning Director and (ii) all applications for a Continuing Care Retirement Community shall be reviewed at the Committee level.
(6) Procedures
With due consideration to the decision of the BVDR Board, the Planning Director or Committee, as appropriate, shall review the application to determine whether the proposed application complies with the design review objectives, considerations and guidelines set forth in Section 11-03-04.12, Chapter 11-07, Development and Design Standards and the design criteria for the BVD District as set forth in the Barber Valley Specific Plan. Upon making such determination, the Planning Director or Committee shall issue its findings of fact, conclusions of law and conditions of approval. Any action of the Planning Director or the Committee may be appealed pursuant to the appeal provisions of this Code.
I. Allowed Uses
Table 11-013.8 sets forth the allowed uses in each Sub-District established herein. Allowed uses are designated with a “•”. Uses listed but not designated as allowed in Table 11-013.8 are prohibited. Uses not listed in Table 11-013.8 are allowed only upon a determination by the
CHAPTER 11-013: Adopted Specific Plans
Section 11-013-02: Barber Valley
Subsection 3: Conformity Required
March 2013
Boise Development Code
Page 438
Planning Director that such uses are similar or compatible in nature to the allowed uses in Table 11-013.8. Any affected person may appeal such a determination of the Planning Director to the Planning and Zoning Commission within 10 calendar days following the date the decision is mailed in accordance with Chapter 11-03, Review and Decision Procedures.
TABLE 11-013.8: Uses Allowed in Sub-Districts SP02-LR SP02-MR SP02-HR SP02-OMR SP02-OC SP02-P RESIDENTIAL
Apartment or Multiple Family Dwelling*
•
•
•
Row House (Townhouse)
•
•
•
•
Duplex House
•
•
•
•
Single Family Residence or Cottage
•
•
•
•
Condominiums
•
•
•
•
Home Occupation
Continuing Care Retirement Community*
•
•
•
•
Assisted Living Apartment*
•
•
•
•
Skilled Nursing Care Facility*
•
•
•
•
Memory Care Facility*
•
•
•
•
Accessory Dwelling Unit
•
•
Accessory Use
•
•
•
•
Common Areas to Support Allowed Uses
•
•
•
•
•
LODGING
Hotel (no room limit)
•
•
•
Hotel (up to 12 rooms)
•
•
•
Inn (up to 5 rooms)
•
•
•
•
Motel
OFFICE/RETAIL
Office – Business, Professional, Medical
•
•
•
Retail Store (convenience, clothing, video rental, sundries, pharmacy etc.)
•
Personal Service Store (dry cleaning, Laundromat, barber shop, etc.)
•
•
•
Service Station
•
Automobile Service
•
Lot, Automobile Sales
Drive-Up Window
•
Billboard
Shopping Center, Convenience Commercial, Neighborhood Commercial or Community Commercial
•
Shopping Center, Regional Commercial
Car Wash
•
Grocery (up to 60,000 square feet)
•
Bank
•
Building Materials Supply
•
Wholesale Business
•
CHAPTER 11-013: Adopted Specific Plans
Section 11-013-02: Barber Valley
Subsection 3: Conformity Required
March 2013
Boise Development Code
Page 439
TABLE 11-013.8: Uses Allowed in Sub-Districts SP02-LR SP02-MR SP02-HR SP02-OMR SP02-OC SP02-P
Restaurant, Café, Coffee Shop
•
•
•
Tavern
•
Liquor Store
•
Adult Cabaret, Adult Motion Picture Theater, Adult Theater, Bikini Bar
Temporary Sales Offices
•
•
•
•
•
Model Homes or Units
•
•
•
•
•
Health Club Facility
•
•
•
Spa/Resort
•
•
Nursery (retail or greenhouse)*
•
•
•
•
CIVIC (PUBLIC AND PRIVATE)
Bus Shelter
•
•
•
•
•
Fountain or Public Art
•
•
•
•
•
•
Library
•
•
•
•
•
Theater
•
•
Outdoor Auditorium
•
•
•
Park
•
•
•
•
•
•
Playground
•
•
•
•
•
•
Parking Lot
•
•
•
•
•
Parking Structure
•
•
•
•
Conference Center
•
•
Community Center
•
•
•
•
•
Religious Institution
•
•
•
•
Clubs, Lodges, Social Halls
•
•
•
•
•
Private Open Space
•
•
•
•
•
Recreation Center
•
•
•
Outdoor Recreation Facility
•
•
•
•
•
•
Swimming Pool
•
•
•
•
•
•
Golf Course
Golf Driving Range
CIVIL SUPPORT
Fire Station
•
•
•
•
•
Police Station
•
•
•
•
Cemetery
Funeral Home
•
•
Hospital
•
•
Medical Clinic (accessory use only in MR and HR)*
•
•
•
•
Rehabilitation Clinic
•
•
Hospital. Large Animal or Small Animal
•
•
EDUCATION
School (public, private or parochial)
•
•
•
•
•
CHAPTER 11-013: Adopted Specific Plans
Section 11-013-02: Barber Valley
Subsection 3: Conformity Required
March 2013
Boise Development Code
Page 440
TABLE 11-013.8: Uses Allowed in Sub-Districts SP02-LR SP02-MR SP02-HR SP02-OMR SP02-OC SP02-P
School, Trade or Vocational
•
•
•
Family Child Care Home (1-6 children)
•
•
•
•
•
Group Child Care (7-12 children)
•
•
•
•
Intermediate or Large Child Care Center (13+ children)
•
•
•
INDUSTRIAL
Heavy Industrial Facility
Light Industrial Facility
Agriculture
Livestock
Laboratory
•
•
Public Utility Facility – Minor
•
•
•
•
Public Utility Facility – Major
Wireless Communication Facility, Micro-Cell or Visually Unobtrusive/Attached
•
•
•
•
Other Wireless Communication Facility
Mini-Storage
Warehouse
Manufacturing Facility
Power Production Facility
Broadcasting Facility (e.g. TV, radio), Micro-Cell or Visually Unobtrusive/Attached
•
•
Other Broadcasting Facility (e.g. TV, radio)
* This use is not allowed in the 8-acre parcel in the SP02 MR Sub-District.
J. Lot and Structure Dimensions
Table 11-013.9 sets forth the lot, yard, density and structure height requirements for uses within each Sub-District established herein.
CHAPTER 11-013: Adopted Specific Plans
Section 11-013-02: Barber Valley
Subsection 3: Conformity Required
March 2013
Boise Development Code
Page 441
TABLE 11-013.9: Lot and Structure Dimensions in Sub-Districts SP02-LR SP-02 MR1 SP02-HR SP02-OMR SP02-OC SP02-P a. MAXIMUM DWELLING UNITS PER ACRE 6 182 40 18 0 -- Attached Detached Attached Detached b. MIN. LOT AREA (square ft.)
Interior Lot
3500
4000
2000
2500
0
0
0
--
Corner Lot
4000
4500
2500
3000
0
0
0
-- c. MIN. AVG. LOT WIDTH (lineal ft.)
Interior Lot
35
40
20
25
0
0
0
--
Corner Lot
40
45
25
30
0
0
0
-- d. MIN. STREET FRONTAGE (flag lot) 10/203 10/203 0 0 0 0 0 -- e. MIN. BUILDING SETBACKS (lineal ft.)
Front Yard & Side Yard Abutting Public St.4
105
105
55
55
0
0
0
--
Abutting public park
5
5
5
5
5
5
5
--
Rear Yard
156
156
5
5
0
0
0
--
Side Yard – Interior
0
5
0
4
0
0
0
-- f. MIN. PARKING LOT/SERVICE DR SETBACKS (lineal ft.)
Front Yard & Side Yard – Adj. to St.
--
7
7
7
7
--
Rear Yard & Side Yard – Interior
--
5
5
5
5
-- g. MAX. FLOOR AREA RATIO -- -- -- -- -- -- h. MIN. LOT AREA PER UNIT (square ft.) -- -- -- -- 1000 -- i. MAX. BUILDING HEIGHT (ft.) 35 45 55 55 55 35
1 Skilled nursing and memory care facility beds are each counted as 1/3 of a dwelling unit.
2 The following standards shall apply to the 8-acre parcel in the SP02 MR Sub-District only: (i) the maximum density shall be 12 units per acre; (ii) on perimeter lots adjacent to existing residential alleys, structures shall be no more than 2 stories and rear yard setbacks shall be 6 feet; (iii) alley access shall 22 feet of backup space; and (iv) the maximum building height shall be 35 feet.
3 10’ allowed with shared access easement agreement.
4 Measured from back of sidewalk.
5 20’ setback required for garages accessed from public streets.
6 5’ setback allowed on corner lots with garages accessed from the side yard street (see Figure 11-013.8); 30’ setback required on lots abutting the existing Riverland Terrace Subdivision.
CHAPTER 11-013: Adopted Specific Plans
Section 11-013-02: Barber Valley
Subsection 4: Off-Street Parking and Loading Requirements
March 2013
Boise Development Code
Page 442
K. Property Development Standards
Except as follows, the Property Development Standards for the Sub-Districts established herein shall be the same as those set forth in the Section 11-04-03 for residential uses and Sections 11-04-04 and 11-04-05 for office and commercial uses:
(1) For attached single-family units, the minimum frontage requirement in Section 11-04-03 is reduced to 18 feet.
(2) For lots with 0 feet frontage on a public right-of-way, drive aisles will provide access to the public street with perpetual ingress/egress or cross access easements recorded against the property. An owner’s association or other agreed upon arrangement among the affected property owners will maintain the drive aisles in accordance with a recorded declaration. The easements and declaration must be reviewed by the Boise City Attorney’s office at the time of preliminary plat approval to ensure the access and maintenance obligations of this paragraph are addressed. The Ada County Highway District must approve installation of any required street signs. Buildings will be addressed to the public street from which the drive aisles extend. Addresses will be clearly delineated with appropriate monuments or signs.
(3) Off-street parking and loading facilities shall be provided in accordance with Section 11-013-02.4 below.
(4) The maximum number of residential units allowed within the Barber Valley Specific Plan District is 1025. The maximum combined office and commercial square footage allowed within the Barber Valley Specific Plan District is 541,500. To exceed either of these limits, the Barber Valley Specific Plan Applicant must follow the rezone procedures of the Boise City Code to amend the Barber Valley Zoning Ordinance. In so doing, the Applicant need not amend the entire Barber Valley Specific Plan so long as the City finds that the revised limits are generally in accordance with the Barber Valley Specific Plan.
(5) Civic uses are limited to no more than 20 percent of the developed area in the SP02-LR Sub-District.
(6) A private management company must be responsible for maintenance of sprinkler systems within mixed use buildings.
4. OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING REQUIREMENTS
In the SP02-LR, SP02-MR and SP02-HR Sub-Districts, off-street parking and loading facilities shall be provided in accordance with Section 11-07-03, except as noted herein. In the SP02-OMR and SP02-OC Sub-Districts, off-street parking and loading facilities shall be provided in accordance with the Pedestrian Commercial Zoning District parking requirements in Section 11-07-06.2.C, except as noted herein. In lieu of the off-street parking ratio requirements in Sections 11-07-03 and 11-07-06.2.C, non-residential uses in the SP02-MR, SP02-HR, SP02-OMR and SP02-OC Sub-Districts must meet an overall parking density of 3.5 per 1000 square feet. Assisted living apartments, independent living residences within the Continuing Care Retirement Community, and similar uses shall be subject to the off-street parking requirements for “Housing for Elderly” uses listed in Section 11-07-03. Memory care facilities, skilled nursing care facilities, and similar uses shall be subject to the off-street parking requirements for “Nursing Home” uses listed in Section 11-07-03.
CHAPTER 11-013: Adopted Specific Plans
Section 11-013-02: Barber Valley
Subsection 5: Administrative Provisions
March 2013
Boise Development Code
Page 443
5. ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS
A. Plat Approval Criteria
Development within the Barber Valley Specific Plan District shall be subject to the subdivision and other related provisions of the Boise City Code. Additionally, the City Council must find that each preliminary plat proposed and/or amended within the Barber Valley Specific Plan District substantially conforms to the adopted Barber Valley Specific Plan and complies with all applicable provisions of the Barber Valley Specific Plan Zoning Ordinance. Plats must still proceed through the normal hearing process with review by the Planning and Zoning Commission and City Council.
B. Annexation into SP02 District
Any property owner or authorized representative may seek to reclassify their property for inclusion within the Barber Valley Specific Plan District pursuant to Section 11-05-08.
C. Amendments
Any property owner within the Barber Valley Specific Plan District may seek to amend the Barber Valley Specific Plan Zoning Ordinance or the Barber Valley Specific Plan pursuant to the Boise City Code provisions for zoning amendments.
D. Exceptions
(1) The Planning Director may grant exceptions to any setback, frontage, parking or height restriction up to 20 percent of the applicable limit and may grant exceptions to any use restrictions on a case by case basis.
(2) The Planning and Zoning Commission may grant exceptions to any setback, frontage, parking or height restriction greater than 20 percent of the applicable limit.
(3) Any approval pursuant to this section shall be supported by each of the following findings:
(a) The exception is consistent with the Barber Valley Specific Plan; and
(b) The exception is justified based on unique circumstances of the proposed use or exceptional design features or the shape of the land.
(c) The exception would not cause undue adverse impacts on any other property.
(d) For any approval pursuant to subparagraph b, the exception meets the general conditional use criteria in the Boise City Zoning Ordinance.
(4) Applications pursuant to this section shall include such information as the Planning Director determines is necessary to make the applicable findings in subparagraph c.
(5) The decision on any requested exception may be appealed pursuant to the appeal provisions of the Boise City Code.
E. Periodic Review
The Planning Director may perform a review of the implementation of the Barber Valley Specific Plan not more frequently than every 1 year after approval of first final plat. The review may address any matters the Planning Director deems appropriate regarding the progress of the development, including but not limited to (a) the Transportation Management Association; (b) the Barber Valley Wildlife Mitigation Plan; and (c) traffic impacts until 2016. Any modification of the Barber Valley Specific Plan Zoning Ordinance may only occur after review by the Barber Valley
CHAPTER 11-013: Adopted Specific Plans
Section 11-013-02: Barber Valley
Subsection 6: Definitions
March 2013
Boise Development Code
Page 444
Specific Plan Applicant and the Planning Director and in compliance with the applicable Boise City Code sections for zoning amendments and Idaho Code Section 67-6511(d).
6. DEFINITIONS
The following definitions apply to this Section. If any conflict exists with definitions in other parts of the Code, the following definitions control.
A. Assisted Living Apartment
A residential apartment or apartment complex that provides personal care services to senior citizens for daily living needs. Assisted living services are a coordinated array of supportive personal and health services available 24 hours a day to residents who have been assessed to need these services, including residents who require long term care. Assisted living services promote resident self-direction and participation in decisions that emphasize independence, individuality, privacy and dignity in a home-like surrounding.
B. Barber Valley Specific Plan Zoning Ordinance
Section 11-013-02 of the Boise City Code or successor section specifically setting forth zoning regulations for the Barber Valley Specific Plan District.
C. Barber Valley Specific Plan
The Specific Plan adopted for the Barber Valley Specific Plan District by the City of Boise on March 18, 2008, as maintained in the official records of the City, including subsequent modifications.
D. Barber Valley Specific Plan Applicant
Brighton Corporation or successor entities.
E. Barber Valley Specific Plan District
The area designated as the SP02 zone or successor designation on the City of Boise’s zoning map and as shown on the Barber Valley Specific Plan Zoning Map (attached as Figure 11-013.6).
F. Continuing Care Retirement Community
A campus-style facility (multiple buildings on a single lot) that provides housing, personal services and health care, including nursing home care to people of retirement age. The community must provide a continuum of care to meet the needs of the individual residents, from independent living to assisted living to skilled nursing care and, possibly, memory care support. Meals, housekeeping, linens, 24-hour security and recreational services usually are provided. Each individual resident enters into a contract with the retirement community that defines the type of housing and services to be provided and the fees that will be charged.
G. Memory Care Facility
Same as Skilled Nursing Facility except the residents also receive care for some form of memory impairment.
H. Skilled Nursing Facility
A residential facility that provides 24-hour supervision by licensed nurses. The care usually is prescribed by a physician. Emphasis is on medical care, supplemented by physical, occupational, speech and other types of therapies. Personal care services, such as help with meals, bathing, dressing and grooming are also provided along with social services, religious services and recreational activities. A nursing facility offers care for individuals suffering from chronic diseases or conditions that do not require the constant attention of physicians. Services are provided that address the individuals' personal care and social-emotional needs.
CHAPTER 11-013: Adopted Specific Plans
Section 11-013-02: Barber Valley
Subsection 6: Definitions
March 2013
Boise Development Code
Page 445
CHAPTER 11-013: Adopted Specific Plans
Section 11-013-02: Barber Valley
Subsection 6: Definitions
March 2013
Boise Development Code
Page 446
Figure 11-013.6: Barber Valley zoning map
CHAPTER 11-013: Adopted Specific Plans
Section 11-013-02: Barber Valley
Subsection 6: Definitions
March 2013
Boise Development Code
Page 447
Figure 11-013.7: Barber Valley land use Sub-districts
CHAPTER 11-013: Adopted Specific Plans
Section 11-013-02: Barber Valley
Subsection 6: Definitions
March 2013
Boise Development Code
Page 448
Figure 11-013.8: Barber Valley site plan